* 2311823
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Automated Quality Assurance and Quality Control for the StraboSpot Geologic Information System and Observational Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Julie Newman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2027
* USD 489,200.00

Digital collection and storage of geological data allow for it to be findable
and accessible. For the data to be reusable and reproducible, however, there
needs to be some evaluation of the quality of the data and/or trust in the
person who collected it. This project focuses on developing an automated system
for evaluating the quality of collected data and the completeness of
observations. This includes the development of two methods - one based on
machine learning and one on logic derived from experts - to evaluate data
quality. Furthermore, the project involves testing methods in two areas – field-
and lab-based data – to ensure that the methodologies apply to different data
types. A mechanism will also be provided that allows scientists to evaluate
existing databases and improve data collection while it is occurring. These
assessments are essential for expert users to reuse and reproduce observations
and for the general public and non-disciplinary experts to recognize high-
quality and complete data collections.

This project addresses the transformational task of providing an automated QAQC
(Quality Assessment/Quality Control) system for observationally-based geological
data. The approach integrates Computer Science, Cognitive Science, and Geology
expertise to develop algorithms to implement a QAQC system. The basis of these
CI resources is the StraboSpot geologic information system. Project activities
include the development of two complementary algorithms – one based on machine
learning and one on logic derived from experts – to evaluate observational data.
Expert testing will be done to improve algorithmic performance. A GUI (Graphical
User Interface) will also be developed to allow geology practitioners to
evaluate others’ datasets and improve their own during data collection. This
approach enables new kinds of science, including: 1) empowering modeling at a
regional scale beyond which a single geologist or team could achieve through
their use of trusted shared data; and 2) allowing experts in one area to
incorporate data outside of their expertise into a model or interpretation,
without having to learn how to collect the data and or assess someone else’s
data quality. Thus, the proposed work will promote and facilitate using shared
data sets within and between disciplines. The iterative, collaborative process
through which the QAQC system is designed will serve as a community-building
endeavor.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education
(RISE), the Division of Earth Sciences (EAR), and the Tectonics Program within
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.