* 2311832
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Performance Engineering Scientific Applications with MVAPICH and TAU using Emerging Communication Primitives
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Stanimire Tomov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Earthquake hazards pose potentially life-threatening risks to communities and
cause significant economic damage. Numerical simulations of earthquakes on
large-scale supercomputers are emerging as key to guiding the infrastructure and
policy decisions as a result of earthquake modeling. These seismic and other
codes including simulations involving Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) distribute
the processing across a large number of compute nodes in a supercomputer.
Optimizing the communication between nodes is key to achieving good performance
but it is a daunting task given the scale of execution. The MVAPICH
communication library that implements the Message Passing Interface (MPI) and
the TAU Performance System, a profiling tool to observe the communication, will
be tightly coupled to assess the performance impact of tuning these codes during
execution. These libraries will share key performance parameters and optimize
the communication in these applications to improve the time to solution.
Performance-engineered versions of these codes will help drive the next
generation of earthquake forecasting and help improve our understanding of
seismic events to reduce risks to population centers and the environment. The
research will enable undergraduate and graduate curriculum advancements via
research in pedagogy for High Performance Computing (HPC), Deep/Machine
Learning, and Data Analytics courses. The results will also be disseminated to
the collaborating organizations of the investigators to impact their HPC
software applications.

Emerging HPC systems---driven by many-core processors and accelerator
architectures--- require innovations in existing infrastructure to deliver the
best performance for science domains. The MPI 4.0 standard has also brought
forward new opportunities for co-designing applications. These include
partitioned point-to-point and collective operations, and neighborhood
collectives. With these advances, there is a critical need to update the
commonly used tools and libraries that form the basis for the NSFâ€™s HPC
cyberinfrastructure. The research undertakes this challenge and pursues new
performance engineering avenues---by exploiting a co-design approach using the
MPI_T API---in the MVAPICH2 and TAU libraries with scientific applications. The
project focuses on two popular HPC applications spanning multiple domains and
representing various communication patterns - Anelastic Wave Propagation (AWP-
ODC) and Highly efficient FFTs for Exascale (heFFTe). AWP-ODC is a highly
scalable parallel finite-difference application with point-to-point operations
that enables 3D earthquake calculations. HeFFTe, dominated by collective
operations, is a massively parallel application that provides a scalable and
efficient implementation of the widely used Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
operations. The research aims to investigate and develop the following
innovations by co-designing MVAPICH2 and TAU libraries to scale driving science
domains---including AWP-ODC and heFFTe: 1) Load-aware designs for MPI
asynchronous communication, 2) Cross runtime coordination for MPI+X
applications, 3) Partitioned point-to-point primitives, 4) Application-aware
neighborhood collective communication, 5) Support for adaptive persistent
collective communication, and 6) Coordinating communication kernels on GPUs.
Integrated development and evaluation are carried out to ensure proper
integration of proposed designs with the driving applications, and closely work
with internal and external collaborators to facilitate wide deployment and
adoption of the released software. The transformative impact of the proposed
effort is to extract the performance and scalability of HPC applications in
next-generation HPC architectures through intelligent performance engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.