* 2311867
* EAGER: Characterizing vertical swimming, payload capacity, and performance envelope of biohybrid robot jellyfish as future ocean monitoring platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* John Dabiri, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

In light of a changing climate, the need to monitor, map, and model the health
of the ocean and its closely associated ecosystems is more vital than ever.
Biologging, i.e., the use of animal-attached sensors to collect data on animal
behavior, physiology, and their surrounding environment, has become an important
input for many climate change and ocean assessment models, providing
environmental data on regions of the ocean that would be otherwise inaccessible.
However, a major limitation of biologging is that it only provides data at
locations where the animal actively swims or is passively carried. Biohybrid
robotic control, or the ability to steer a living animal along a desired
trajectory, would address current limitations in both biologging and traditional
robotic sensing systems. Recent technology developed at Caltech has demonstrated
the ability to robotically control the unidirectional swimming of a moon
jellyfish (Aurelia aurita) in the laboratory and ocean. A small microcontroller
with two electrodes inserted into the center of the jellyfish induces electrical
stimulation that allows for these biohybrid robotic jellyfish to swim on command
and at speeds 3 times their natural abilities. These biohybrid robot jellyfish
have to the potential to expand vertical ocean profiling missions in particular,
where existing technology is especially constrained. The deep ocean is vastly
under-sampled due to limitations associated with immense pressure and depth and
their associated technological expense. However, deep sea measurements are
extremely important for understanding the interplay between the ocean and
climate. Jellyfish are naturally suited to the harsh conditions of the deep, and
biohybrid robot jellyfish swim at speeds an order of magnitude larger than
background vertical currents due to upwelling and downwelling. Biohybrid robotic
jellyfish platforms would address many of the limitations of current ocean
profiling technologies, due to their: 1) low cost, 2) global animal availability
and open-source technology, 3) energy-efficient, long-duration propulsion, 4)
limited environmental disturbance (small size and minimal wake), and 5)
potential for deployment in large swarms. The societal broader impacts for this
work include the creation of a more economically accessible, vertical profiling
ocean sensing platform. Once the performance envelope of this platform is
characterized in this project, new biologging tags with additional sensors,
antennas, and GPS can be incorporated. Because this technology will be open
source, other researchers will be able to modify and further optimize this
platform. On a local scale, this research will engage with the community through
the direct mentorship of underrepresented students, as well as researcher
participation in workshops focused on increasing the diversity of this research
community.

The first-generation prototype of the biohybrid robotic jellyfish has
demonstrated significant but unrealized potential to act as a future ocean
sensing platform that can supplement and enhance existing ocean sensing
technologies. However, further research and development is needed to optimize
the protocol for equipping biohybrid jellies with environmental sensing tags for
long-term, vertical ocean profiling under realistic field conditions. This
project will characterize the capabilities of a modified version of biohybrid
robotic jellyfish for the specific application of vertical ocean profiling.
Research activities will include: 1) simplifying the swim controller interface
for a more plug-and-play, globally scalable controller, 2) quantifying the
scaling of maximum payload versus body size for biohybrid robot jellyfish, 3)
integrating an off-the-shelf biologging tag (iTAG) with the swim controller
interface, 4) assessing the achievable measurement duration and spatial range of
biohybrid jellyfish for long-term deployments, and 5) demonstrating successful
onboard control and data retrieval of equipped biohybrid robot jellyfish for
vertical ocean profiling in coastal and open ocean environments in southern
California.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.