* 2311354
* Scalable Bayesian regression: Analytical and numerical tools for efficient Bayesian analysis in the large data regime
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Philip Greengard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,908.00

Hierarchical regression has become a ubiquitous tool in statistics and data
science. Applied researchers across the social and natural sciences, in fields
such as epidemiology, political science, genomics, and many more, rely on
hierarchical regression as an essential element of their data analysis toolbox.
However, there are still major obstacles in practical and widespread use of
hierarchical regression. The primary limitation is computationalâ€”learning from
complex models with large amounts of data can require extensive compute time.
With this research project, the investigators aim to supply the communities of
applied statisticians and data scientists with a range of tools that open up
more efficient user-friendly statistical modeling. This project provides
research training opportunities for students.

The investigators will focus on the development of customized computational and
analytical tools for statistical inference for hierarchical modeling. Popular
tools for inference such as MCMC and variational methods rarely take advantage
of friendly analytical structure in the model and they typically rely on many
evaluations of the target density and its gradient. In this project, the
investigators will exploit the analytical and numerical properties of the
posterior density and capitalize on the oftentimes extensive friendly structure
of models by building customized methods. This will involve the use of modern
numerical linear algebra, approximation theory, and the tools of fast algorithms
for the numerical solution of partial differential equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.