* 2311235
* New York HSI Hub: Building Community College Capacity in Culturally Responsive Professional Development and Grantsmanship
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Elaine Craft, Westchester Community College
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,685,901.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this New York HSI Hub project aims to bring about
systemic improvements for 14 diverse and highly enrolled New York City area SUNY
and CUNY community colleges through a five-year program of professional
development in culturally responsive instruction, faculty learning communities,
and grantsmanship mentoring of STEM faculty. The Hub’s activities will help
address challenges community colleges face when attempting to build capacity for
institutional change. Moreover, this project will expand the STEM pipeline for
students in participating colleges by providing faculty with tools for effective
teaching in diverse environments and for pursuing future grant funding to
support efforts responsive to student success in STEM.

This project aims to strengthen STEM education at the 14 participating colleges
by offering a five-year program of a) faculty professional development in
culturally responsive instructional methods to advance STEM success for students
that represent the full spectrum of diverse talent at HSIs, and b) grantsmanship
mentoring to increase the capacity of STEM faculty to competitively pursue NSF
HSI funding to further accelerate culturally responsive instruction and related
program improvements. Through workshops and network-building, the project uses
Participatory Action Research to help faculty reflect and develop their teaching
methods. Results of the project include creating an engaging and impactful
classroom experience for community college STEM students, and successful grant
development among the 14 participating colleges. Findings on the impacts of
Participatory Action Research and grantsmanship training will be disseminated
widely through national conferences and webinars. Results will also be
disseminated through SUNY and CUNY systemwide meetings and events. This project
is funded by the HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.