* 2311026
* IUCRC Phase II Arizona State University: Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Dimitris Metaxas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2028
* USD 106,684.00

Accelerated and real-time analytics is a leading edge of the smart data
revolution, pushed by advances in internet-connected sensor hardware on one side
and accelerated AI/ML analytics on the other. These technologies include machine
learning, cognitive, quantum, neuromorphic, and edge computing combined with new
classes of sensory and programmable hardware components, active storage, flash
storage, in-memory cloud systems, and embedded sensors. They address many
pursuits of national defense and cybersecurity, weather prediction, health- and
disease-monitoring, Industrial IoT, etc. In IUCRC/CARTA Phase II, we will
develop new accelerated and real-time approaches to these technologies and their
integration relevant to our partners.

We will leverage our cutting-edge research in AI/ML and programmable cyber-
systems to conduct collaborative CARTA research. Our research areas include
accelerated medical image analytics, explainable and interpretable AI/ML for
medical and vision/language models, digital twins for dynamical systems with
acceleration, and physics-based modeling with AI/ML for improved understanding.
Our research will be primarily “application neutral;” i.e., the techniques can
be applied with modifications across multiple industry sectors, including cyber
security, healthcare and medical, dynamic systems, environment, and business
intelligence. Our exploration will include deep learning, semi-supervised
learning, federated learning, architectures, image understanding, real-time
simulations, and blockchains. Our project will benefit businesses by providing a
larger pool of highly skilled workforce. We will disseminate the results of this
collaborative research with industry widely by publishing them in appropriate
journals and conferences. We will leverage our many programs for our
underrepresented students both in the undergraduate and the graduate populations
to recruit students for summer internships at our industry partners and to do
research in CARTA projects. We will also leverage our MS and PhD in Data
Science, Analytics and Engineering programs to find opportunities for the
students to do projects as industry interns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.