* 2311950
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: An Integrated Framework for Enabling Temporal-Reliable Quantum Learning on NISQ-era Devices
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Qiang Guan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

As quantum computers consistently scale up with more qubits, the development of
practical and real-world applications using quantum computing has become a
crucial frontier for quantum information scientists and technologists, which
benefits other scientists and end-users across a wide range of disciplines.
Quantum learning, a combination of quantum computing and machine learning and
also known as Variational Quantum Algorithm (VQA), is one of the most promising
approaches to be applied to a variety of practical problems. Quantum learning is
a hybrid quantum-classical protocol that optimizes parameters in a Variational
Quantum Circuit (VQC) with a cost function using a classical training optimizer.
However, the inherent noise on quantum devices brings severe deployability and
portability issues, making the optimized VQCs suffer significant performance
degradation in deploying or porting among different quantum computers. What is
more, the noise on the quantum devices changes over time, known as unstable
noise, fluctuating noise, or drift of noise, which prevents the reuse of VQCs on
one quantum computer at different times and even misleads the learning to a non-
optimal path when noise change during the VQC training process. This project
aims to enable temporal-reliable quantum learning by generating fundamental
understandings and practical approaches in quantum learning, uncertainty
prediction, noise suppression, and system visualization. Outcomes are evaluated
using quantum learning for scientific applications on the DoE-sponsored
supercomputing centers that provide access to various commercial quantum
computing resources.

With the objective of facilitating practical quantum learning, this project uses
a systematic and innovative approach to develop an integrated framework, which
presents the novelty of the proposed research, practical value, and domain
impacts: (1) developing a novel compression-based error adaptor to adjust the
parameters and structure of VQC according to the fluctuating quantum noise, such
that the VQC can effectively and efficiently adapt to the present quantum noise;
(2) building an uncertainty predictor to quantify the deployability of a given
pair of VQC and quantum processor, such that users can be aware of performance
change; (3) designing a novel visualization tool with scalability to portray the
impact of noise on the performance of a given VQC; and (4) the developed toolset
is finally integrated into a scientific application, real-time earthquake
detection, which can provide insights into identifying real-world tasks where
quantum technologies may offer a promising solution. The education impacts of
this project include the tutorials on the developed software tools to guide and
encourage the domain researchers to leverage the advanced quantum computing
cyberinfrastructure; the integration of research to the quantum summer program
from the Potomac Quantum Innovation Center for high school seniors; and the
development of new undergraduate and graduate courses for quantum workforce
training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.