* 2311595
* I-Corp: A quantum and classic bridge
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Esin Tureci, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that applies broadly to various industries actively
exploring quantum solutions for their business problems. This application
includes the financial services, pharmaceuticals, aerospace, transportation, and
chemicals industries. Quantum computing is still at its infancy and the current
device capabilities do not allow customers to adequately test the potential of
incorporating quantum algorithms into their business. The hybrid platform
fundamentally increases the computing capabilities of such industries to
establish a better understanding of the use cases and the extent to which
quantum computing improves their bottom line. This technology enables quantum
hardware providers to offer more services to their customers. In fact, most
major quantum hardware providers are also major classical cloud computing
providers. This technology serves as the bridge between the existing classical
infrastructure and the emerging quantum stack. The bottleneck cost for quantum
computing is the hardware development cost. This technology is a low-cost, high-
impact solution to significantly scale quantum services.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology that helps bridge
the gap between quantum computing needs and the existing, insufficient solutions
used to run quantum algorithms. Quantum computing has been proposed as a new
paradigm that has the potential to offer computing advantages over the classical
computing paradigm. However, the two existing solutions to execute quantum
algorithms suffer from apparent challenges. First, simulations of quantum
algorithms using classical computers do not scale. Second, quantum computers
must satisfy highly demanding hardware size and quality requirements to support
practical applications. This technology is a software toolchain that combines
quantum and classical computing into a concerted computing platform. The 3-step
process consists of (1) cutting a large quantum program into smaller pieces, (2)
running the smaller pieces with quantum computers, and (3) reconstructing the
results using classical high-performance computers. Overall, the technology
leverages classical tensor network techniques and quantum computing to enable
the execution of quantum programs significantly beyond the capabilities of the
existing stand-alone solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.