* 2311260
* Frameworks: Data-Driven Software Infrastructure for Next-Generation Molecular Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Francesco Paesani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,928,087.00

This project focuses on the development and optimization of the MB-Fit/MBX
software infrastructure, a tool designed to advance the field of molecular
simulations. By providing a machine-learned representation of molecular
interactions, the software provides researchers worldwide with the possibility
to model and predict the behavior of complex systems at the molecular level with
unprecedented accuracy. As an open-source tool, MB-Fit/MBX not only promotes the
progress of science by encouraging contributions from researchers worldwide but
also democratizes access to cutting-edge computational tools. The project is
committed to fostering education and diversity through the organization of
workshops and training programs, thereby creating a vibrant community of users
and developers. These initiatives include undergraduate summer research programs
and collaborations with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
which aim to attract students to computational molecular sciences and promote
STEM disciplines in underrepresented and underprivileged communities. The
significance of this project is underscored by its potential to advance
scientific knowledge and contribute to national progress by providing a tool
with wide-ranging applications. From drug design to materials science, the MB-
Fit/MBX software infrastructure is poised to catalyze breakthroughs across
various scientific domains. The project also includes a blog that highlights all
scientific accomplishments and new discoveries enabled by the MB-Fit/MBX
software infrastructure. This platform not only disseminates the project's
achievements but also helps to raise the visibility of contributors in the
community, thereby fostering a culture of recognition and collaboration.

The primary goals of this project include the development of the MBX-Fit/MBX
software infrastructure for data-driven many-body molecular simulations,
acceleration of computationally intensive terms to GPU accelerators, and
integration of the MBX-Fit/MBX software with LAMMPS, i-PI, and RASPA, which are
widely used open-source software for molecular simulations. The project also
aims to enhance the scalability of the iterative electrostatic solver in MBX and
develop mini-apps for efficient evaluation of PIPs on CPUs and GPU accelerators.
The project employs a variety of methods and approaches, including machine
learning, high-performance computing, and open-source software development.
Specifically, the project will explore multi-partition algorithms where a subset
of the CPUs will be tasked with computing the 3D FFTs, providing additional
opportunities for performance optimization. The development of mini-apps will be
a key element of the software design strategy, enabling rapid algorithm
development and performance measurement on target architectures. The project
will also focus on performance tuning and optimization guided by profiling
tools, with a particular focus on achieving better performance with code
refactoring. As a result, this project will enable more accurate and efficient
molecular simulations, foster a community of users and developers, and provide a
platform for training and education in the field. The progress and achievements
of the project will be disseminated through a blog that highlights scientific
accomplishments and new discoveries enabled by the MB-Fit/MBX software
infrastructure. The project also includes a manual on the MB-Fit/MBX website,
providing comprehensive guidance for users and developers. The project will
benefit from periodic interactions with LAMMPS, i-PI, and RASPA developers to
ensure the best performance of the MBX/LAMMPS, MBX/i-PI, and MBX/RASPA
interfaces. The project's broader impacts include the organization of workshops
and training programs, undergraduate summer research programs, and
collaborations with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), all
aimed at promoting STEM disciplines in underrepresented and underprivileged
communities.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Chemistry within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.