* 2311007
* A Multi-Rate Feedback Control Framework for Design and Analyzing of Decentralized and Federated Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mingyi Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2026
* USD 472,000.00

Distributed systems hold great promise to realize scalable processing and real-
time intelligence required for our modern life, revolutionizing how we interact
with technology and enabling us to easily tackle complex problems. However,
despite extensive research in distributed algorithms and systems, several
challenges persist in their synthesis and application. In particular, the
current algorithm design process is not scalable. Indeed one needs to design a
new algorithm and develop the corresponding analysis specific to each
application scenario and set of requirements. There has been an urgent need to
unify various subclasses of distributed algorithms to provide insights and
streamline the design and analysis. The framework developed in this project will
benefit a wide range of applications beyond machine learning, such as control
theory and signal processing. The proposed activities also offer rich
opportunities for engaging undergraduate students in cross-disciplinary research
and K-12 outreach activities.

This proposal advocates a generic “model” of distributed algorithms by
leveraging theory and techniques from stochastic multi-rate feedback control
systems. Such a generic model can abstract important features of distributed
algorithms, such as guaranteed differential privacy, compressed communication,
or occasional communication, into tractable modules. Building upon these
abstract models, we design a framework with superior modeling power to encompass
a substantial class of distributed algorithms. Such a framework can be used to
analyze the entire algorithm class, but more importantly, it helps streamline
the design of new algorithms in the sense that features arising from different
application domains can be easily integrated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.