* 2311430
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Lattice QCD software for nuclear physics on heterogeneous architectures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 358,638.00

Nucleons (protons and neutrons) make up atomic nuclei and are a common building
block of all matter in the universe. To better understand atomic nuclei, as well
as to assist current experiments to find new particle physics and to understand
particles known as neutrinos, it is important to carry out calculations of
nucleons interacting with not only other nucleons but other particles in nature,
such as electrons, muons, and mesons. The development of optimized software to
carry out such computations on modern GPU-accelerated supercomputer systems is
pursued.

The physics of hadron-hadron interactions can be studied using Monte Carlo
estimates of path integrals involving quark and gluon fields on a space-time
lattice. Baryon-meson and baryon-baryon scattering phase shifts can be computed,
yielding important information on hadron structure. Form factors involving the
nucleon and transitions through the Delta baryon are particularly important
since they are crucial to accelerator-based neutrino experiments, such as the
Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE). New computational techniques, such
as the stochastic LapH method, have made possible such computations in lattice
quantum chromodynamics (LQCD). A key, but computationally intensive, ingredient
in such computations is the evaluation of individual baryon sources and sinks.
One goal of this work is the development of highly-optimized software to
evaluate baryon sources/sinks on modern GPU-accelerated architectures. A
plethora of tensor contractions are needed in the end stages of such scattering
calculations, which are best performed in separate program executions requiring
different wall times and numbers of computing processors. Effectively bundling
such numerous runs together into a handful of batch jobs on supercomputer
systems is crucial in the work flow of these computations. This work will also
develop the software to efficiently carry out this bundling.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of Physics
within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.