* 2311803
* I-Corps: Quiet car wheel technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Yun Jing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new strategies for sound isolation for vehicle interior noise
induced by the friction of tires on pavement using highly reflecting acoustic
metamaterials. One broad impact of the proposed project is to make a paradigm
shift in the noise, vibration, comfort of vehicles. This technology is a meta-
surface which can be used to control and isolate sound generated by a moving
car. The proposed acoustic metamaterial partially fills the interior of the
tires, thus isolating them acoustically from the car cabin. The proposed design
significantly reduces the noise arising from tire-pavement interaction at a wide
range of vehicle speeds over acoustic frequencies below 2 kHz. Robust
lightweight meta-structures provide substantial interior noise reduction and a
comfortable driving experience without affecting tire performance. Considering
the growing automotive market size, the proposed technology can be a catalyst
for economic growth both locally and globally. The proposed quiet technology can
help solve the existing environmental noise pollution in other fields and may,
ultimately, have long-term impacts on health including anxiety, depression, and
heart diseases.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of automotive vehicle noise
pollution reduction technology. This noise often comes from tire-pavement
interaction, e.g., friction and impact. Currently efforts aim to use sound
absorbers and/or cavity resonators to suppress peaks in the noise spectrum. The
tools applied to reach this goal are acoustic foams and Helmholtz resonators.
However, these noise reduction methods are focused on suppression of the tire
cavity resonance, and they are effective within a relatively narrow bandwidth. A
different approach is necessary for better noise reduction of the sound
generated at low frequency and the wideband noise caused by tire-pavement
interaction. While it is difficult to deal with the low frequency and undesired
broadband sound using conventional materials due to the limited design
constraints, this project will use acoustic metamaterials and artificially
engineered structures that can have a compact shape while providing exotic
acoustic properties. The proposed approach uses an artificially designed,
reflecting acoustic can be extended to other objects generating low-frequency
mechanical noise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.