* 2311996
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Researching Equity Surrounding Hiring and Promotion Experiences (RESHAPE)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Kirsten Dellinger, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,416.00

The University of Mississippi will undertake an institutional self-assessment to
identify potential organizational inequities (unjust or unfair) policies and
practices that result in differential professional outcomes for some STEM
faculty. The ADVANCE Catalyst project will result in a five-year STEM faculty
equity plan tailored to the University of Mississippi context and institutional
data that will guide institutional actions to address any issues identified
during the grant. This project will employ a novel framework to examine how
policies, procedures, and experiences interact across levels of an institution
and affect different faculty in STEM.

The institutional self-assessment and five-year strategic plan will set a
foundation to improve equity for STEM faculty at the institution. This work will
benefit STEM disciplines as well as non-STEM disciplines due to the
interconnected nature of institutional policy. Results of the Catalyst project
will be regularly communicated with the University of Mississippi community. The
findings and strategies aim to be applicable to multiple institutions and they
will be shared with other higher education institutions—especially large
flagship institutions and those located within the southern United States.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional assessments and the development of five-year
faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit, institution of higher
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.