* 2311319
* Elements: A workflow for efficient and reproducible permafrost geomorphology analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Joanmarie Del Vecchio, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 393,758.00

The project is focused on developing software to study the dynamics of
permafrost landscapes, with the aim of quantifying and predicting landscape
changes and carbon fluxes. The software developed in this project connects the
ever-growing volume of environmental data being collected from high latitudes
datasets with cutting-edge software to advance understanding of permafrost
landscapes. These analyses will help understand permafrost landscape dynamics
and their influence on carbon release, which is crucial for accurate climate
projections and informed mitigation efforts. This work trains the next
generation of geoscientists in the use of advanced data and computational tools,
ensuring they are well-equipped to tackle complex environmental challenges and
fostering a more inclusive and diverse scientific community. Through its
commitment to open-source tools and interoperability, PyCoGSS also promotes
interdisciplinary investigations in permafrost research. This project advances
our understanding of climate change and its effects on landscapes while
providing hands-on learning experiences in geospatial science through the
development of teaching materials alongside research tools.

Recent advancements in satellite technology and software have improved the study
of permafrost landscapes, but the lack of appropriate cyberinfrastructure and
training hinders widespread adoption, limiting progress in understanding
permafrost landscape dynamics. To overcome this, the project combines process
geomorphology with advanced computational tools for acquiring, analyzing, and
visualizing large interdisciplinary datasets. The Python Computational
Geomorphology Software System (PyCoGSS) enables reproducible and scalable
analyses of landscape morphology, topographic change, and ecohydrological
indicators. The software facilitates the acquisition, analysis, and
visualization of topographic and multispectral data, allowing for spatial and
temporal trend analyses. It enables quick experimentation with different
combinations of morphometric data and multispectral products as inputs to
machine learning algorithms. The software development prioritizes user-
friendliness and accessibility, catering to researchers at different career
stages. The project employs undergraduate researchers to test software to ensure
the content is accessible to coding novices and lead to the training of
undergraduates in scalable and reproducible landscape analysis. The development
of PyCoGSS has the potential to foster a more inclusive surface processes
community and promote open-source tools and datasets.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Office of Polar Programs (OPP), the Division of Research,
Innovation, Synergies, and Education (RISE), and the Geomorphology and Land-use
Dynamics (GLD) Program within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.