* 2311649
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Sketching for privacy and privacy for sketching
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Huy Nguyen, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2027
* USD 281,321.00

A sketch of a dataset is simply a compressed representation, consuming much less
memory than what it would take to store the raw data, which allows for answering
some set of queries and possibly also supporting updates to the database.
Sketching algorithms are typically deployed in scenarios with low memory
availability such as in sensor networks, low-latency applications where low
memory solutions fit in cache and are thus faster, big data applications as a
tool for algorithmic speed-up such as large-scale machine learning, or
distributed applications in which compressed sketches can be transmitted between
servers more cheaply than the (large) raw data. Several recent industry and
government applications have necessitated such algorithms that additionally
maintain user privacy in a variety of settings, while also being efficient in
terms of memory, runtime, and/or communication, which can be accomplished via
sketching.

This project aims to advance the state of the art in the development of
sketching algorithms for particular applications. This in particular includes
reducing communication in distributed environments with privacy requirements, as
well as further developing privacy as an algorithmic tool to design new
randomized sketching algorithms that provide correctness guarantees even in
environments with adaptive adversaries. In addition, the project aims to further
develop the use of sketching to provide low-memory solutions to statistical
learning problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.