* 2311990
* III: Small: Multiple Device Collaborative Learning in Real Heterogeneous and Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,410.00

In collaborative learning, different devices such as smartphones or
organizations like banks or hospitals learn together, using their own (sometimes
private) data to build a shared model. This project tackles the challenge of
scaling up this kind of learning for large, constantly changing, and diverse
datasets. It proposes a move away from traditional computing systems, towards
more flexible systems that can handle changing data types, decentralized
computing, and different strategies between learning devices. Currently,
problems arise from the diverse nature and volume of real-world data, like user
photos, surveillance videos, or medical information. Present collaborative
learning schemes often try to average out the learning updates from all devices,
ignoring the individual characteristics of each device and their unique
computing abilities. Moreover, these systems struggle with "free riding", where
some participants benefit from the improved learning model without contributing
any data. This difficulty calls for creating fitting incentives to encourage
equal participation. The goal of this project is to improve collaborative
learning by solving these issues, resulting in more efficient and fair learning
systems that cater to individual devices' unique characteristics. This
advancement goes beyond improving machine learning as it encourages data
sharing, participation, and inclusivity, bringing about broader societal
benefits. Current collaborative learning frameworks often achieve consensus by
averaging model updates from participating agents, an approach that may
disregard the unique attributes and diverse hardware capabilities of the agents
involved. Such an oversight could lead to a mismatch between the model
architecture and the hardware capabilities of specific devices, particularly
edge devices with limited memory or computational power, thereby impeding
efficient model training or underutilizing available resources. Additionally,
the extant collaborative learning frameworks tend to overlook crucial factors
such as algorithm trustworthiness and mechanism design. These challenges
highlight the urgent need for a reimagined approach to collaborative learning.
This project focuses on the development of a collaborative learning framework
specifically designed for dynamic and diverse environments, with particular
emphasis on standard hardware computing platforms, such as those comprising edge
devices. The project's objectives are threefold: First, it seeks to innovate
model-parallel collaborative learning by designing unique model architectures
and efficient algorithms, underpinned by theoretical explorations employing a
structured variational inference approach. Second, the project aims to
facilitate the creation of practical, efficient training and communication
learning algorithms for on-device usage. This aim will be achieved by
introducing new algorithmic components and an authentic on-device testing
platform. Lastly, the project intends to evaluate the system's trustworthiness
and mechanism design in a decentralized setting. It will design incentives that
promote data sharing and algorithm adoption, thereby maximizing benefits at both
the community and individual levels. The project's targeted applications
encompass disaster forecasting, AI-assisted clinical diagnosis, and treatment,
and decentralized strategic decision-making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.