* 2311640
* Understanding the Role of Mechanical Boundary Conditions on Tissue Assembly and Repair in 3D Fibrous Microtissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeroen Eyckmans, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 635,000.00

This award will support research that will generate new knowledge about
biological tissue assembly and repair. This work will both promote the progress
of science and advance national health. Tissue assembly and repair are the
fundamental mechanisms that underly wound healing. It is known that mechanical
forces control tissue assembly. However, the mechanisms by which forces regulate
new tissue formation and its organization remain poorly understood. Essentially,
changing the mechanical forces on a tissue can either promote or suppress wound
healing. However, the direct relationship between mechanical forces and wound
healing outcomes are largely unknown. This award supports the fundamental
research to provide knowledge about how mechanical forces will influence tissue
assembly and repair in a tightly controlled laboratory setting. Through
establishing a combined experimental and computational platform for measuring
the interplay between mechanical, chemical, and biological cues, this research
will directly advance the design of engineered devices and therapeutics to
promote would healing. Thus, results from this research will benefit the U.S.
national health, economy, and society as impaired wound healing is a significant
medical problem. Finally, this work will include community outreach at the
middle school level to educate students about the exciting field of
mechanobiology.

The objective of this project is to understand how domain boundary conditions
(i.e., the boundary restraints that control emergent ECM alignment and tissue
geometry) control local tissue repair (i.e., healing through matrix
contractility and matrix deposition) via the induced spatially heterogeneous
mechanical microenvironment (i.e., self-assembled fiber alignment, tissue
strain, and tissue stress). This work tightly integrates in vitro experiments
and computational modeling, where the in vitro experiments build on a previously
developed three-dimensional in vitro biomimetic gap closure model of tissue
assembly and repair. This work will first establish a mechanistic computational
model to predict the heterogeneous stresses and strains of microtissue formed
around different micropost configurations. Then, it will integrate the
mechanistic computational model with timelapse image based experimental data to
form a combined mechanistic and data-driven framework to predict the gap closure
process. Finally, this framework will be used to define the transition regime
between “gap closure” and “gap closure failure” for this in vitro experimental
system. In addition to the knowledge gained about biological tissue assembly and
repair, this work will establish a generalizable methodology for integrating
mechanistic and data driven computational models for mechanobiological systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.