* 2311667
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Enabling Particle and Nuclear Physics Discoveries with Neural Deconvolution
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Miguel Arratia, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sheikh Ghafoor
* 08/31/2026
* USD 233,104.00

Even though large physics experiments are able to detect complex properties of
reaction rates, such foundational scientific quantities are always compressed
due to limitations in statistical methods and exchange platforms. The current
paradigm introduces significant barriers for scientific discovery and data
reusability. Comparisons between experiments with different compression schemes
is challenging. Furthermore, the compression schemes necessarily throw out
potentially useful information, which may be needed to explore interesting
phenomena. This information loss likewise limits the long-term utility of
archived data, which may be of scientific interest long after the experiment
that generated it ends. Recent advancements in machine-learning methods
initiated by the PIs and others solve these issues by enabling measurements
directly in the un-compressed (or minimally compressed) data. However, there is
currently no standard or platform for sharing such data, and therefore, no
measurements of this kind with actual data have been published to date. This
project builds open source cyberinfrastructure for publishing and reusing un- or
minimally compressed measurements for research and educational purposes. These
tools are widely applicable across physics domains and data from electron-proton
collisions are used to test and benchmark the frameworks. This project serves
the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, by promoting the progress of
science. The publication of minimally processed data greatly extends the
practical lifetime of experimental facilities, enabling high-quality scientific
analyses well beyond the time a detector is running and the researchers who
collected the data. Many analyses are simply not possible with existing
protocols where only limited numerical results are published alongside academic
papers. Minimally compressed data can be studied without computationally
expensive and often proprietary detector simulations, and are therefore of great
interest for a first exposure to research by early career scientists in
training.

This project builds upon recent advances by the PIs and others in the
development of machine machine learning solutions to measurements of reaction
rates in large physics experiments. Cyberinfrastructure is created for
publishing and reusing measurements created by these machine learning
algorithms. The project develops an exchange format for sharing machine
learning-based measurements whose data representation is neural networks, unlike
the tabular, often histogram, format of traditional measurements. This format is
integrated with a software platform that enables these data to be readily
findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). This
cyberinfrastructure is tested with a prototype science pipeline, starting from a
first unbinned measurement as input into the platform and ending with an
analysis that reinterprets it. In the process, practical software is developed
and made available to other researchers to carry out unbinned measurements and
to reuse published data. These tools are integrated with widely-used frameworks
in particle, nuclear, and astrophysics in order to accelerate their adaptation.
Such developments are also used to broaden participation in fundamental physics
and applied machine learning for undergraduate researchers, including those who
would not normally have access to large experimental and computing resources.
This is enabled in part by significantly reduced computational resources
required to carry out forefront analysis since computationally expensive
experimental tools including detector simulations are not needed. Undergraduate
researchers are involved in the development and testing of the new
infrastructure.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of Physics
within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.