* 2311052
* Collaborative Research: Estuarine metabolism and gas exchange determined from dissolved oxygen time series: method development, field evaluation, and application to historical data
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Wade McGillis, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2023
* USD 280,627.00

Estuaries play a key role in the global cycling of elements because they are hot
spots of biological activity and chemical transformations that lie at the
interface between land, ocean, and atmosphere. As materials are transported from
land to ocean, estuaries profoundly transform or filter these materials through
various processes, chief among which are photosynthesis and respiration,
collectively referred to as metabolism, and the exchange of gases (such as
carbon dioxide and oxygen) between the estuary and the atmosphere. However,
these processes are poorly constrained due to lack of sufficient data, high
variability in space and time, inconsistent methodology, and lack of a unified
model. This research will advance understanding of these processes through a
novel combination of field campaigns, model development, and historical data
analysis. The data currently available to quantify these processes, which are
continuous measurements of dissolved oxygen, are complicated by tidal currents.
Hence a main objective of the research is to evaluate and improve methods that
remove the influence of tidal currents, which is called advection. This
objective will be achieved by direct measurements of advection in two
contrasting estuaries in contrasting seasons. Products of this research will be
made available to high school teachers, college students, and research
professionals. Easy-to-use software based on the open-source R programming
language will be developed to analyze the dissolved oxygen data. A Research
Experience for Teachers will engage a high school teacher in estuarine
metabolism and gas exchange research. Curricular materials for high school and
college employing the software will be developed with education specialists. The
software will be integrated into the current software suite that is used to
analyze dissolved oxygen data from a national data base. A postdoctoral
researcher will be involved in all aspects of the broader impacts and gain
experience in pedagogy and outreach.

The first two objectives of the proposed research are to evaluate and improve
advection-removal techniques and gas transfer parameterizations in four one-
month field campaigns in contrasting estuaries (Hudson River and Apalachicola
Bay) and seasons (spring and late summer). A control volume approach will be
adopted, providing a rare opportunity to completely constrain the dissolved
oxygen budget at an estuarine location. Achieving these two objectives will
allow the following hypotheses to be tested: (H1) advection-removal errors
increase as the correlation between sun angle and tidal height increases and
(H2) turbidity and fetch measurably influence the gas transfer velocity. The
third objective is to develop a new dissolved-oxygen data assimilation method,
Estuarine BAyesian Single-station Estimation (EBASE), for simultaneously
determining gross primary production, ecosystem respiration, net ecosystem
production, and gas exchange. EBASE will combine the advection-removal technique
(and its determined errors estimated in the first objective) with Bayesian
metabolism techniques recently developed in limnology. EBASE will also retrieve
model parameters, such as the initial slope of the photosynthesis-irradiance
curve, the temperature dependence of respiration, and the fetch dependence of
the gas transfer velocity. The fourth objective is to apply EBASE to the field
campaign data and to 16 long-running (at least 14 years), high-quality dissolved
oxygen time series within the U.S. National Estuarine Research Reserve System
(NERRS), which also contains critical continuous measurements of temperature,
salinity, turbidity, wind speed, wind direction, and surface irradiance as well
as monthly measurements of chlorophyll and nutrients. EBASE will be applied to
one-month segments of the NERRS data, facilitating an analysis of the drivers of
seasonal, interannual, and cross-system variability in estuarine metabolism and
gas exchange. This analysis will allow further testing of H2 as well as testing
of metabolism-related hypotheses: (H3a) the initial slope of the photosynthesis-
irradiance curve increases with nutrients and chlorophyll and decreases with
turbidity and (H3b) the slope of the respiration-temperature relationship
increases with salinity (a proxy of dissolved organic matter) and chlorophyll (a
proxy of bacterial abundance).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.