* 2311527
* Elements: Enabling High Precision Citizen Science Photometry from Wide Field Color Images
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mary Urquhart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,993.00

This project is developing free and open-source software and a web interface for
extracting high-precision brightness measurements of stars from citizen
scientist observations collected with color digital cameras. Mass production
makes such cameras much more affordable than the monochrome detectors typically
used by professional astronomers; consumer cameras also come with a host of
built-in features which make them much simpler to operate and automate than
professional detectors. However, color images are particularly challenging for
existing tools due to the staggered microfilters applied to detector pixels
which enable color sensitivity. This project will greatly expand the pool of
citizen scientists able to contribute to cutting edge science: using these
tools, the public can pursue numerous additional exoplanet and variable star
projects using high-cadence, high-precision photometry of bright stars over much
or all of the sky at a fraction of the cost of professional surveys.

This project is collaborating with three of the leading projects pursuing
exoplanet science through citizen observations: PANOPTES, Exoplanet Watch, and
the Unistellar network. This software will become the data processing pipeline
of PANOPTES and be integrated into the Exoplanet Watch and Unistellar pipelines,
ensuring its adoption by three large global communities of citizen scientists.
The citizen science data will be used to search for additional transits of
candidates identified by the TESS satellite with only a single transit, transits
from additional longer orbital period planets in both known short period
exoplanet systems and TESS transit candidates, and transits of known radial
velocity planets. Any identified planets will orbit stars that appear
exceptionally bright from Earth, produce deep transits, and reside far away from
their stars. The first two properties makes such planets particularly easy to
study using state of the art space and ground facilities, and the planet-star
interactions will be much weaker for these planets than is typical for the
current population of planets with deep transits around similarly bright stars.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Division of Astronomical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.