* 2311967
* S&amp;AS: FND: COLLAB: Planning and Control of Heterogeneous Robot Teams for Ocean Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Nora Ayanian, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 114,440.00

Robots in marine and littoral environments are envisioned for commerce,
scientific exploration, search and rescue, and many other tasks. However, robots
in such environments face significant challenges. Vehicles must act and effect
change in environments with large inertial effects and disturbances, with only
near-field perception. Coupled with our limited understanding of ocean dynamics
and the lack of accessible and high-quality ocean flow data, these obstacles
make the use of robotics technology in these varied applications extremely
difficult. This project realizes an integrated, heterogeneous robotic approach
towards large-scale ocean monitoring for environmental mitigation and search and
rescue operations. It enables data-driven tracking and mapping of various
physical, chemical, and/or biological processes of interest in marine
environments, such as tracking contaminant dispersion or missing aircraft. This
project significantly improves the state of the art in ocean search and
monitoring technology, helping us understand and harness ocean currents, and
improve the health of the world's oceans. Results from the project are
integrated into education, through the PIs' courses, mentoring students on
research, and expanding an existing K-12 outreach relationship. The project
creates fundamental knowledge about new ways that robots can better monitor,
sense, and operate in dynamic and uncertain environments. The project develops
new methods for heterogeneous teams of monitoring robots to improve their
environment model through current interactions with the environment;
concurrently collect data, process and assimilate it into the existing model,
and plan on that model; accept high-level instruction and translate goal-
oriented directives such as environmental monitoring into a suitable plan for
sensing, reasoning, communicating, and acting through the underlying system
architecture; and monitor their actions, optimize, and reconfigure autonomously.
The heterogeneous team of robots proposed includes surface vehicles providing
samples at the air-sea interface and aerial robots creating flow models and
acting as intermediaries within the team. The hierarchical structure of the
approach takes advantage of the natural boundaries defined by Lagrangian
coherent structures in the creation of a distributed sensing framework.