* 2311072
* Non-parametric estimation under covariate shift: From fundamental bounds to efficient algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Martin Wainwright, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Machine learning (ML) methods for large-scale prediction have had dramatic
impacts on various branches of science and engineering over the past decade.
However, these methods --- when they are used on data sets that differ from the
training data --- are often reported to be unstable, or to fail in mysterious
ways. Failures of this type --- and our lack of understanding of their root
causes --- pose a major roadblock to the adoption of modern ML methods in high-
stake settings, where the cost of failure might be significant (e.g., self-
driving cars, financial risk assessments, medical diagnoses). The goal of this
research project is to characterize the fundamental causes of such failures, and
to develop new algorithms that mitigate these issues. The project will also
integrate research and education through: (a) the involvement of both
undergraduate and graduate students in the research and in the dissemination of
research results; (b) the inclusion of the research results in courses at MIT
and in the web-based course materials, which are accessed from other
universities; and (c) short courses at summer schools and workshops. The project
will also support mentoring graduate students and postdocs that are under-
represented in the STEM fields, with continued professional support in their
careers.

In more detail, the research focuses on the challenge of covariate shift, in
which the distribution of the feature vectors used to train a large-scale
prediction model differ from those on which it is evaluated. An initial goal is
to characterize fundamental limits and develop efficient algorithms for
estimation under covariate shift, in the finite-sample non-asymptotic setting.
Armed with such an understanding, a follow-up goal is to develop computationally
efficient procedures that achieve the fundamental limits along with theoretical
understanding of their behavior. The work in this project will leverage and
build upon techniques and tools from non-parametric analysis, empirical process
theory, concentration of measure, reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, and
information theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.