* 2311800
* Elements: Entity: Radiative General-Relativistic Particle-in-cell Toolkit for Extreme Plasma Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Philippov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The computational modeling efforts of extreme plasma phenomena around the most
exotic objects in the Universe -- the black holes and the neutron stars -- are
growing at an unprecedented rate both in terms of the scales of the simulations
and in terms of their complexity. Nonetheless, the current state of the
simulation frameworks fails to meet the growing interest in the field. The
development of new computational tools is the primary agenda of this proposal.
This award aims to produce an open-source, user-friendly, and easily accessible
software toolkit used to investigate the dynamics and radiation of extreme
plasmas on a variety of platforms varying from laptops to high-performance
computing hardware, including the exascale national supercomputers and GPU
clusters. The key aspect of the toolkit is its ease of use out-of-the-box, which
is crucial for educating newcomers in the field, while still offering high-
enough customizability to facilitate the more demanding state-of-the-art
research. The project will provide training for undergraduate and graduate
students through semester-long or year-long projects at the University of
Maryland and will sponsor a postdoctoral scholar, who will be involved in the
active development process.

This award leads to advances in extreme plasma astrophysics -- a frontier in
plasma physics research aiming at understanding fundamental plasma processes in
the vicinity of astrophysical compact objects, where the interaction of charged
particles with the produced radiation is important. To describe the systems of
interest, the team develops Entity, a radiative general-relativistic particle-
in-cell code, available in several different grid geometries (Cartesian or
flexible curvilinear coordinate systems, including the cubed sphere grid, both
special and general-relativistic). Entity is going to be equipped with a module
capable of simulating all the astrophysically-necessary QED-plasma interaction
processes, and a continuum solver using a semi-Lagrangian numerical scheme.
During the three-year grant period, PI and collaborators plan to organize a set
of training camps (both in-person at participating institutions and using Zoom
webinars available to a broader community). These sessions and lectures will
cover aspects of extreme plasma astrophysics and focus on basic practices for
interacting with Entity. In addition, a postdoctoral scholar and graduate
students supported by this project will receive extensive professional,
educational, and equity, diversity, and inclusion training, including
transferable skills acquired through work on this project.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of Physics
within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.