* 2311513
* I-Corps: Tri-functional (feeding, venting, sensing) tube for premature infants
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Christopher Rylander, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a tri-functional (feeding, venting, and sensing) tube for
premature infants. The long-term health of children born prematurely is a major
national and international concern. Each year more than 15 million infants
globally, and 350,000 infants in the US are born prematurely. High-quality
clinical research has driven huge advances in prenatal care and allowed
intervention to become the standard of care at gestations that were considered
incompatible with survival just 20-30 years ago. Infants born at 22-23 weeks of
gestation, weighing 400-500 grams are now routinely admitted for intensive care
intervention. Respiratory failure remains the primary cause of mortality and
morbidity in extremely premature newborns, yet physiologic monitoring of
respiratory status has not advanced since the introduction of oxygen saturation
monitoring in the 1980s. The proposed tri-functional tube may provide value by
continuously monitoring vital signs while simultaneously feeding and venting the
extremely preterm infant in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), avoiding
the need for skin-mounted sensors, which are an irritant to newborn skin and
produce unreliable readings due to poor contact. Current healthcare costs to
society potentially may be reduced using this tri-functional tube technology.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a tri-functional (feeding,
venting, and sensing) tube for premature infants. This technology integrates
three functionalities for the first time: delivering milk feeds to the stomach,
venting excess gas from the stomach (a by-product of non-invasive modes of
ventilation), and multifunctional vital sign monitoring such as
electrocardiogram (ECG), transdiaphragmatic pressure, and body core temperature.
The tri-functional tube design has evolved through multiple iterations based on
clinical needs and engineering input. Extensive literature and product reviews,
as well as testing results, have defined optimal sensor locations and
configurations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.