* 2311532
* Assessing the paleoenvironmental and geobiological significance of carbonates from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary of the White River Group
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Darrin Pagnac, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2026
* USD 563,380.00

The geologic record provides an archive of past climates and ancient ecosystems.
Reconstructing past climates is key to our understanding of Earth history and
provides insight into how modern ecosystems may react to current and future
climatic changes. This study will investigate the degree of climatic change and
the ecosystem response to these changes preserved in ancient lake deposits from
southwestern South Dakota during the transition into the modern “icehouse”
climate. These results will enhance our understanding of this key interval of
Earth history and provide knowledge necessary to improve models for predicting
the effects of modern climate change. This study will also provide professional
training for undergraduate and graduate students and enable the development of
educational resources at the South Dakota Mines Museum of Geology and Badlands
National Park for visitors on the scientific importance of the rocks in this
region. This project is jointly funded by the Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology Program (SGP) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

The Eocene-Oligocene Transition occurred ~34 million years ago and was
characterized by an average global cooling of ~2.5oC, the formation of permanent
Antarctic ice caps, and an extinction event in ocean ecosystems. However, the
degree of climatic change and the ecosystem response to these changes in the
interior of North America during this time is unclear. Lake deposits formed
during this time that are preserved in the Badlands of South Dakota provide a
record of these changes but have previously received only limited study. This
research has two primary objectives: 1) to identify the extent of these lake
deposits and understand their sedimentology and stratigraphy, and 2) to analyze
the geochemical composition of these rocks through time and space to reconstruct
changes in paleoenvironmental conditions. These efforts will provide a better
understanding of terrestrial responses to climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.