* 2311397
* AF: Small: New Challenges and Approaches in Clustering Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Sayan Bandyapadhyay, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2026
* USD 162,970.00

Clustering is the task of dividing a dataset into similar groups, a fundamental
data analysis technique frequently applied in computer science and other
disciplines. Typically, the task is modeled as a computational problem and
algorithms are designed in order to perform the task. This project investigates
fair clustering models, essential for computing and society, that can train
machine learning systems in an unbiased or fair manner for each protected group
(defined based on a sensitive feature, say gender). However, designing
algorithms with provable guarantees for fair clustering has been frustrating, as
the fair versions pose novel challenges. In particular, the classic techniques
that have been used to solve regular (or vanilla) clustering problems have
fallen short in handling the fair versions. Accordingly, the project aims to
bridge this gap of understanding and design tools and techniques to achieve
guarantees matching those of vanilla clustering. Additionally, the project
supports research by graduate students and outreach activities to create
awareness among local school/college students about ongoing research in
Theoretical Computer Science.

This project highlights a collection of fundamental fair clustering problems
with the fairness notion of balance. This notion requires that each protected
group is well-represented in every cluster. Balanced clustering has emerged as
one of the most popular, but difficult clustering models in recent times. For
example, it is widely known that k-median (or k-means) clustering admits
polynomial-time constant-factor approximation algorithms, but a similar
approximation is not known for the balanced versions. This project investigates
the limitations and applicability of generic techniques from the area of
approximation, such as relax-and-round and metric partitioning. As a part of the
project, new tools and techniques will be designed that would help solve a
broader class of problems. The study will also examine the trade-offs between
quantities such as time complexity, approximation guarantee, and the extent of
fairness satisfaction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.