* 2311162
* Understanding the Critical Role of Seasonality for El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Variability, Using Empirical Stochastic-Dynamic Models and Physics-Based Coupled Models
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel Vimont, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 717,604.00

The El Niño/Southern Oscillation is the largest source of climate fluctuation on
seasonal to year-to-year time scales. It has immense societal impacts around the
world. Most El Niño events tend to evolve throughout the seasons in similar
ways: beginning around May or June, reaching their peak amplitude toward the end
of the calendar year, and dying off through the following (northern) spring.
Despite these similarities, individual El Niño events evolve in slightly
different – but important – ways, leading to different levels of impacts. The
role of seasonality in controlling how El Niño evolves is not yet well
understood. This project examines the seasonal evolution of different types of
El Niño events by developing and utilizing a suite of complimentary tools. The
study includes the development of empirical models to ensure that analysis is
grounded in observations, the usage of physics-based model simulations that
allow systematic testing of specific physical processes, and the application of
new analytical tools that link theoretical ideas of dynamical systems to applied
analysis of specific features of El Niño’s seasonal evolution. The study will
advance understanding of why and how different seasonally varying processes lead
to the seasonal evolution of individual El Niño events.

The impact of this study is threefold. First, the study will advance our
understanding of how El Niño events develop to inform efforts to understand and
predict El Niño’s wide ranging societal impacts. Second, the study will continue
the development of powerful new empirical models that can be applied to
understand and predict other societally relevant phenomena in the Earth system.
Lastly, the project will contribute to training the next generation of climate
scientists, with opportunities to work with scientists in federal laboratories
who are developing the underlying theories of empirical model development as
well as application of those models to real physical problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.