* 2311106
* LTREB Renewal: Nutrients and climate as drivers of carbon sequestration and ecosystem metabolism in a nitrogen-enriched, shallow coastal ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Robert Howarth, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2028
* USD 483,042.00

Seagrasses provide critical habitat for many species, help maintain water
quality by filtering nutrients, and store substantial quantities of carbon. In
many coastal waters, seagrasses are being lost at an accelerating rate, with
nutrient pollution being a major cause. This project examines the interaction of
nutrient pollution with climate change on the ecology of a coastal harbor on
Cape Cod, Massachusetts with extensive seagrass beds. The project studies how
the seagrasses store carbon and remove nutrients in coastal marine environments,
thereby reducing environmental degradation. The harbor has received high inputs
of nitrogen for the past 20 years from groundwater contaminated by nearby
municipal wastewater treatment. The nitrogen load to the harbor is expected to
decrease over the coming years due to improved wastewater management. The
project therefore measures how a seagrass-dominated ecosystem recovers from
pollution. The project educates 10 to 15 undergraduate students each year who
are conducting research projects. The project also shares data with the Buzzards
Bay Coalition, the Town of Falmouth, and the Buzzards Bay National Estuary
Program. This research informs efforts to better protect and restore seagrass
habitat and water quality.

This project is the second five years of a planned ten-year study that continues
a set of measurements made since 2005. These measurements include: nitrogen
loading; rates of primary production, ecosystem respiration, and net ecosystem
production; concentrations of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, and
chlorophyll in sediments, porewaters, and water column; seagrass extent and
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus content; and exchanges of nitrogen and
phosphorus with the coastal ocean. The long-term data set provided by this
project is the only one globally for a nitrogen-polluted, shallow seagrass-
dominated ecosystem. These data allow exploration of several fundamental
questions, including whether nitrogen or phosphorus is more limiting in these
types of ecosystems. Further, the project examines how climate-driven changes in
ocean circulation may be altering sources of nitrogen and phosphorus.
Ultimately, the research demonstrates how climate and nutrients interact to
regulate the storage of organic carbon in seagrass-dominated ecosystems in the
temperate zone.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.