* 2311848
* Elements: FourPhonon: A Computational Tool for Higher-Order Phonon  Anharmonicity and Thermal Properties
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiulin Ruan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Thermal conductivity of materials is important in many emerging applications,
such as thermal management of semiconductor devices, insulation materials for
buildings, thermal barrier coatings, and thermoelectric waste heat recovery.
Heat is carried by phonons, the quantum mechanical description of lattice
vibration. Conventionally, thermal conductivity was considered to be controlled
by the scattering processes that involve three phonons, but recently it has been
discovered that the scattering processes that involve four phonons can play a
significant or even leading role. Predicting four-phonon scattering and the
resulting thermal conductivity, however, is extremely challenging due to the
complex formulation and tremendous computational cost even for the simplest
materials. To address these challenges, this project is aimed at the development
and optimization of an open-source computational package, FourPhonon, to enable
interested users to perform such calculations for their materials and
applications. Approaches based on GPU and machine learning will also be
developed to significantly accelerate the speed of computation. The project will
transform four-phonon scattering from a breakthrough to a new routine capability
for academia and industry in the coming decade.

The objective of this project is to enhance FourPhonon, an open-source code that
was deployed by a team led by the PI and can be used to predict four-phonon
scattering rates and the resulting thermal conductivity. Since the release of
the first version of FourPhonon, it has been used by many researchers worldwide
for their materials and applications. However, upgrades in computational methods
are needed to keep up with theoretical advances, and acceleration of computation
is necessary considering the large or even unaffordable computational cost. In
this proposal, the investigators will fulfill these needs by enhancing
FourPhonon. For the base version, the project will: (1) develop an interface
that can implement temperature-dependent force constants, which will enable the
capability of the inclusion of phonon renormalization and phase transition
phenomena, and (2) enable the full iterative scheme of both three- and four-
phonon scattering channels. For the advanced features, the project will: (1)
accelerate the computation of four-phonon scattering using GPU parallelization
via heterogeneous computing, and (2) accelerate the computation via machine
learning models that are trained on datasets of a small fraction of the
scattering processes. The improved FourPhonon package will enable accurate and
affordable prediction of thermal conductivity of a large number of materials
that are technologically significant.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
within the Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.