* 2311203
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Phonon Database Generation, Analysis, and Visualization for Data Driven Materials Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Christopher Wolverton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Material databases and their related computing infrastructures have become the
major cornerstone of current data driven and artificial intelligence based
materials discovery. However, among the rich material properties of interest to
the materials community, few databases have comprehensively included phonon
properties, which are at the center of materials science and are key to discover
materials with diverse functionalities. This project meets these urgent needs to
generate a comprehensive phonon database along with analysis, visualization,
navigation, and visualization tools, combined with multi-channel infrastructure-
community communication and feedback. The phonon database will become an
excellent complement to the currently widely used material databases. Developing
such an infrastructure will be beneficial for all areas of materials science and
engineering, accelerating the prediction, design, and synthesis of novel
materials with various emerging applications in modern science and technology.
The project will promote the engagement of underrepresented and minority
students in research, equip engineering students with interdisciplinary
expertise and frontier knowledge crucial to their future careers, and fulfill
the mission to prepare a high-quality workforce for science, technology, and
engineering. The project will also develop new course materials for
undergraduate and graduate computational materials science courses.

High-quality material property data has always been a major bottleneck for
maximizing the potential of modern artificial intelligence and machine learning
in large-scale computational material discovery, which has led to the discovery
of numerous new inorganic crystalline materials that have dramatically improved
the quality of human life. This project aims to deliver (1) a comprehensive
phonon database of two major datasets: one consists of about 40,000 phonon
dispersions and 15,000 lattice thermal conductivity of existing crystal
structures that are thermodynamically stable and fully computed by first-
principles; the other consists of phonon related properties of 300,000
structures predicted by deep learning models and partially validated by first-
principles, (2) a web server for non-profit researchers to effectively retrieve,
quickly navigate, visualize, and compare large pools of phonon band structures
to pinpoint the materials of interest, and (3) toolkits for predicting phonon
properties. Our multi-channel communicable new phonon database and user-
interactive toolsets will benefit broad communities of material physics,
chemistry, and engineering with new collaborative opportunities for novel
materials discovery in many societally important areas.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.