* 2311042
* NSF-BSF: IIBR Instrumentation: Photonic Band Gap Resonators for High-Field Dynamic Nuclear Polarization of Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Alexander Nevzorov, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2027
* USD 301,437.00

An award is made to North Carolina State University (NCSU, USA) with support
from the Infrastructure Innovation Program for Biological Research in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program in the Division of Chemistry to considerably – by up to several orders
of magnitude – improve sensitivity of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy by employing pulsed high-frequency methods of Dynamic Nuclear
Polarization (DNP). This first-of-its kind spectrometer will be developed in
partnership with Tel Aviv University (TAU, Israel), thereby strengthening
scientific collaboration between the two Nations. Such gains in sensitivity will
expand the applicability of NMR methods to some of the most challenging problems
of structural biology and, potentially, make the method suitable for studying
protein structure and function in living cells. This highly interdisciplinary
collaborative project will provide unique training opportunities for students
with backgrounds in biology, physical chemistry, spin physics, and millimeter-
wave technologies.

The project is aimed at transforming DNP NMR methods by significantly expanding
the photonic band-gap resonator technology invented at NCSU from the current 200
GHz electron resonance frequency to 400 GHz and take advantage of the expertise
of the TAU team in pulse shaping and cryoprobe development. The instrument will
operate at 400 GHz electron and 600 MHz proton NMR frequencies, which will be
highly beneficial for higher resolution and sensitivity. Coherent manipulation
of the electronic spin states will be achieved by combining state-of-the- art
digital technologies and recent advances in solid-state millimeter-wave devices.
The spectrometer will serve as a unique platform for developing new methods for
transferring spin polarization in DNP. The method is expected to yield novel
structural and dynamic information on biological macromolecules as compared to
conventional NMR spectroscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.