* 2311159
* Criticality of Urban Networks: Untangling the Complexity of Urban Congestion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kurt Wiesenfeld, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,329.00

This award will support research to explore the application of tools and methods
from complexity science to better understand and control urban congestion. This
paradigm-shifting approach is made in light of recent empirical data confirming
earlier theories that the flow of traffic through urban transportation networks
behaves like a fluid inside a container. In this analogy, rush-hour congestion
can be thought of as the boiling point of the fluid, where one can observe two
distinct states of matter coexisting in different proportions depending on the
temperature: gas (little congestion) and liquid (stopped, stuck in traffic).
This is where traffic flow becomes chaotic and therefore our traditional
engineering tools such as calculus and statistics no longer apply to prediction
and control. This research provides a framework for describing and modeling
traffic flow systems in this context. The educational component of this project
will promote and facilitate the incorporation of basic complex systems education
into the civil engineering curricula at Georgia Tech.

The theory of phase transitions is one of the better understood theories in
physics, but it has not been applied to traffic flow successfully so far due to
the lack of a suitable description of heat flow in the system. This project
suggests the flow of vehicles as a correct interpretation, and the research
approach includes the analysis of large amounts of empirical observations,
together with mathematical modeling and theoretical analysis that will combine
elements from traffic flow theory, statistical mechanics and fractal geometry
within the overall framework of complexity science. Most relevant to this
project will be the theory of self-organized criticality (SOC) and its
connections with different universality classes such as Manna, Kardar-Parisi-
Zhang and directed percolation classes, all of which have received much
attention lately in the context of traffic networks. SOC has been found to be
fundamental in diverse areas from geology to astrophysics, and this project will
explore if urban networks fall in this category, along with the methodological
implications for controlling urban congestion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.