* 2311733
* FET: Medium: Quantum Algorithms, Complexity, Testing and Benchmarking
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Umesh Vazirani, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2027
* USD 882,373.00

This is an exciting time in quantum computation, with computational ideas poised
to play an even larger role in guiding the enormous investment in experimental
realization of quantum computers, as well as in foundational questions in
cryptography, complexity theory, condensed matter physics and quantum gravity.
This project includes robust plans for exploring these issues, including the
testing and benchmarking of near-term quantum computers, foundational questions
at the intersection of cryptography and quantum, the complexity of ground states
of local Hamiltonians and quantum probabilistically checkable proof (PCP), and
the interplay between quantum gravity and ideas from quantum complexity and
cryptography. The presented research will deepen an already active interaction
between the theory of quantum computing and experimental and theoretical
physics, as well as with classical complexity theory and cryptography. It will
bring the computational lens to bear on some of the most fundamental questions
in condensed matter physics and quantum gravity.

This project presents two different threads. The first explores computational
questions about verification and benchmarking of near-term quantum computers.
This includes studying the complexity of (and algorithms for) Random Circuit
Sampling, which was the basis of Google’s “quantum supremacy” experiment, and
formulating a theoretically sound but achievable goal for the next generation of
quantum processors. And it includes developing some of the basic primitives for
benchmarking quantum computers. The second thread is more foundational and
explores a number of themes including: i) Fundamental questions in Quantum
Hamiltonian Complexity, including the quantum PCP conjecture and whether ground
states of certain 2D Hamiltonians have succinct classical representations as
projected entangled-pair states (PEPS). ii) Re-examining the basic primitives of
cryptography in the context of quantum computation. iii) The deep relationship
between quantum gravity and complexity theory and cryptography, including
questions about whether the quantum extended Church-Turing thesis is false in
quantum gravity, how to formalize the general notion of efficient computation in
quantum gravity, and connections between cryptography and the nature of
Bekenstein-Hawking radiation. The Principal Investigator will update and
continue teaching Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) class named "Quantum
mechanics and quantum computation" that has already reached tens of thousands of
students worldwide and participate in the advisory board of a non-profit called
Qubit x Qubit, which is successful reaching low-income, underrepresented
minority, and female students across hundreds of countries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.