* 2311985
* Mechanistic Design and Understanding of Fully Polymeric Antifreezing and Tough Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 418,021.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Icing is a natural phenomenon that plays a crucial role in sustaining life on
Earth, but unwanted icing can cause severe economic, environmental, and life-
threatening consequences. Conventional antifreezing materials, such as icephobic
water-free organics or hydrophilic hydrogels containing antifreezing additives,
often suffer from weak mechanical properties under subzero temperatures, which
limits their practical applications. To address this issue, this research will
explore a design strategy for developing a new class of fully polymeric
hydrogels that possess inherent antifreezing properties and enhanced mechanical
strength without requiring antifreeze additives. A successful project could pave
the way for a new family of antifreezing hydrogels with diverse structures and
other built-in functions for different applications under subzero temperatures,
including flexible supercapacitors, soft robotics, electronic skin, and wearable
devices. The research is multi-disciplinary and will provide a valuable learning
experience for undergraduate/graduate students and high-school teachers in the
areas of polymer chemistry/physics, molecular simulations, and engineering
design. Additionally, the PI will also introduce experimental and computational
components to the curriculum to enhance student learning of engineered materials
and promote the field of hydrogel-based materials by organizing international
conferences, special journal issues, and STEM student activities.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The overarching goals of this research are twofold and aim to (1) develop and
engineer a new family of fully polymeric hydrogels with intrinsic antifreezing
and enhanced mechanical properties and (2) gain a fundamental understanding of
antifreezing/toughening mechanisms of these hydrogels at different spatial and
time scales ranging from atomic to macroscopic levels by using a combination of
polymer chemistry and molecular simulations. The design strategy for these
antifreezing hydrogels is to integrate strong water-binding polymers with
tightly crosslinked and highly interpenetrating double-network structures,
allowing to enhance polymer-water interactions for competitively inhibiting ice
nucleation and growth, as well as to activate multiple energy-dissipation
pathways for improving hydrogel mechanical properties. Parallel to experimental
works, multiscale molecular simulations with new polymerization algorithms will
be developed to study water structures, dynamics, and interactions around
polymers confined in networks at both resting and stretching states, as well as
at different subzero temperatures. Computational study allows to reveal
different but correlated antifreezing and toughening mechanisms at atomic
levels. Finally, experimental and computational data from the benchmarking
hydrogel systems will be compared and correlated to better understand the
complex composition/structure-dependent antifreezing and mechanical performance
of such hydrogels. This will lead toward an optimal design of antifreezing
hydrogels in an iterative way by investigating changes in polymer chemistries,
pendant groups/crosslinkers, network structures, and water behavior. Overall,
the development of new antifreezing hydrogels with enhanced properties could
impact areas such as improved energy efficiency, environmental protection,
biomedical treatments, and industrial applications. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.