* 2311573
* Unravelling the Abnormal Thermo-Mechanical Behavior of 2D Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Perovskites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Qing Tu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2026
* USD 338,914.00

This award supports research which aims to investigate how temperature
influences the mechanical behavior of 2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites
and uncover the origin of such thermo-mechanical behavior. These materials are
burgeoning low-cost, high-performance semiconductor materials with great
potential in various energy and electronics applications, including solar cells,
transistors, sensors, and flexible electronics. The coexistence of mechanical
strain and temperature fluctuations is universally found in such applications
and causes mechanical failure issues that significantly hinder commercial
viability. However, the thermo-mechanical behavior of 2D hybrid organic-
inorganic perovskites remains elusive. This research project will bridge this
knowledge gap by systematically measuring the mechanical property change of
these materials as a function of temperature using atomic force microscopy. The
findings of this research have the potential to extend the lifetime of energy
and electronic devices using 2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites.
Additionally, it can expedite the commercialization of low cost and efficient
solar cells made of these materials, greatly facilitating the realization of the
US governmentâ€™s clean energy goals. This project will also provide opportunities
to educate and train graduate and undergraduate students at Texas A&M
University, a Hispanic Serving Institute, and promote STEM education/careers
through on-campus K-12 and community outreach activities.

2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites manifest a uniquely different in-plane
thermo-mechanical behavior compared to their 3D counterparts or other low-
dimensional materials. The overarching goal of this project is to form a
fundamental and comprehensive understanding of the thermo-mechanical behavior
and unveil the structural origin found in 2D hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites. Advanced scanning probe-based nanomechanical characterization
techniques at controlled temperatures will be employed to systematically
investigate the temperature-dependent mechanical properties of these materials
along both in-plane and out-of-plane directions. The project will test the
central hypothesis that the thermal response of the organic spacer molecules and
their interfaces give rise to the interesting thermo-mechanical behavior of 2D
hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites. The thermal response of the organic spacer
molecules will be engineered by tuning the structural parameters of 2D hybrid
organic-inorganic perovskites, and directly correlated to the attendant thermo-
mechanical behavior of the materials, where the mechanistic explanation will be
provided by the interfacial shear strength between the 2D layers measured with
friction force microscopy. The research outcomes will offer indispensable
insights to engineer, design, and optimize mechanical reliability and the
strain-coupled semiconductor performance of 2D hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites across the technologically interested temperature range.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.