* 2311550
* Elements: Enabling multi-resolution simulations at the interface of biology and nanotechnology with ARBD
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 596,870.00

At the interface of biology and nanotechnology, the unfamiliar combinations of
materials, physical laws and design principles promise the most radical
advancements in science and technology. Transforming this promise into practical
applications requires precise characterization of the unfamiliar interactions,
which presents major challenges to existing experimental probes. This project
aims to overcome these challenges by providing the research community with a
robust and versatile computational framework capable of accurate description of
mesoscale bionano systems. Rather than modeling such systems as a collection of
atoms, the framework trades resolution for computational efficiency, allowing
the computational effort to be applied where it is needed. The project’s outcome
will permit computational characterization of a wide range of previously
intractable systems, including large self-assembled DNA nanostructures, systems
for single molecule reading of biological information, viruses, organelles, and
even small bacterial cells.

This CSSI Elements program aims to provide a general framework for modeling
systems at the interface of biology and nanotechnology by transforming the
Atomic Resolution Brownian Dynamics (ARBD) code into a general-purpose mesoscale
simulation engine supporting multiple hardware platforms, multi-node and multi-
GPU parallelism. The implementation of advanced simulation methods in ARBD is
expected to greatly simplify modeling and simulation tasks common to the
research communities specializing in nanoscale transport, plasmonics, DNA self-
assembly, and biomolecular physics. Using a test-driven software development
approach, the project transforms ARBD by implementing new parallel data
structures that target multiple hardware types and provide multiple levels of
parallel communication. The project introduces additional flexibility into
modelling of complex processes through its support for collective variables and
multi-copy simulations. The project aims to make the ARBD framework widely
accessibility through its integration with a python-based force-field library,
creation of detailed documentation and tutorials, and hands-on workshops.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.