* 2311372
* Elements: Streaming Molecular Dynamics Simulation Trajectories for Direct Analysis: Applications to Sub-Picosecond Dynamics in Microsecond Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Oliver Beckstein, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,289.00

Massive increases in computing capabilities are increasing the data volume
generated in numerical simulations, while data storage and transfer capabilities
are not growing at the same pace. This is especially true for all-atom molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations that are used to study the function of biomolecules
and novel materials on timescales of microseconds in systems containing hundreds
of thousands to millions of atoms. Such simulations evaluate atom positions and
velocities for >109 distinct times, which corresponds to >2 petabytes of data
and exceeds reasonable data storage and transfer capacities. As a result,
simulation data is stored only at coarse time intervals even though this
approach loses information on fast molecular processes that is essential to
computing many experimental observables. The software infrastructure created in
this project avoids such information loss in molecular dynamics simulations via
convergence of data generation and analysis. Instead of storing data for post-
processing (status quo), it is passed directly to a parallel software platform
via a streaming protocol. The implementation of the streaming protocol into
existing software packages with a large user base allows for a direct
integration into established simulation protocols. As a result, molecular
dynamics simulations produce more usable information, and associated
computational resources are used more efficiently.

The streaming protocol for MD simulations uses a TCP/IP socket application
programming interface (API) to transfer data directly from a running simulation
to the analysis software. This approach enables the simultaneous analysis of
fast (sub-picosecond) and slow (microsecond) processes in molecular simulations
without creating bottlenecks or requiring massive trajectory output files. The
analysis is performed with the open-source MDAnalysis platform for which tools
are implemented as MDAKit plugins that significantly benefit from the streaming
interface, such as 3D-2PT (spatially resolved two-phase thermodynamics) and
related tools for the analysis of spatially resolved protein solvation maps.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.