* 2311345
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identifying and Characterizing Human-Insect Relations through Material Culture in Western Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Brian Boyd, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,341.00

Insects appear in material culture, oral tradition and archaeological contexts
across Alaska, yet have received limited attention from scholars. This project
explores the representation and meaning of insects in Indigenous material
culture of western Alaska. The project will identify Yup’ik and Iñupiaq insect
objects from archaeological sites and museum collections; contextualize insects
within Indigenous worldviews; and compare and contrast Indigenous insect
categories with scientific Linnaean taxonomies. This project advances
understanding of the world’s most numerous taxon, both in terms of species and
numbers of individuals, and highlights the role of Indigenous knowledge in
understanding arctic ecosystems.

Funding for this project supports survey of insect objects in eight museum
collections; formal iconographic analysis; and the application of both
scientific and Indigenous taxonomic identifications to insect depictions.
Ethnographic and ethnohistoric sources, combined with interview data, will
contextualize the materials. Project findings will be disseminated via an
insect-object catalog, conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal articles,
and a dissertation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.