* 2311716
* Elements: CausalBench: A Cyberinfrastructure for Causal-Learning Benchmarking for Efficacy, Reproducibility, and Scientific Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2026
* USD 599,905.00

While we are witnessing the exceptional success of artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning (ML) technologies in many applications, users are starting
to notice a critical shortcoming of the current approaches: they are not
causally grounded. While being relatively recent, causal learning aims to go far
beyond conventional machine learning and is emerging as a vibrant field with new
opportunities and challenges. Yet, advances in this field are hampered due to
the lack of cyber-infrastructure platforms, with unified benchmarks data sets,
algorithms, metrics, and evaluation service interfaces for causal learning.
Reproducible science is possible only when the outcomes can be quantified and
compared to other approaches and lack of reproducibility results in serious
concerns on validity of published research. This can only be achieved through
open platforms for data, algorithm, and model exchange and evaluation.
Therefore, CausalBench, a transparent, fair, and easy-to-use evaluation
platform, provides the key functionalities necessary to establish trust in
causal learning’s innovation, collaboration, and critical applications,
including public health and sustainability.

CausalBench is a novel cyberinfrastructure of benchmarking data, algorithms,
models, and metrics for causal learning, impacting the needs of a broad of
scientific and engineering disciplines and sustain discovery across all fields.
The cyberinfrastructure enables the advancement of research in causal learning
by facilitating scientific collaboration in novel algorithms, datasets, and
metrics and promotes scientific objectivity, reproducibility, fairness, and
awareness of bias in causal learning research. CausalBench includes (1) an
“ontology” for benchmarking to standardize the evaluation methodology, improve
transparency, and promote collaboration to efficiently advance causal learning,
(2) standard and convenient mechanisms for the community to contribute data and
models such that disparate datasets can be integrated in a standard way, and (3)
integrated evaluation standards that can help assess of algorithms for novel
problems in the emerging field of causal learning with observational data. The
project trains PhD students in the area of causal discovery and causally aware
data management challenges via integrative, cross-disciplinary approaches and
prepares future researchers with skills in data intensive AI and machine
learning systems. The project further provides an excellent context for
master’s, undergraduate, and K-12 students to be aware of AI and machine
learning and their potential impacts on urgent societal challenges including
public health, and sustainability.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems within the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.