* 2311466
* Elements: Open-Source Battery Electrode Simulation Toolkit using MFEM (BESFEM)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dirk Colbry, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 555,077.00

Batteries have become an indispensable commodity in our modern lives, powering
mobile phones, laptops, power tools, and electric vehicles. The crucial
components of a battery are electrodes, which consist of packed lithium-storage
particles. As a result, electrodes possess complex microstructures with
convoluted spaces and irregular particles. The charge-discharge processes in
batteries involve coupled physics mechanisms of the migration of ions and
electrons these complex electrodes. Consequently, investigating battery
phenomena becomes challenging due to these complexities. The objective of this
project is to develop an open-source Battery Electrode Simulation toolkit using
MFEM (BESFEM). This toolkit will enable rapid simulation of electrochemical
processes in complex electrode microstructures. It will perform detailed
simulations on experimentally reconstructed electrode microstructures, and the
results can be visualized in a virtual-reality-like environment. Users will be
able to digitally explore electrochemical processes in various microstructures
and under different cycling conditions. Not only can this software serve as a
design tool for enhancing battery performance and mitigating battery failures,
but it can also serve as an educational tool for training materials scientists.
This work will accelerate battery development in the US automotive industry and
grid-level energy storage. Conventional sharp-interface simulations require mesh
systems that conform to the domain of interest for solving governing equations.
However, generating meshes for complex microstructures poses a challenging task.
To address this, our research team employs the smoothed boundary method (SBM),
which utilizes a continuous domain function to describe geometries and
reformulate the relevant electrochemical governing equations. This formulation
enables solving the new equations on a regular Cartesian grid, eliminating the
need for body-conforming meshes. Remarkably, the SBM equations can be directly
solved on voxel data of reconstructed 3D microstructures, significantly reducing
the time spent on simulation preparation. BESFEM integrates the SBM approach on
the MFEM solver library, a product of the DOE's Exascale Computing Project. To
enhance accuracy and computational efficiency, our team will leverage MFEM's
hybrid order cells functionality, where elements near SBM diffuse interfaces are
assigned with high-order shape functions. MFEM has demonstrated its scalability
to millions of parallel CPU tasks and also supports GPU computing. Consequently,
BESFEM will greatly accelerate the speed and scale of electrode microstructure
simulations. This capability will allow BESFEM to conduct high-throughput-type
microstructure simulations to extract the structure-performance relationship of
electrodes. The proposed software development will follow the best practice of
software engineering and the product will be made fully available as a research
and education tool for the battery science and materials science communities.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems,
and the Electrochemical Systems program, within the Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.