* 2311608
* RCN: DRAGNet - Disturbance and Recovery Across Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Elizabeth Borer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Dudgeon
* 08/31/2028
* USD 661,301.00

Physical disturbances (like plowing or animal wallowing) and increased supply of
nutrients (like nitrogen and phosphorus) are changing Earth's terrestrial
environments. However, predicting how plants and soils will respond remains
uncertain. The project, DRAGNet (Disturbance and Recovery Across Grasslands
Network), aims to address this by coalescing over 120 scientists from 93
grassland sites across Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe, North America, and South
America. All scientists will conduct identical soil disturbance and nutrient
addition experiments to understand how and where grassland communities respond
to repeated disturbances and increased nutrients, how grasslands will recover
from disturbance, and why similar places exhibit different responses to these
changes. DRAGNet requires relatively low investment of time and money from
individual researchers, enabling contributions from ecologists globally. Beyond
scientific discoveries, the project aims to foster a diverse and inclusive
research community, offering networking and collaboration opportunities,
particularly for early-career researchers and scientists from developing
countries. The findings from DRAGNet will be shared through publications,
educational materials, and public talks. Coordination of this collaborative,
global research network will provide deeper understanding of how ecosystems
respond to disturbances and changes caused by human activities across the globe
to better protect and preserve, both, wild and human-occupied environments.

As a research coordination network, DRAGNet will allow comparisons of community
responses in different grassland environments by coordinating identically
replicated, factorial experiments manipulating soil disturbance and elemental
nutrient supply at sites around the world. The data on plant and soil responses,
collected following identical methods, will support tests of hypotheses about
vegetation and biogeochemical resistance, the tendency to remain unchanged when
disturbed, and recovery, the speed of return to a pre-disturbance state. By
coordinating replicated experiments across site conditions, DRAGNet data will
also uniquely clarify the context-dependence of post-disturbance responses on
site history and conditions. In addition to testing hypotheses arising from
ecological theory, project data will support development of a framework for
understanding herbaceous system responses to these environmental changes by
comparing recovery trajectories among diverse site conditions. The network will
have four in-person and four virtual meetings to bring contributors together to
analyze data, test hypotheses, and advance theoretical frameworks. In concert
with scientific advances, the DRAGNet collaboration, especially the meetings,
will serve to reduce isolation and increase inclusion, diversity, and scientific
capacity, both, in the US and abroad. DRAGNet will advance research and
facilitate collaboration and knowledge-sharing in the global scientific
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.