* 2311102
* HCC: Medium: Sociotechnical Systems to Combat Nonconsensual Intimate Media
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Eric Gilbert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,132,002.00

This research will examine the design of sociotechnical systems that offer user
controls for combating non-consensual intimate media (NCIM) and that deter
perpetrators from sharing it. NCIM refers to the sharing of another person's
intimate, sexual content without their consent, violating a person's right to
privacy and autonomy. NCIM can cause severe harm to its victims, most of whom
are women. Online social media have enabled widespread collection and sharing of
NCIM, and recent computational advancements like live-streaming, deep fakes, and
recognition technologies amplify the potential for NCIM to fester and spread.
The law is evolving to recognize NCIM, but access to legal recourse can be
expensive and slow. Similarly, victims can appeal directly to platforms to take
down their content, but such appeals are labor-intensive, traumatic, and often
unsuccessful. This work will provide technology companies and policy makers with
empirically-evaluated designs for combatting NCIM. It will develop design
principles for a set of systems that support individual agency and autonomy,
while recognizing the societal inequities that create the conditions for NCIM to
thrive.

The research has six main objectives: (1) understand the needs of victims using
design workshops; (2) examine norms about appropriate content sharing practices
via online experiments; (3) design systems to support victims tracking and
requesting takedowns of non-consensual content; (4) design systems to
communicate content sharing preferences; (5) translate results for the broader
public through sociotechnical guidelines for combatting NCIM; (6) engage in
community outreach to combat abuse within the field of computing. This project
will also explore novel technical questions, such as whether it is possible to
design interfaces for the expression of content sharing preferences, or whether
user-selected digital watermarks can increase control over personal content. It
will examine how principles like consent, data rights, data privacy, and
community norms can be designed into sociotechnical systems. For example, it
will explore how legal principles can be integrated with computation, such as
automating documentation of evidence of NCIM or user interface designs for
tracking takedown requests.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.