* 2311167
* Ceramic Compositional Analysis to Trace Extensive Cultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Hannah Mattson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 192,084.00

This project conducts research to study pottery production and trade at an Chaco
Canyon. Chaco is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and an important anthropological
case study in the socioeconomic organization of pre-state societies. Much
remains unknown about the configuration of Chaco’s exchange network, which
funneled materials from abroad geographical region into the canyon. The major
contribution of this research is addressing a critical gap in the current
understanding of the role of pottery in maintaining this network. Pottery-making
is still an important activity to many relevant descendant communities. By
incorporating the expertise and perspectives of traditional Pueblo potters, this
project serves as an example of how significant scientific archaeological
research can not only be successfully conducted in a minimal-impact manner that
is aligned with the values of descendant tribes, but also produce richer and
more meaningful results by incorporating aspects of traditional Indigenous
knowledge. The beneficial outcomes of the research also include providing
important scientific training opportunities for students, thereby helping them
to advance along their STEM career paths, as well as providing a framework
within which an early career PI can form important contacts and relationships
with members of Indigenous communities ancestrally affiliated with her area of
research, allowing her to better align her work with their concerns and
interests.

While some types of pottery were clearly imported into Chaco Canyon, the precise
production location of Cibola Wares is unknown; these wares constitute the
majority of ceramic artifacts recovered from archaeological sites in Chaco
Canyon, representing tens of thousands of vessels, at a minimum. Based on the
geographic distribution of Cibola pottery, its possible production area
encompasses 30,000 square miles. Given the scarcity of archaeological evidence
in the canyon for significant ceramic manufacture, the widespread default
assumption among researchers is that most, if not all, of the Cibola pottery was
produced outside the canyon. However, this assumption has not been adequately
tested, leaving unresolved a question that reflects directly on the economic
support of the canyon and the nature of relationships between the canyon and the
other communities comprising the Chaco system. The PI resolves this important
issue through a program of compositional analysis, involving both Neutron
Activation Analysis and Electron Microprobe Analysis, of Cibola ceramics from 36
large Chacoan sites (‘great houses’), both in the canyon itself and those in
Chaco’s interaction and exchange sphere. This study represents the first large-
scale instrumental compositional study aimed at Cibola ceramics from this
period, significantly advances knowledge of the role ceramic circulation played
in the organization of Chacoan society, and creates a large compositional
reference database that can be used by future researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.