* 2311059
* Collaborative Research: Advances in the Theory and Practice of Non-Euclidean Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Victor Patrangenaru, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 52,633.00

Shape, image, and RNA data types have had an important impact in many areas of
Medicine, Science, Technology, etc. These modern data types contain different
kinds of information that typically do not belong to a Euclidean space. As such,
the analysis of these data types depends upon the development of statistical
methodology that is adapted to address the topology and geometry of non-
Euclidean metric object spaces. The project considers geometric-topologically
informed statistical methods for the analysis of data lying on such object
spaces. The methods to develop can find applications for new kinds of image
analyses that are more likely to detect important features, identify new
measures of location for shape, image, and RNA data, and improve the quality of
peripheral computer vision and 3D image data. The developed methods for RNA
sequencing data may apply to the investigation of viral diseases and cancer at
the genomic level. The project also provided research training opportunities for
graduate students.

The project develops statistical parameters and their inference in object spaces
that underlie projective shape data, digital image data, and RNA sequence
analyses. The development relies upon two key features - nonlinearity and
compactness. Information extracted from these data types is often represented as
points on a stratified space. This project extends classical statistical methods
to colored images via RGB correlations and 3D scene reconstructions and
considers the processed images to be points on an object space, which is
embeddable in a Hilbert space. Moreover, this project expands upon existing
approaches with the aim of increasing the computational speed of algorithms
required for real-world applications and introducing distribution-free
methodologies for these data types.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.