* 2311256
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mechanisms of shrubification in a changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Ruby An, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 03/31/2026
* USD 65,127.00

Arctic tundra is made up of a variety of plants, including mosses, grasses,
flowering herbs, and woody shrubs, which guard vast quantities of underground
carbon frozen in Arctic soils. As the Arctic warms, shrubs are replacing other
plant species, altering the carbon cycle. The driving mechanisms and impacts of
this shift on Arctic soil carbon remains unclear. This research explores the
reasons behind this shift by testing three hypothesized mechanisms that may
explain shrubs' competitive advantage in a warmer climate. These hypotheses
include increased photosynthesis, greater response to nutrients made available
by warming, and larger gains from longer growing seasons. The project employs
mathematical models, field experiments, and surveys of shrubs across Alaskan
tundra landscapes to test these mechanisms. This research will improve our
understanding of vegetation changes and carbon cycling in the rapidly warming
Arctic. Results will be shared via a public-facing interactive website and
incorporated into K-12 and college courses.

The goal of this research is to determine the mechanisms by which changing
climate enables shrub dominance in heterogeneous Arctic ecosystems. The research
approach combines trait-based models of competing tundra species informed with
field experimental manipulations of temperature, nutrient availability, and
snowmelt date. The full factorial experimental manipulation of these three
environmental factors will allow researchers to untangle the relative
contribution of the hypothesized mechanisms to shrubification. Since different
mechanisms may be driving shrubification across vast and variable Arctic
landscapes, researchers will conduct surveys of shrub populations and warming
experiments across natural environmental gradients on the North Slope of Alaska.
By clarifying mechanisms driving shrubification at local and landscape scales,
this research will aid future efforts to represent Arctic shrubs accurately in
Earth System Models and reduce uncertainties in climate change projections.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.