* 2311543
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: EPIC: Exploiting Photonic Interconnects for Resilient Data Communication and Acceleration in Energy-Efficient Chiplet-based Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Ahmed Louri, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 07/31/2027
* USD 424,291.00

The on-chip communication fabric connecting the cores, accelerators and the
memory in chiplet-based architectures consumes a significant amount of power
today and must be designed to not only provide adequate connectivity and
performance, but also be very energy efficient and scalable, to satisfy future
computing demands. Silicon photonics has the potential to alleviate some of the
on-chip communication problems thanks to better performance-per-watt and higher
bandwidth density. A key issue in addressing this design challenge today is the
under-utilization of the expensive silicon photonics technology due to temporal
and spatial fluctuation of traffic patterns. To make silicon photonics practical
and viable, re-purposing the under-utilized resources for computation can speed
up application execution and provide much-needed energy-efficient data
transfers. The proposed research is timely and vital for the continued growth of
chiplet-based heterogeneous manycore architectures. It is an organized effort
that combines recent advances in technology, architecture, application, and
machine learning into a promising integrated approach that will tackle one of
the most critical challenges of computing systems of the future, namely the
design of next-generation communication fabrics for high-performance, energy-
efficient and scalable heterogeneous architectures with much-increased
functionality and flexibility. All the research findings and simulation toolkits
will be disseminated to the community via conference and journal publications,
and a dedicated website. The research will also play a major role in education
by integrating discovery with teaching and training. This research will continue
to expand on outreach activities and broadening participation in computing by
making the necessary efforts to attract and train underrepresented and minority
students in this field.

This research will design a novel, dual-purpose photonic fabric that will not
only enable power-efficient and scalable on-chip communications for
heterogeneous multicores but will also function as a cost-efficient and high-
performance neural network accelerator for diverse applications. The crux of the
idea is to: (1) provide high-bandwidth and power-efficient data transfer between
cores and accelerators during high network load, and (2) off-load key
accelerator functions to the same network during low network load to maximize
resource utilization and speedup computation, hence the dual-purpose nature of
the photonic fabric. It is expected that the combined effects of meticulously
orchestrating data communication (on-chip and off-chip), sharing hardware
resources between communication and computation, and implementing optical neural
computations will provide an extremely power-efficient and scalable platform for
next-generation heterogeneous chiplet-based architectures. This research will
result in (1) novel photonic architectures that can be leveraged for computing
and communication simultaneously, (2) a fundamental understanding of photonic
computation for implementing accelerator functions, (3) hardware techniques for
photonic architectures to dynamically adapt to application demands to maximize
the power-efficiency and improve resiliency, and (4) proof-of-concept and open-
source tools that will expand and enhance the research capabilities of the
computer architecture community in this critical area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.