* 2311034
* Geometry Aware Exploratory Data Analysis and Inference Methods for Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Paromita Dubey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 275,000.00

Complex big data appear routinely in the sciences and has become standard fare
in contemporary data science. It is known to be difficult to analyze data that
live in metric spaces, lacking fundamental vector space operations like addition
and scalar multiplication and with no ordering between the data elements. Such
data show up in the form of samples of histograms, networks, images,
phylogenetic trees, and so on, and in multitudes of fields such as health
monitoring, neuroscience, business and economics research, climate and
environmental studies, evolutionary genetics, social sciences, and demography.
Challenges are magnified when the observed complex data are dynamic, for
example, when the data are time-varying or observed on other continuous domains.
This project will push the frontiers in the state of the art of modern data
analysis by creating a theoretically sound and user-friendly practical toolkit
that will overcome these challenges for several important data analysis tasks.
The new methods, being rooted only in pairwise distances between the data
elements and tuning free by design, will immediately cater to the needs of
scientists and engineers working with diverse representations of data, for
example in longitudinal fMRI studies, online detection of the mutations in the
virus phylogeny, understanding microbial diversity compositions, monitoring
daily blood glucose distributions in electronic health analytics, time-varying
gene-regulatory networks, understanding trends in social evolution and many
more, offering practitioners a bundle of off-the-shelf tools to carry out
exploratory analysis on the complex data before moving on to the downstream
modeling tasks. The award will also support graduate students' training and
offer research opportunities to undergraduates.

Model-free distance-based approaches drive the success of developing statistical
methods oriented to complex non-Euclidean data with minimal requirements on the
ambient data space or the data distribution. This research aims to expand the
arsenal of methodology in object data analysis by developing new rigorously
justified algorithms for common data analysis jobs and building inference
procedures that lie at the heart of statistics and constitute the basis of what
most scientists attempt to answer with data. To address the key challenge of the
lack of a vector space structure in object data and the absence of ordering
among the data elements, the new developments will be based on the concepts of
depth profiles, which are the distributions of distances as dictated by the law
of the data, and the transport ranks, that are center-outward ordering schemes
for object data constructed using optimal transport maps between the depth
profiles. Specific sub-projects will focus on rank-based object data clustering
and classification, outlier detection, and mode-centric data analysis
procedures. Inferential frameworks with rigorous theory will be designed for
novel two-sample tests, independence tests, change point detection, and
localization, all of which will be distance-based and easily implementable.
Finally, the new tools will be broadened to include exploratory analysis and
dimension reduction for time-varying object data, both when the observations are
dense in time and the more challenging case when only sparse measurements in
time are observed irregularly. Theory and methodology development will involve
tools from the empirical process and U-process theory, M-estimation, and
functional data analysis. Efficient and scalable software implementations
together with codes for appealing visualizations, which are extremely
challenging for object data, will be made freely available for practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.