* 2311092
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Linking geochemical proxy records to crustal stratigraphic context via community-interactive cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Erik Sperling, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sheikh Ghafoor
* 08/31/2026
* USD 196,893.00

Collaborative Research: Elements: Linking geochemical proxy records to crustal
stratigraphic context via community-interactive cyberinfrastructure

This project integrates two data systems which take different approaches to
digitally describing the Earth’s geologic history. Macrostrat characterizes the
bulk properties, spatial distribution, and age relationships of crustal rocks.
The Sedimentary Geochemistry and Paleoenvironments (SGP) project compiles
sample-derived proxy measurements that record information about the prevailing
conditions at specific times in the past. Unifying these two approaches to
understanding the “rock record” allows the site- and time-specific information
carried by geochemical proxy records (e.g., water chemistry, temperature,
atmospheric composition, nutrient levels) to be compared more precisely across
scales and through geologic time. Aligning Macrostrat and SGP increases the
operational effectiveness of both data systems: Macrostrat provides a
sophisticated contextual and age modeling framework to surround SGP geochemical
data, while the SGP consortium directs a large and active community of
contributing researchers towards expanding the Macrostrat column dataset. These
new capabilities support new science and provide geochemical data to the public.

The reach and impact of Macrostrat’s advanced cyberinfrastructure for describing
the Earth’s crust would be improved by integrating a wide collaborator base. SGP
has a novel consortium structure that effectively engages the effort of many
researchers, but it lacks an effective age model to align measurements in
geologic time. This project combines these approaches by 1) linking SGP samples
to Macrostrat units and columns, 2) building new web interfaces for
stratigraphic column visualization and entry, and 3) engaging the SGP community
in capturing columns that contextualize geochemical datasets. New API data
access endpoints and websites will provide access to large volumes of well-
structured and harmonized stratigraphic and geochemical data. A new column-entry
web application allows broad participation in stratigraphic data collection,
curation, and use. Contextual records, once compiled, will sustain new research
approaches that integrate bulk and proxy-based rock measurements.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education
(RISE), the Division of Earth Sciences (EAR), and the Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology Program within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.