* 2311294
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Roots of Complexity: Tubers, Cuisine, and Surplus Production in the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Trevor Lamb, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2025
* USD 65,947.00

Anthropologists have long suggested that meat—especially salmon—dominated the
North Pacific culinary world. This focus on animal foods has obscured the roles
plants played in the subsistence, storage, and culinary systems of coastal
hunter-gatherers. Ecological knowledge and historic accounts demonstrate that
root-foods, such as tubers, bulbs, corms, rhizomes, and roots, were critical
sources of carbohydrates throughout this region. This dissertation research
tests hypotheses about the roles tubers played in the emergence of surplus
production, hierarchy, and feasting in the Kodiak Archipelago, western Gulf of
Alaska. Research results have implications for understanding broader patterns of
human adaptation across the North Pacific.

This project evaluates multiple lines of evidence from sites and sources in the
Kodiak Archipelago, including archaeological samples and ethnohistoric accounts
of root-food production and consumption. The co-PI will analyze charred plant
remains from household and communal pit-roasting features; the size and shape of
ceramic vessels; starch residues preserved on cooking pots, and stable carbon
and nitrogen isotope ratios to reconstruct past meals. Radiocarbon dating of
selected materials will provide chronological control. Integration of these
multiple data sources will clarify the roles of root foods in status-based food
production and consumption behaviors. The co-PI will produce a dissertation and
peer-reviewed journal articles and present results to local Alaska and academic
audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.