* 2311791
* Sustainability: Open SciServer: A Sustainable Data-Driven Science Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Arik Mitschang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 992,866.00

Data-driven research is central to the acceleration of science and engineering
needed to address major societal needs, advance national health, and secure
global strategic competitiveness. Methods and ideas to leverage rapidly growing
data resources also provide broad impacts for society including democratization
of access to data resources and development of the diverse, skilled workforce
required by the industries of the future. At its core, modern data-driven
science requires versatile analysis platforms that provide collaborative science
teams powerful, inexpensive, and scalable tools for analysis of large and varied
data sets. The Open SciServer project migrates the existing SciServer platform
to one that can be used, installed, managed, and extended by research projects
from community colleges to research institutions. A central goal of the project
is creation of a path to sustainability so data providers can depend on the
SciServer platform for up-to-date, optimized use and re-use of science data into
the future.

The Open SciServer project is a transition to sustainability for the SciServer
collaborative data-driven science platform. SciServer is a cross-domain platform
developed with NSF funding providing server-side data analysis and research with
complex scientific workflows in interactive and batch mode. SciServer has a
well-developed code base; an established user community; and demonstrated impact
on scientific discovery, research, and education in fields as diverse as
astronomy; materials science and engineering; turbulence; oceanography; and
precision medicine and genomics. Specific Open SciServer project tasks include:
codebase migration to open source; creation of developer-level documentation
allowing modification and development of new services; enhancing administrative
functions with built-in monitoring and metrics; and creation of tiered cloud-
deployment options. Together these developments allow easy adoption as a science
platform to optimize use of large data resources from any domain or project.
Open SciServer also expands and engages the user community to gather input and
refine existing architecture to facilitate sustainable development. Providing a
powerful, open science platform promotes open science through democratization of
advanced computing and access to FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
Reproducible) research data.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Information and Intelligent Systems Division within the Directorate for
Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.