* 2311611
* I-Corps:  Sensor-based frailty assessment tool using a smart watch
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Nima Toosizadeh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology for physical frailty assessment. Frailty is an aging
syndrome related to low physiological reserves in organs and systems and is
associated with increased risk of hospitalization, adverse therapy outcomes,
disability, and mortality. The proposed application of the technology is to risk
stratify hospitalized and community dwelling older adults and will be
implemented through a smartwatch and smartphone to measure frailty in under 5
minutes. Monitoring technologies, such as the proposed frailty score, have the
potential to improve older people’s safety, manage their health and assist them
in maintaining their independence. Additionally, these technologies hold the
promise of enormous cost savings for the healthcare system by enhancing the
ability of providers to provide timely intervention prior to a patient’s
deterioration requiring acute care.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a novel objective sensor-
based frailty assessment tool. In this frailty tool, for the first time, instead
of assessing characteristics of physiological systems in basal resting-state
conditions, a provocative physical stress test will be employed to quantify the
level of physiological reserve within and across cardiac and motor systems.
Biomechanics approaches including muscle model and heart rate dynamics analysis
will be used to characterize motor and cardiac system behaviors. In addition,
the proposed technology may be used to assess dynamic interactions between the
motor and cardiac systems using state space reconstruction of motor and heart
rate behaviors within the stress-response model. The test takes 60 seconds to
perform (repetitive and fast elbow flexion) and can provide the frailty score
immediately after the test. The proposed approach has been validated cross-
sectionally using comprehensive frailty assessment approaches that take 45-60
minutes and longitudinally based on adverse hospital/treatment outcomes,
readmission, and mortality. In addition to the sensor-based frailty score, the
technology has been transformed from more expensive equipment to a simple
smartwatch platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.