* 2311582
* III: Small: A Big Data and Machine Learning Approach for Improving the Efficiency of Two-sided Online Labor Markets
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yong Ge, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,974.00

Online labor markets (OLMs), where the employment of on-demand workers and the
delivery of products occur online, have become an increasingly important
component of today’s economy. These two-sided markets provide workers and
employers with the access to a large pool of geographically dispersed, semi-
anonymous virtual transaction partners. Millions of Americans are freelancing at
various OML platforms, and they contribute hundreds of billions of dollars to
the U.S. economy. To support workers and employers in performing daily business,
OLM platforms have developed some functions and tools. Examples include keyword-
based search for jobs, task matching, and recommendation for workers. However,
many of these tools have critical drawbacks and cause significant problems (such
as bias in the exposure of tasks to workers). This project will collect and
analyze massive OLM data and develop a suite of novel technical solutions to
improve the efficiency of today’s OLM platforms. The developed technical
approaches will make research contributions to the fields of data mining,
machine learning, and OLM analytics. The study results of this project will
advance the knowledge and understanding of the U.S. OLMs. This project is
designed to benefit multiple stakeholders and yield potential impacts on society
such as providing a novel worker-task matching tool for OLM platforms, updating
OLM workers’ skills, and improving OLM employment. This project integrates
research with education through course module development, involving graduate
and undergraduate students in research, and research showcases for local K-12
students.

This project focuses on the following three specific aims (SAs): developing
novel technical solutions for discovering useful knowledge, learning feature
representations from massive OLM data, studying the issues of over-competition
among workers, mitigating unbalanced exposure of tasks in OLMs, developing a
novel two-sided matching approach to address the issues, analyzing the critical
skill gap between OLM tasks and workers, and developing a novel forward-looking
OLM skill recommendation solution to bridge the gap. The project will develop a
context-aware deep & wide approach for mining OLM skill keywords from massive
text and a new representation-learning approach that jointly models graphical
and textual data. It will formalize and solve an optimization problem for two-
sided matching between tasks and workers. It will also develop an effective
approach for identifying OLM workers who need skill updating and an
interpretable heuristic approach for generating skill recommendations to
selected workers. The results of this project will be disseminated in the form
of peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, seminars, and
workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.