* 2311252
* Statistical Problems Through a New Perturbation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Van Vu, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

One of the main goals of statistics and data science is to deduce information
from a large set of data, usually given in the form of a large matrix. For
instance, in most recommendation systems, the rows of the matrix represent
customers, and the columns represent products, the entries are the (potential)
rating of a customer for the corresponding product. Since data comes with noise,
it is important to measure the impact of noise on the information we would like
to deduce (in most cases, in terms of some matrix parameters). Given the
popularity of the spectral method in data science, the problem has been studied
by scientists across many fields for a century. However, in modern data science,
it has been observed that very often, the data matrix has some structure, such
as being low rank. The PI aims to develop a new theory with this restriction,
which would improve many classical mathematical results, and at the same time,
would lead to better estimates and faster algorithms for many real-life
problems. The project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.

Consider a matrix (which represents data). In practice, we often have access to
a noise version of it, where each entry is added with some noise (or the whole
matrix is added to a noise matrix). Classical perturbation theorems, such as
Weyl or Davis-Kahan, provide us with estimates for the difference between key
parameters of the original matrix (such as leading eigenvalues and eigenvectors)
and their noisy counterparts. These results are sharp in worst cases analysis.
However, in modern data science, data often has a low-rank structure, and noise
is random. Under these assumptions, the PI has observed that one can provide
much better bounds. Under this project, the PI will obtain optimal bounds under
the above assumption, in various norms. The PI and his students will also attack
several well-known algorithmic problems, such as matrix completion and Gaussian
mixtures, using the spectral method combined with these new tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.