* 2311878
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: FZ: A fine-tunable cyberinfrastructure framework to streamline specialized lossy compression development
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Hanqi Guo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2027
* USD 579,943.00

Data is the fourth pillar of the science methodology. However, rapidly expanding
volumes and velocities of scientific data generated by simulation and instrument
facilities present serious storage capacity, storage and network bandwidth, and
data analysis challenges for many sciences. These challenges ultimately limit
research discovery which would promote prosperity and welfare. Many research
groups are exploring the use of data reduction techniques to address these
challenges because lossy compression for scientific data offers a reliable,
high-speed, and high-fidelity solution. However, existing generic lossy
compressors often do not correspond to user-specific applications, use cases,
and requirements in terms of reduction, speed, and information preservation.
Hence, many potential users of lossy compressors for scientific data develop
their own specialized lossy compression software, an effort that requires
tremendous collaboration between compressor experts and domain scientists,
demands extensive coding to optimize performance on multiple platforms, and
often leads to redundant research and development efforts. This project aims to
create a framework, called FZ, that revolutionizes the development of
specialized lossy compressors by providing a comprehensive ecosystem to enable
scientific users to intuitively research, compose, implement, and test
specialized lossy compressors from a library of pre-developed, high-performance
data reduction modules optimized for heterogeneous platforms. This project also
contributes to the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
by enhancing the quality of computing-related curricula in scientific data
management, compression, and visualization and through outreach activities at
four universities. This project builds FZ, an intuitive cyberinfrastructure for
the composition of specialized lossy compressors, by adapting, combining, and
extending multiple existing capabilities from the SZ lossy compressor, the
LibPressio unifying compression interface, the OptZConfig optimizer of
compressor configurations, the Z-checker and QCAT compression quality analysis
tools, and the Paraview and VTK visualization tools. The project has three
thrusts: (1) It develops programming interfaces and a compressor generator to
create new compressors from high-level languages such as Python and optimize
their execution. (2) It refactors the SZ lossy compressors infrastructure to
enable fine-grained composability of a large diversity of data transformation
modules and integrate non-uniform compression capabilities, new preprocessing,
decorrelation, approximation, and entropy coding data transformation modules to
produce specialized lossy compressors. (3) It provides interactive
visualization, quality assessment, and graphical user interface (GUI) tools that
adapt and extend existing capabilities to automatically search optimized lossy
compression module compositions and to identify relevant compression ratio,
speed, and quality trade-offs for their use cases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.