* 2311142
* Frameworks: Infrastructure For Political And Social Event Data using Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,589,016.00

This project intends to revolutionize computerized data extraction for conflict
scholars, security analysts, and practitioners who for decades have devoted
significant resources to monitor, understand, and predict armed violence, social
protests, and other politically relevant events worldwide. Currently, the vast
majority of conflict event data are  expensively coded by humans from
increasingly large volumes of news reports. This project uses  recent advances
in artificial intelligence and large language models to address this fundamental
issue for conflict research. It builds on earlier NSF efforts that created a
publicly available large language model to study inter- and intra-state conflict
and armed violence, called ConfliBERT. This project expands the ConfliBERT model
to multilingual settings, including Arabic and Spanish. This will help
researchers and policymakers better understand the context of local events and
create a continuous data analysis process by feeding in current news stories to
identify new political actors and events in real time. As the project's
cyberinfrastructure develops, the research community will be empowered through
training, education, and outreach with groups at local, national, and
international levels, including academics and government.

In the last five years, state-of-the-art language models have revolutionized the
field of natural language processing (NLP). In particular, there have been
significant advances in the use of domain-specific models for understanding
social processes. Our research and that of other experts in this field
demonstrate how ConfliBERT outperforms prior  models for coding and
understanding conflict and violence from raw text (Hu, et al. 2022, Haffner, et
al. 2023). This project  supports new NLP developments for conflict research and
expands their access to the academic and policy communities. Specifically, it
builds on earlier NSF efforts that led to the development of ConfliBERT, a
domain-specific language model, publicly available at Hugging Face, trained on
an expert-curated corpus about conflict and political violence (Hu et al. 2022).
This project will integrate, extend, and apply ConfliBERT and our related
innovations (e.g., actor detection for network construction) into a sustainable
ecosystem to engineer data from text. It will expand ConfliBERT to multilingual
settings including Arabic and Spanish, update the corpora in sustainable ways
and retrain ConfliBERT on a continuous basis, provide new political network
data, and develop language models for users to create customized datasets and
applications. All developed cyberinfrastructure is and will continue to be
broadly accessible for the community of researchers, analysts, and others with
interests in conflict dynamics, security studies, and international relations. 

This project funded by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences, and
the Directorate for STEM Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.