* 2311117
* Collaborative Research: New Anodic Catalysts for Water Oxygen Evolution Using Hybrid Solid-State Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

The development of large-scale non-fossil sources of energy is arguably science
and engineering's most important goal. The proposed project will address a key
process for scaled use of sunlight, the electrocatalytic oxidation of water.
Electrocatalysts are materials that make electrically-driven chemical reactions
proceed faster, more efficiently, and/or with less input of electricity. This
project will involve discovery of new catalytic materials for efficient
electrochemical oxidation of water to produce hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2). The
produced dihydrogen can be used directly as a fuel to produce electricity in
hydrogen fuel cells or as a reactant to upgrade low-grade carbon-containing
compounds to high-value fuels and chemicals. The project will address a critical
step in a sustainable process for converting solar energy to chemical energy,
thus alleviating dependence on fossil resources. A key aspect of this effort is
to elucidate details and understanding of catalyst performance that would not be
possible without the synergistic use of both experimental and computational
interrogation.

A major challenge for the scaled use of electrocatalytic processes for the use
of green energy to produce hydrogen from water is the development of robust
anodic materials that catalyze rapid and long-lived water oxidation. The
proposed research is focused on the development of new carbon-supported
materials to gain fundamental understanding of electrocatalytic water oxidation,
especially with a focus on the ability to integrate well-defined molecular
catalyst structures into conducting solid materials. Through a collaborative
effort that involves groups in molecular catalysis (Gunnoe, Machan),
nanomaterials (Zhang), theory and computational modeling (Goddard), carbon
materials and catalyst characterization (Heumann), and benchmarking and
mechanistic studies (Spanos) including in situ EPR spectroscopy (Schnegg), a
strategy to develop and optimize molecular catalysts with ligand functionality
to enhance electrocatalytic water oxidation, incorporate these molecular units
into conducting carbon-based materials, and to study their efficacy and
mechanism will be implemented. To achieve these goals, three objectives will be
pursued: Objective 1. Increased understanding of the design of capping arene
ligands to optimize performance of hybrid electrocatalysts, including multi-
nuclear transition metal molecular precursors, for water oxidation based on Co
or Fe metals. Objective 2. Develop design principles for pyridine-alkoxide
ligands to optimize performance of hybrid electrocatalysts, with a focus on
generating multi-nuclear transition metal molecular precursors, for the OER
based on Cu and Co. Objective 3. Understand the impact of the carbon support on
the activity and stability of the catalyst active site. Also, the project will
also involve educational outreach to primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs)
to increase interest among students from diverse backgrounds in careers as
scientists and engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.