* 2311797
* Cross-Sector Partnerships, Experiential Learning, and Professional Development to Build Pathways to STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,087,580.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1: Building Capacity project aims to
improve STEM education and broaden participation in STEM. It intends to do so
through a collaborative, cross-sector partnership model that will provide
students and faculty with year-round, extra-curricular, STEM-related
experiences. It is expected that these experiences will help increase the number
of students who are retained in and successfully complete STEM degrees at HSI
institutions. One of the unique features of this program is that faculty will be
embedded with students during the extracurricular experiences. As a result,
faculty will connect with professionals working at the forefront of their
disciplines and be able to use their experiences to improve their teaching. The
program is also expected to help increase the number and quality of cross-sector
collaborations.

The project team has already created partnerships with corporate, non-profit,
and government organizations. The primary partners are Packet, MillerCoors
Brewing, CSU Fullerton, Gravitational Waves Physics & Astronomy, City of Hope,
The Explainables, The Right Question Institute, and the Blue Marble Space
Institute of Science. These organizations will provide students with experiences
that range from workshops and demonstrations to coding boot camps and summer
research internships. The project intends to serve 300 students, who will
participate in one of three themed cohorts: 1. Geosciences; 2. Engineering,
Physics, Mathematics & Computer Sciences; and 3. Biology and Chemistry. It is
expected that participation in the cohort will broaden students’ understanding
of career opportunities, introduce them to subfields within their disciplines,
and provide internships or research opportunities, while building durable
networks with peers and professionals. The research and evaluation components of
the project will contribute to the literature regarding science identity. It is
expected that this work may serve as a model for increasing the diversity of the
STEM workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.