* 2311245
* Elements: MVP: Open-Source AI-Powered MicroVessel Processor for Next-Generation Vascular Imaging Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jing Hua, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,921.00

Effectively acquiring and processing complicated microstructures and their
morphology become increasingly important in scientific and engineering
discoveries. A growing body of evidence in animal and human studies shows that
micro-cerebrovascular abnormalities are the real source of many neurologic
disorders and vascular diseases. Therefore, there is an urgent need for better
detection and understanding of vascular characteristics in vivo at the micro-
level. However, the existing techniques and software solutions are developed
based on general-scale medical images for processing macro-level organs and
tissues, not applicable to the challenging next-generation vascular imaging data
and micro-level vasculature. Furthermore, they are difficult to be customized to
specific scientific microvascular imaging applications for domain developers.
The overall objective of this project is to design and develop a rigorous,
scalable, intelligent, and comprehensive data and software infrastructure,
MicroVessel Processor (MVP), which supports and sustains advancements of
understanding and analyzing the complicated 3D microvascular networks, provides
services to a large community, and fosters continuous innovation in the
multidisciplinary domains.

This project integrates new paradigm of data-driven 3D microvascular discovery -
generate new knowledge and understanding and accelerate discovery and innovation
via the advanced software cyberinfrastructure, along with use-case driven
functional applications and evaluations. The capabilities of the newly developed
AI-based high-fidelity 3D image enhancement, 3D geometric segmentation /
extraction, reconstruction, and analytics techniques are integrated in the MVP
system as the core modules in the software infrastructure. The MVP database
including a large number of subjects with varying anatomical shapes,
morphological features, and different data modalities is collected and
constructed as the infrastructure (i.e., knowledgebase), which provides the
knowledge for 3D microvascular networks tracking and analysis. The MVP system is
designed and built based on an open-source and drag-drop real-time application
system, in order to reduce both human labors and computation costs, accelerate
the speed and efficiency of re-development and extensibility. This unique
framework supports a wide adoption in microvasculature analytics in biomedical
engineering, big-data neuroscience, and AI-based clinical diagnosis.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
within the Engineering Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.