* 2311653
* CIF: Small: Learning, Optimization &amp; Analysis for Biologically Inspired Community Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Urbashi Mitra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,999.00

Bacteria are single-celled organisms that constitute some of the earliest forms
of life. Bacteria have an aggregate biomass that is larger than that of all
animals and plants combined. Despite their simplicity, the operations and
interactions of bacteria are not fully understood, yet microbial communities
play a significant role in bioremediation, plant growth promotion, human and
animal digestion, disease, the carbon-cycle and the cleaning of water. Thus, it
is of significant interest to further understand microbial populations. This
project uses methods from communications and signal processing to model,
optimize and hopefully further understand the interactions within microbial
populations. The particular focus is on the phenomenon of quorum sensing wherein
bacteria express new genes, under the right environmental and population
conditions, which facilitates collective behavior such as biofilm formation as
well as virulent behavior such as infections. Thus, quorum sensing enables these
simple unicellular organisms to achieve complex, collaborative tasks. The
project will train graduate students in cross-disciplinary research and
potentially impact applications and industries such as microbial fuel cells,
bacterial infection suppression, commercial cellular systems, search-and-rescue,
transportation systems, environmental monitoring, and homeland security.
Modeling, learning and optimization strategies for biologically inspired
problems will be considered. Several unique challenges will be directly
addressed: (1) developing signaling and channel models that enable optimization
and control, while capturing key operational behavior of the bacteria; (2)
designing meaningful cost functions that are relevant to the microbial
application; and (3) designing models addressing the inherent coupling between
individual bacteria as well as coupling between the bacteria and their
environment. The project views quorum sensing as a critical element of a multi-
agent, distributed decision-making system that is the bacterial community. A key
challenge is to bring everything together: the incorporation of biological
constraints, the coupling between microbes, the challenge of determining the
proper objective function that captures biological fitness or other microbial
objectives in the context of temporal and spatial evolution of microbial
colonies. The following tools will be leveraged: decentralized
detection/decision making, sequential decision making, active localization,
active sampling, stochastic geometry, causal graph identification, directed
information, two-way communication, multi-hopped communication, and packet
scheduling methodologies. While the proposed work does not have a significant
experimental content, previously collected experimental data in the context of
existing collaborations will be leveraged to drive the proposed research. The
project aims to close the loop by not only using communication, signal
processing and information theory to model and design microbial systems, but to
use the outcomes of this biologically inspired research to design engineered
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.