* 2311307
* Optimization of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Schemes with Spectral Gap Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Quan Zhou, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 50,241.00

The enormous scale and increasing complexity of modern data make it
computationally prohibitive to find exact solutions to many mathematical models
used in data sciences. Sampling methods have emerged as an efficient alternative
approach to this issue and are widely used in various scientific fields,
including biology, physics, finance, geoscience, and artificial intelligence. By
generating a large number of random solutions and simulating different
scenarios, sampling can reveal hidden patterns and relationships that may not be
apparent from the data itself in a computationally efficient manner. However,
for different data sets and scientific problems, the efficacy of a given
sampling algorithm can vary significantly. One major goal of this project is to
develop general methods for assessing sampling difficulty during the algorithm
execution, which can be further used to adaptively tune the behavior of existing
sampling algorithms to achieve optimal performance. For example, consider the
problem of selecting genes associated with some complex disease using a modern
genomic data set consisting of millions of genes. The research team aims to
develop sampling algorithms that can quickly identify which genes are highly
likely or unlikely to be associated with the disease and then allocate most
computational resources to analyzing a small number of genes that may interact
with each other and show intermediate evidence of association. This project will
train students on both theoretical and interdisciplinary research and enable the
investigator to develop and revamp courses related to sampling methodology.

The Markov chain convergence theory provides both theoretical guarantees and
practical guidance on the use of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling, the
main driving force behind Bayesian computation, and the past decade has
witnessed a rapid development in the complexity analysis of MCMC methods for
high-dimensional statistical models. However, estimation of the MCMC convergence
rate from a single trajectory has received much less attention. The few existing
methods are computationally expensive, making it difficult for practitioners to
optimize the efficiency of MCMC schemes. This project aims to fill these gaps by
developing novel theory and methodology for measuring, estimating and optimizing
the convergence rates of various MCMC schemes, including classical Metropolis-
Hastings algorithms and recently proposed importance tempering schemes. New
sampling algorithms will be developed aiming to overcome challenging multimodal
target distributions that arise in statistics and other scientific fields.
Additionally, a stochastic control approach will be explored to gain further
theoretical insights into the optimal design of tempered MCMC schemes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.