* 2311953
* Collaborative Research: Insults for free: the roles of metamorphosis and dormancy in aging dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Dillon, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 398,251.00

Biological age does not always correlate with chronological age, and it is
unclear how physiology contributes to aging or protects from it. Some hypotheses
predict that organisms will repair tissues necessary for reproduction, while
allowing other tissues to age. Other hypotheses predict the opposite: tissues
related to reproduction will age faster because of selection for early life
fitness. This research will examine aging dynamics across life stages and
tissues, and in response to stress. Bees are an ideal system to probe the
mechanistic underpinnings of extreme differences in lifespan, yielding general
insight into regulators of aging. Bee life-cycles are short compared to
vertebrates and its possible to examine lifetime patterns of senescence. And,
many aspects of cellular senescence are conserved across insects and
vertebrates. Investigating how aging dynamics differ among species may lead to
new ways of disrupting negative effects of aging. Understanding aging is
particularly pressing in a world in which organisms are increasingly exposed to
stress and many bee species are in decline. The proposed research will support
the training of six graduate students and six undergraduate students. A K-12
learning module on bumble bee spring emergence will be developed as a hands-on
lesson to engage Native American high school students in STEM. As part of an
ongoing collaboration, informational exhibits and outreach events about
pollinators will be developed with the Red River Valley Zoo (Fargo, ND) and
Science Kids and Wyoming PBS (Laramie, WY).

The objective of the proposed research is to integrate physiology with life
history theory to mechanistically explain patterns of aging. Insect
metamorphosis may be an extreme version of the disposable soma hypothesis.
During metamorphosis, larval tissues are recycled and replaced by imaginal cells
with stem cell-like properties, which have the potential to be cellularly
“younger” than the tissues they replace. Insect metamorphosis may provide an
opportunity to dispose of damaged somatic tissues, mitigating the effects of
juvenile exposure to stress. Insect overwintering, also known as diapause, also
has important implications for aging. Diapause increases lifespans by six times
compared to non-diapausing individuals. This research will determine how
metamorphosis and diapause contribute to aging dynamics by examining cellular
damage and organismal performance by: 1) determining the relationship between
senescence and cellular markers of aging, 2) examining how the disposable soma
during metamorphosis influences aging by comparing cellular aging in tissues
formed during metamorphosis to those carried over from the larval stage, and 3)
assessing whether overwintering dormancy is a slowing down of aging or is
regenerative. The proposed research will investigate these dynamics in solitary
bees and bumble bees, and will strengthen an already productive collaboration
between NDSU, UW, and the USDA-ARS, and greatly extend what is known about the
mechanisms that contribute to variation in senescence.

This project is jointly funded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.