* 2311020
* I-Corps:  Remote Blood Analysis for Digital Animal Health
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* John Hanks, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an implantable sensor and measurement system to monitor the
health of feed animals digitally. The proposed implantable sensor platform
measures a wide range of health biomarkers such as temperature, oxygen, glucose,
pregnancy hormones, and lactate without the expensive of drawing blood or other
bodily fluids. Morbidity and mortality rates of animals in feedlots range
between 15% - 45% with Bovine Respiratory Disease (BRD) alone having an economic
burden of $1 billion. In addition, the proposed technology has the potential to
lower the use of antibiotics and medications used with feed animals by
predicting illness days before conventional methods. The system uses a low-cost
passive sensor implant that offers a significantly lower cost solution than
alternative active electronic wearable devices.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a luminescent hydrogel
implant that is the size of a grain of rice and an instrumentation system for
data collection that is able to “read” the implant. The biosensor is implanted
under the animal’s hide just a few millimeters below the tissue surface. The
implant device is seeded with a molecule that lights up when attached to a
target biomarker such as oxygen and excited with light of a certain wavelength.
The reading instrument, similar in size to a metal detector, produces the
excitation light and measures the emission return light signal from the implant.
Similar implantable biosensors that use skin-attached reading instruments are
commercially available in the market and are approved by regulators for
continuously measuring oxygen in humans. Unlike human applications that use a
skin attached reader, the proposed technology uses a rugged outdoor system for
beef and dairy applications to read the implant sensor at a distance of few
centimeters several times a day for early detection of illness. To date,
implants and a reader system to interrogate implantable oxygen and temperature
sensors have been designed for use at a distance of 12 cm.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.