* 2311540
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Model Biases in Poleward Heat Transport--Atmosphere-Ocean Partitioning, Trends over the Historical Period and Sub-Seasonal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Aaron Donohoe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 608,923.00

Winds in the atmosphere and currents in the ocean move heat from the equator to
the pole thereby moderating temperatures over Earth’s surface. In the absence of
poleward heat transport, the tropics would be uninhabitably warm and sea ice
would cover nearly half the planet. Future changes in poleward heat transport
rely on coupled (atmosphere/ocean) climate model simulations and have
substantial impacts on the spatial structure of projected temperature changes.
This project will evaluate if state-of-the-art climate models adequately
represent key physical processes responsible for poleward heat transport.
Research will be pursued through a model-observation comparison of poleward heat
transport at three observable timescales. First, at climatological (long-term
averages) timescales the partitioning of poleward heat transport between the
atmosphere and ocean will be compared in models and observations. Second, the
model simulated long-term trends in poleward heat transport over the last 40
years will be compared to the observational record. Last, the investigators will
assess if climate models adequately represent the daily variability of
atmospheric heat transport responsible for heat waves. The project will serve a
platform for training undergraduate and graduate students and involve outreach
activities at local venues.

The project will improve the physics of climate models by identifying model
biases in the processes responsible for the global scale movement of heat
through the climate system at observable timescales. These same physical
processes in climate models govern future long-term temperature change and
variability with substantial human impact. Additionally, the atmospheric motions
that move energy through the climate system also move moisture and, thus, the
project results will also improve future predictions of rain and snowfall
changes. Lastly, the project directly addresses if models adequately represent
the atmospheric processes responsible for heat waves. Identifying model biases
in the underlying causes of heatwaves will lead to improved predictions of
regional heatwave intensity changes in a warming world. In addition to training
undergraduate and graduate students, the investigators will perform public
outreach on project-related science concepts to engender enthusiasm amongst
younger generations and raise awareness of climate research among the general
public.

This project is jointly funded by the Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics Program
and Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences to support projects that
increase research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety of
institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.