* 2311306
* Applications of stochastic analysis to statistical inference for stationary and non-stationary Gaussian processes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Philip Ernst, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Scientists and engineers want to extract information and develop an
understanding of the natural world and human society by analyzing data to inform
questions and decisions. The data often presents itself as the so-called time
series, also known as stochastic processes, evolutions of measurable quantities
over periods of time. The variations of these time series can be rather
predictable from one period to the next, but less so over longer time intervals
covering many periods. There are subtle differences in the nature of various
types of these stochastic processes. For instance, the value of a financial
stock or index, or the yearly global mean temperature, are buildups,
accumulating stochastically over time. But daily returns on stocks or
commodities futures, or the category (intensity) of successive Atlantic
hurricanes, are of a different nature, typically showing a great deal of
independence from one day or one event to the next, featuring a property of
stationarity over time after adjusting for trends and seasonality. A critically
important question is how some of these time series relate to each other. For
instance, are global mean temperatures closely tied to Atlantic hurricane
activity? Climate scientists would talk about significant attribution of the
latter to the former if the relation is statistically significant. We have
discovered that ordinary statistical tools work well to measure attribution when
time series are largely stationary, but that the same tools can incorrectly
point to a strong attribution when none actually exists, for time series, which
are more accumulative. This incorrect attribution phenomenon, measured using a
so-called correlation coefficient, occurs more frequently in scientific papers
than one would hope. It is known as Yule's "nonsense correlation" in honor of
the famed British statistician who first described the possibility empirically
in 1926. Our work is the first to quantify exactly how this correlation can
behave as a mathematical object, for accumulative time series, and for
stationary time series. As a consequence of this award's work, we will provide
scientists with demonstrably correct tools for correlations of time series,
which will help them measure with great precision whether natural and societal
phenomena, such as those described above, are statistically related, or whether
they are more likely to be independent of each other. The project will also
provide research training opportunities for graduate students. As is a well-
accepted direction when developing tools for statistical inference, this award's
work will study the properties of statistical tests which detect whether data
streams are likely not to be independent. The objects of study are pairs of
paths of times series or stochastic processes, and the empirical Pearson-type
correlation statistic for any such pair. In particular, the work will apply to
observational studies, rather than repeated experiments, since single time
series are often the only type of data for any given environmental or economic
variable. For stationary stochastic processes, we will derive precise estimates
of the empirical correlation's fluctuations, by using calculations involving
both exact distribution theory and normal approximations via stochastic
analysis. These results will lead directly to proposing principled statistical
methods for distinguishing between dependent and independent of pairs of
stochastic processes. Next, we will investigate the realm of highly non-
stationary paths, including random walks and Brownian motion, how the
asymptotics for the empirical correlations deviate strongly from normality, and
how to convert this information to the aforementioned application to distinguish
between dependence and independence. Much of our work will draw on the
distributional properties of classical variance and covariance objects for
Gaussian vectors, as a technical aspect of stochastic analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.