* 2311286
* EAGER: Grounding Natural Language Inference in Cognitive Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* John Licato, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 04/30/2024
* USD 149,570.00

Being able to detect textual similarity is important for many applications
including machine translation, detection of plagiarism, text generation, fact
checking etc. At the word level, two words tend to mean the same thing when one
can be swapped with the other with little or no consequence. But how does this
approach extend to the sentence level and beyond? According to an inference-
centered view, a significant part of a sentence’s meaning can be understood in
terms of the “inferential halo” of each sentence. The “inferential halo” is all
the inferences, i.e., implied meanings, that a sentence has. Comparing the
semantic similarity of two sentences or text would then be accomplished by
comparing all the inferences that each sentence or text implies. However,
current Natural Language Processing approaches to detecting sentence and text
similarities are limited to measures based on word or substring similarities
which do not capture adequately the meaning of a text.

This project addresses the limitations of previous approaches a) enriching the
notion and representation of inference and b) learning how people naturally
reason about semantic relations of texts. The novelty of our approach draws on
established work in Cognitive Psychology. For the enrichment of the notion of
inference, we introduce the distinction between a) quick and automatic
reasoning, known as Type 1, and b) slower and more deliberate reasoning, known
as Type 2. Type 1 reasoning applies when for example we recognize a face and
Type 2 when we calculate the tip for a bill. To learn how people naturally
reason, we collect data using data collection protocols established in Cognitive
Psychology for quick and slow reasoning. For data collection, we experiment with
a novel level of granularity to better capture the range of inferences made by
humans and train new computational models of detecting semantic inferences. The
proposed research will yield results, guidelines, and new computational models
that will lead to a) a novel way of studying informal reasoning in language
processing and b) improved metrics of textual similarity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.