* 2311442
* Elements: An Integrated Software Platform for Simulating Polariton Photochemical and Photophysical Processes
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yihan Shao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2026
* USD 599,597.00

Coupling electronic states with the quantized radiation field inside an optical
cavity creates polariton states, which are composed from the collective and
delocalized excitations among molecules and the cavity mode. As forming
polariton states have been shown to facilitate new chemical reactivities,
polariton chemistry provides a new strategy to control chemical reactivities in
a general way by tuning the fundamental properties of photons and provides a new
paradigm for enabling chemical transformations that can profoundly impact
catalysis, energy production, and the field of chemistry at large. Computer
simulations play a crucial role in understanding the new principles in this
emerging field. Simulating the time-dependent polariton quantum dynamics of such
hybrid matter-field systems is a necessary and essential task, as these
polariton photochemical reactions often involve a complex dynamical interplay
among the electronic, nuclear, and photonic degrees of freedom. The overarching
objective of this project is to provide a software infrastructure to facilitate
such simulations of time-dependent polariton quantum dynamics.

Towards the objective, software elements are developed within open-source
software packages. In particular, software modules are implemented in open-
source electronic structure packages to provide ab initio quantum mechanics and
semi-empirical based descriptions for the polaritonic states and dark states. In
parallel, surface-hopping and wavepacket-based polariton non-adiabatic quantum
dynamics methods are implemented in open-source electron dynamics packages, so
that efficient and accurate polariton quantum dynamics simulations can be
carried out routinely using the interfaces between electron structure and non-
adiabatic dynamics packages.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Chemistry and Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.