* 2311296
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Verifying Deep Neural Networks with Spintronic Probabilistic Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 297,307.00

This project addresses the critical need for verifying the safety and
reliability of deep neural networks (DNNs) used in various applications, such as
autonomous driving, aircraft control, and consumer products like smartphones. As
the demand for computational power in artificial intelligence continues to grow,
this project explores innovative domain-specific architectures (DSAs) such as
quantum and probabilistic computing platforms as potential solutions to the
verification problem. The research's significance lies in ensuring the correct
functioning of DNNs when exposed to perturbations or attacks, with the goal of
benefiting society by enhancing the safety and trustworthiness of Artificial
Intelligence (AI)-driven technologies. This interdisciplinary project will not
only advance the field of DNN verification and energy-efficient domain-specific
computers but also support education and workforce development, increasing
diversity and collaboration between academia and industry through targeted
activities.

The project aims to solve the exact DNN verification problem using quantum
annealing and probabilistic computers, contrasting conventional classical
computing approaches. The research contributions span device, circuit, system,
and algorithm levels. At the device level, the project will improve the energy
efficiency of existing probabilistic-bit (p-bit) designs by leveraging the
voltage-controlled-magnetic anisotropy (VCMA) phenomenon. At the circuit and
architecture level, the team will design array-level spintronic p-computers
(i.e., computers powered by p-bits) and investigate the dynamics between the
feedback circuitry and p-bits, complemented by scaled complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) emulators (Field Programmable Gate Arrays - FPGAs) with
more than 1000 p-bits. At the algorithm level, the project will focus on
formulating the exact verification of a neural network as an Ising model
problem, which will be solved using the developed hybrid classical/probabilistic
computers. The project will create pathways for large-scale spintronic
probabilistic computers and explore new research directions, such as applying
the simulated quantum annealing algorithm for DNN verification. This work will
lay the foundations for p-computers with more than one million p-bits, enabled
by Magnetic Random Access Memory (MRAM) technology with far-reaching
applications beyond verification, including machine learning and quantum
simulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.