* 2311369
* Inspiring Innovation: Two-year College Geoscience Faculty as Agents of Change
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Rebecca Walker, Mount San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2024
* USD 69,430.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing opportunities for
geoscience, environmental science, and other STEM faculty to consider actionable
changes that they could adopt, adapt, and implement in their instructional and
other professional practices. To achieve this aim, a five-day virtual conference
for two-year college (2YC) geoscience faculty will be held to advance knowledge
about improving 2YC student success and becoming a faculty change agent. The
conference will be led by individuals who have (1) served as faculty leaders
(change agents) on their campuses and in their regions; (2) written articles in
“Catalyzing Change: STEM Faculty as Change Agents” (Baer, Layou, & Macdonald,
2022), a volume of New Directions for Community Colleges, about their work as
change agents; and (3) written funded grant proposals. This professional
development experience will prompt faculty to consider how to improve their
teaching, strategies for inclusion, and student mentoring skills. These changes
will enhance the recruitment, retention, and support of STEM students at 2YCs.
This conference will also address barriers to 2YC faculty involvement in NSF
proposal conception and creation, and provide support, feedback, and time for
participants who wish to develop grant proposals. Increased 2YC faculty
participation in federal grants could have a tremendous impact on the
recruitment and retention of a diverse group of STEM workers as many students at
2YCs are members of groups historically underrepresented in STEM. Project
leaders will convene a five-day virtual conference for 2YC geoscience faculty
using articles from “Catalyzing Change,” most of which were authored by 2YC
faculty who have led faculty professional development in the context of the SAGE
2YC (Supporting and Advancing Geoscience Education at Two-Year Colleges) program
and/or have experience with funded grant proposals. Conference sessions — led by
“Catalyzing Change” chapter authors — on effective teaching and student
learning; diversity, equity, and inclusion; and supporting students’ career and
transfer paths will disseminate the content of the “Catalyzing Change” articles
and aid participants in formulating ideas for future work as faculty agents of
change and grant proposal authors. The interactive format of the conference will
aid a diverse group of participants, many of whom may be new to leading faculty
professional development and/or writing grant proposals in the past, in
formulating ideas for moving their work forward on their campuses and developing
individual or collaborative NSF proposals. The goals of the project are to grow
the existing community of 2YC faculty change agents across the country, continue
to advance the goals of the SAGE 2YC project, and encourage increased 2YC
geoscience faculty participation in the submission of NSF and other grant
proposals. These efforts will ultimately contribute to student success as
faculty enhance their professional practices. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects and conferences to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.