* 2311575
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Modeling and Mitigating Confirmation Bias in Visual Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Ya Yang Xiong, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2027
* USD 514,987.00

People can easily be overwhelmed with data when making decisions, such as
deciding which healthcare treatment is appropriate or which political candidate
to vote for. When overwhelmed by data, people tend to seek and interpret
information in a way that supports their preexisting beliefs. This phenomenon is
often referred to as confirmation bias. In data communication and visual
analytics, confirmation bias can be especially nefarious, even for experienced
analysts. Although there is a misconception that statistical models and
visualizations present objective truths, in reality, choices in the collection,
handling, analysis, and presentation of data can bias people into overly relying
on their pre-existing beliefs. This project will closely examine confirmation
bias in data analysis by (1) creating models that show how existing beliefs and
analytic goals can impact data-driven decision-making, and (2) designing novel
analytic interfaces that help analysts make less biased decisions by
intelligently suggesting evidence that may disprove a belief. The project team
will also create educational materials and collect empirical datasets to help
data analysts, researchers, and members of the public think about confirmation
bias in visual data communication and interpretation.

This project aims to increase understanding of how confirmation bias manifests
in real-world visual data analysis tasks and to develop and evaluate bias-
mitigation interventions. The project is structured around four research
thrusts. As measuring confirmation bias requires capturing an individualâ€™s
beliefs, the researchers will first investigate experimental methods to
accurately capture a person's beliefs and mental representations about data
patterns and trends in an analytic setting (Thrust I). The researchers will then
leverage these methodological findings to measure and model the effect of
confirmation bias in low-level visual analytic tasks such as finding
correlations (Thrust II), then examine higher-level compositions of these tasks
in more realistic analysis settings (Thrust III). Finally, the researchers will
design and develop four bias-mitigation interventions to be incorporated into
real-world visual analytic tools such as Data Voyager and Jupyter Notebooks,
recruiting professional analysts to evaluate them in digital field studies
(Thrust IV). This research agenda will advance the understanding of confirmation
bias and provide promising interventions to empower data analysts to make better
decisions. The researchers will also develop coursework and initiatives that
bring together computer science, psychology, and ethics to advance practice and
education around visual data analytics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.