* 2311843
* Elements: Development of cyberinfrastructure to establish a scalable application of self-supervised machine learning for over a decade of NOAA's water column sonar data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Qin Lv, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,095.00

The health of the ocean is vital to economies throughout the world due to the
global importance of ship traffic, commercial and recreational fisheries,
tourism, and energy exploration and extraction. One technology that scientists
use to understand and predict changes in the ocean is sonar, which allows them
to ‘see’ into the ocean to observe its inhabitants and features such as ocean
currents, sunken vessels, vents, and ocean bottom. By investigating the water
column – the area of the ocean from the surface to the seafloor – using sonar
technology, foundational information on the condition of the ocean ecosystems
can be learned. Sonars produce vast amounts of data and much of it is
interpreted by the trained eye of expert scientists. Unfortunately, modern sonar
systems produce more data than scientists can interpret, and fast and accurate
ways to extract information are needed. This project’s innovative approach
efficiently processes decades of publicly available water column sonar data,
which adds up to hundreds of terabytes. This project focuses on economically
critical fisheries, and the results show how the patterns of fish schools and
small swimming animals called zooplankton change over time and location. The
project’s methods are being shared widely so scientists across the world can
more easily use water column sonar in their research and interpretation is
simplified since the results are directly comparable. The processing of existing
data in new ways provides new information about ocean health, and rapid sharing
of that information will lead to quicker answers for management decisions. These
methods can also be applied to real-time sonar data collected on global fishing
vessels and integrated into swarms of scientific ocean robots. When combined
with other ocean data, the team can understand why the distribution of essential
critters like zooplankton and fish changes, and how climate change can affect
global fisheries. The project’s team is also training the next generation of
scientists and engineers by using the information learned throughout the project
in undergraduate courses for a diversity of students.

Water column sonars provide foundational information on the condition of ocean
ecosystems and inform marine resource conservation decisions. This project is
developing the cyberinfrastructure (CI) required to apply self-supervised
machine learning (SSL) to decades (and thus tens of terabytes) of water column
sonar data to discover patterns that reflect the spatio-temporal physical and
biological structure of aquatic environments. The SSL model is built using
multi-frequency echosounder data collected from 1998 to 2022 by the NOAA
Northeast Fisheries Science Center. These data are archived at the NOAA National
Centers for Environmental Information and accessible as analysis-ready zarr
stores on Amazon Web Services. This effort explores different scales of data in
different regions of the Northwest Atlantic, evaluates the latency of pattern
analysis, and validates the accuracy of the patterns found with domain experts.
The project will deliver a CI proof of concept for a new, self-learning, and
extensible method to classify acoustic signal patterns from large volumes of
data. In combination with climate indicators, it enables advanced understanding
of how the distribution of ecosystem essential critters like zooplankton and
fish have been changing over time and space, and why.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Division of Biological Infrastructure (BIO/DBI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.