* 2311414
* LTREB: Population persistence in a variable world:  spatiotemporal variation in climate and demography across the range of scarlet monkeyflower
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2029
* Amy Angert, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2029
* USD 442,310.00

This project seeks to understand how different climates influence the survival,
growth, and reproduction of plant species. Understanding how survival, growth
and reproduction influence how fast a population grows helps determine how
vulnerable species are to climate change. The researchers will measure
population growth rates across the range of the scarlet monkeyflower in the
western United States over the next 10 years. The findings of this research will
provide valuable insights into how populations can persist in the face of
changing climates. This work will help land managers with programs to conserve
rare plants, promote healthy ecosystems after wildfires, and restore stream
habitats. In addition, the project will mentor and train recent college
graduates from underrepresented groups.

Populations can be buffered from temporal variability in climate if one or more
demographic rates mitigate environmental variation in a way that promotes
stability in population growth. Alternatively, populations might show variable
population growth rates that track temporal variability in climate to capitalize
on favorable conditions. It remains unclear how the propensity for climate
buffering and climate tracking varies with life history, particularly under
realistically varying environments, alters range-wide inferences of population
dynamics when local populations differ in buffering and tracking capacity, and
influences the likelihood that genetic adaptation and phenotypic plasticity
facilitate population persistence in the face of climate extremes. To address
these knowledge gaps, the researchers will collect range-wide demographic data
over the next 10 years in the scarlet monkeyflower (Mimulus cardinalis), a plant
that is found across different climates in western North America. Mimulus
cardinalis is an ideal model for understanding population persistence and
adaptation in a rapidly changing climate because the researchers can uniquely
synthesize extensive observational and experimental datasets. The combination of
large-scale and long-term demographic observations (21 populations over 10-21
years to date), experimental work in greenhouse and field common gardens, and
genomic studies makes this a particularly powerful system for dissecting how
historical and contemporary climate adaptation shape distribution and
abundance.Â  Linking genotypes and phenotypes to demography across a broad
spatial and temporal scale will reveal unforeseen insights into population
persistence in the face of increasingly extreme climates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.