* 2311893
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Advancing Computer Hardware and Systems' Research Capability, Reproducibility, and Sustainability with the gem5 Simulator Ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Elba Garza, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2027
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to improve the cyberinfrastructure ecosystem for computer
system research by expanding and improving the popular gem5 simulation
infrastructure. The breakdown in Moore’s Law and Dennard Scaling is leading to a
drastic increase in the scale of computing systems, making it increasingly
difficult to make broad scientific progress in research to improve computer
systems without considering the entire scale of the hardware-software stack from
transistors to applications. This project will build on prior NSF investments
and scale the gem5 simulator to more users, more types of computing systems,
larger and higher fidelity computing systems, and more scientific communities
beyond computer architecture. These improvements to the gem5 simulation
infrastructure will enable researchers to design and understand the next
generation of supercomputers, laptops, and mobile devices. It also supports
education and diversity by creating teaching materials to broaden the
participation in computer systems research for both graduate and undergraduate
students.

Working with a large and diverse team of experts from the computer architecture
community, this project will develop a wide variety of improvements to the gem5
simulation infrastructure. This includes modeling future devices and phenomena
such as reliability, security, and chiplets; creating scalable models for modern
hardware by improving the accuracy of current models, adding support for
emerging vector extensions, and improving support for common accelerators such
as GPUs; scaling simulation performance by optimizing gem5’s performance and
providing interoperability with other simulation infrastructure; improving
modularity, reusability, and reproducibility by making baseline system easier to
use and providing ready-to-use benchmarks for many domains; and sustaining the
community with outreach and education by running workshops, tutorials, bootcamps
and expanding gem5’s userbase beyond computer architects through developing
asynchronous learning and teaching tools. Additionally, it will help ensure the
long-term sustainability of the gem5 infrastructure by growing a sustainable
ecosystem and increasing participation in computer system research.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Computing and Communications Foundations within the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.