* 2311685
* Elements: A Convergent Physics-based and Data-driven Computing Platform for Building Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shuai Li, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 584,094.00

Building modeling is used to establish computational models of their physical
characteristics, indoor environments and energy use with external weather
conditions acting as inputs. An accurate building model supports a variety of
downstream applications, such as smart building management, retrofit analysis,
and decarbonization. Current building modeling practice uses either physics-
based and data-driven approaches. Physics-based methods model building dynamics
using physical principles, which are sound and reliable, yet often have to
compromise accuracy due to high computational cost, limited mechanistic rules,
and incomplete input information. Data-driven approaches are computationally
efficient and offer flexibility, but they lack interpretability and often are
difficult to extrapolate, which hinders their field applications. This project
proposes to overcome these gaps by developing a novel cyberinfrastructure with
an advanced integration mechanism to fulfill convergent physics-based and data-
driven modeling. Research outcomes intend to enable accurate and computationally
efficient building modeling in practice, and thereby benefit many relevant
applications whose goals are a sustainable and resilient built environment.
Education and outreach activities, including interdisciplinary curriculum
development, minority and K12 student engagement, are closely integrated into
specific research activities.

This project will conduct unique, interdisciplinary research to design novel
mechanisms that unify physics-based and data-driven modeling approaches. The
project first plans to investigate and understand discrepancies between building
models at different fidelities and actual measurements. Based upon developed
understanding, several machine learning residual models and Neural Ordinary
Differential Equations are developed to integrate physics-based and data-driven
models. A flexible and easy-to-use cyberinfrastructure, including user interface
layers and modeling layers, will be developed as an open-source platform to
support convergent building modeling practice. The modeling framework and
cyberinfrastructure are validated using field measurements from multiple
resources. This project makes fundamental contributions to the building modeling
field, as well as other engineering domains using diverse modeling approaches.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(ENG/CBET) and the Division of Civil, Mechanical & Manufacturing Innovation
(ENG/CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.