* 2311405
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Socially-integrated robust communication and information-resource sharing technologies for post-disaster community self-reliance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Daniel Abramson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

When a disaster strikes, communities often become isolated and citizens come
together to help each other: people share resources, pass along information, and
take on tasks that are outside of their usual domains. These activities have
been reported in both academic literature and anecdotal documents. Some examples
include: New Yorkers’ sharing private vehicles and boats during the 2005 MTA
strike that crippled NYC transit services; and neighbors helping neighbors
escape from flooding caused by 2016’s Hurricane Matthew using rafts improvised
from inflatable mattresses in Rowland, NC. These peer-to-peer resource sharing
activities fill important gaps during times of disaster that cannot be fulfilled
by emergency response agencies. This project helps fill this gap by working with
urban and rural, higher- and lower-income communities in Washington State to
understand and advance more effective local information and resource
dissemination during a disaster. The project integrates hardware, robust
communication technologies, social capacities, and spatial conditions to
leverage and enhance place-based social networks for information-resource
sharing; and investigate a little-studied scientific frontier intersecting
communications, sharing, and disaster resilience. The results of the project
will be scalable and useful on a daily and emergency basis to communities that
increasingly face natural disaster risks and are interested in enhancing their
resilience through information and resource sharing.

More specifically, the project will co-design with the two communities and
conduct research in four thrusts. Thrust 1—robust communications, will develop
robust off-grid community-based networks that are owned and operated by the
community. Thrust 2—building community social networks for information-resource
sharing, will conduct surveys to collect information about people’s sharing
behavior and their social ties within a community, and develop novel models to
infer community-based social networks. Thrust 3—community-based information-
resource sharing, will develop models and strategies that will lead to efficient
information-resource sharing. The key hypothesis is that social network
structures affect the optimality and stability of information-resource sharing.
Thrust 4 (Dynamic Map your Neighborhood) integrates the results of Thrusts 1-3
and uses them to co-design and pilot-test applications with two communities in
WA (urban and rural). The diverse team expertise facilitates knowledge and
methods across disciplines through the design of robust communication
technologies, and novel ways to solicit social ties information and information-
resource sharing models that considers both model optimality and human inputs
(e.g., leader nominations from the communities).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.