* 2311328
* WHOI Sea Floor Samples Laboratory: Curation and distribution of samples from the sea floor in the service of marine science and education
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 717,874.00

This project supports the operation of the Seafloor Sample Laboratory at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. This repository has more than 26,000
samples from the world’s oceans. Samples from the collection are distributed to
researchers and educators across the globe. Research using collection samples
have addressed important problems related to climate change, ocean circulation,
ocean resources, and geohazards. Repository personnel engage in numerous
outreach and education activities. Undergraduate interns, including those from
underrepresented groups in the geosciences, assist in repository activities.

Previously acquired samples curated at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Seafloor Samples Laboratory provide opportunities for a wide variety of research
projects including preliminary studies, investigations where archived material
plays a supplemental role to ongoing research, and stand-alone ventures that
depend wholly on those materials already collected. Sample requests are
fulfilled for scholars, educators, and students from around the world at no cost
to the end user. Continuing support from the National Science Foundation enables
the Seafloor Samples Laboratory to provide consistent and quality facilities and
services to an international community of Earth and environmental scientists.
The purpose of the repository facilitates marine science and education by
providing access to valuable samples from the seafloor collected over many
decades. To do this lab personnel work to 1) expand and curate the collections,
2) distribute geological subsamples to clients, 3) promote access to the diverse
collections via outreach programs and web and data services, 4) serve as a
community resource for field sampling techniques, and 5) collaborate with and
train scientists and students in best practices. Data obtained from samples in
the collection are an enduring resource for the community to ask new and
innovative questions and for the development and application of new techniques.
These activities lead to novel scientific insights. Samples provided to
researchers are being used to examine a vast array of topics including
tectonics, rheology, minerology, climate change, geohazards, and environmental
pollution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.