* 2311267
* UNIDOS HSI Program Network Resource Center for Community Coordination
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* Monica Cardella, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2029
* USD 2,320,756.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Center project aims to coordinate and amplify
the work of Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). Hispanic Serving Institutions
play a unique role in promoting the participation and success of historically
underserved groups of students in STEM education. However, the successes of
individual faculty, staff and institutions can be further extended through
increased infrastructure, new partnerships and amplification of HSI successes
and HSI expertise. The UNIDOS center aims to further strengthen the impact of
HSIs by providing members of the HSI community opportunities to learn from and
build on each other’s work and form new partnerships that lead to innovations in
HSI education. Additionally, the UNIDOS Center will impact current HSI faculty,
staff and students by providing professional learning activities focused on
proposal development, teaching, and leadership designed to foster increased
student success through improved research, teaching, and programmatic
activities. UNIDOS is a Center for HSIs by HSIs, with a leadership team and
engaged partners that represent the diversity of Hispanic-Serving Institutions
and the many groups they serve.

The Center will be led by experts from five institutions with established
records in Hispanic/Latiné STEM student success: Florida International
University; Valencia College; California State University, Sacramento; the
University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras; and the University of Texas at El Paso.
The Center’s larger leadership team also includes professional organizations:
the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), the Society for
the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS)
and Excelencia in Education. The goals of the UNIDOS Center include: 1) Building
connections by developing stronger synergies between HSI community members
through organizing the HSI Program Awardee meeting, fomenting partnerships
through technology and intentional networking, and deploying collaborative
innovation sandbox meetings for participants to discuss bold ideas; 2) Building
capacity by developing the community’s proposal development, leadership, and
teaching capacity through proposal workshops and resources, a mentoring program,
and faculty development on teaching; 3) Elevating HSI voices by hosting
listening sessions with HSI community members, convene HSI Councils of Experts
to platform HSIs’ expertise, and form Working Groups to design toolkits and
resources on critical topics of HSIs; and 4) Facilitating communication by
amplifying the work of HSIs through a comprehensive communication plan,
including deployment of website, social media, newsletters, and a seminar
series. Additionally, the social network analyses and other external evaluation
will yield new knowledge on how HSI community members connect and collaborate
with each other. This project is funded by the HSI Program, which aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.