* 2311087
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium:  Physics-Model-Based Neural Networks Redesign for CPS Learning and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Weisong Shi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2026
* USD 197,000.00

Deep Neural Networks (DNN) enabled Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) hold great
promise for revolutionizing many industries, such as drones and self-driving
cars. However, the current generation of DNN cannot provide analyzable behaviors
and verifiable properties that are necessary for safety assurance. This critical
flaw in purely data-driven DNN sometimes leads to catastrophic consequences,
such as vehicle crashes linked to self-driving and driver-assistance
technologies. On the other hand, physics-model-based engineering methods provide
analyzable behaviors and verifiable properties, but do not match the performance
of DNN systems. These considerations motivate the work in this project which
aims at physics-model-based neural networks (NN) redesign, yielding HyPhy-DNN: a
hybrid self-correcting physics-enhanced DNN framework. HyPhy-DNN will provide
the performance of DNNs and the analyzability and verifiability of physical
models, thus providing a foundation for verifiably safe self-driving cars,
drones, and other CPS systems. Moreover, the HyPhy-DNN will fundamentally
advance the integration of deep learning and robust control to enable safety-
and time-critical CPS to safely operate with high performance in unforeseen and
dynamic environments.

The HyPhy-DNN will make three innovations in redesigning NN architecture: (i)
Physics augmentations of NN inputs for directly capturing hard-to-learn physical
quantities and embedding Taylor series; (ii) Physics-guided neural network
editing, such as removing links between independent physics variables or fixed
weights on links between certain physics variables to maintain the known physics
identity such as in conservation laws; and (iii) Time-frequency-representation
filtering-based activations for filtering out noise having dynamic frequency
distribution. The novel architectural redesigns will empower the HyPhy-DNN with
four targeted capabilities: 1) controllable and provable model accuracy; 2)
maximum avoidance of spurious correlations; 3) strict compliance with physics
knowledge; and 4) automatic correction of unsafe control commands. Finally, the
safety certification of any DNN will be a long-term challenge. Hence, the HyPhy-
DNN shall have a simple but verified backup controller for guaranteeing safe and
stable operation in dynamic and unforeseen environments. To achieve this, the
research team will integrate HyPhy-DNN with an adaptive-model-adaptive-control
(AMAC) framework, the core novelty of which lies in fast and accurate nonlinear
model learning via sparse regression for model-based robust control. The HyPhy-
DNN and AMAC are complementary and will be interactive at different scales of
system performance and functionalities during the safety-status-cycle, supported
by the Simplex software architecture, a well-known real-time software technology
that tolerates faults and allows online control system upgrades.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.