* 2311187
* Collaborative Research: Design, Modeling and Active Learning of Quantitative-Sequence Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xinwei Deng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 181,968.00

A new type of experiment concerning both quantitative and sequence (QS) factors
has recently drawn great attention in science and engineering applications. In
chemotherapy, to develop efficient drug combinations involving several drug
components, researchers need to conduct experiments optimizing both the doses
and the sequence orders of drug components. Such a problem raises new challenges
for statisticians since the input space is semi-discrete and grows exponentially
with the number of drugs. Researchers rely more than ever on statistical
modeling and active learning to identify optimal settings given limited
experimental resources. Additionally, QS experiments often have specific
requirements. In the computer experiment for metal additive manufacturing
processes, the output response is binary (success/failure), and it requires both
interpolation and uncertainty quantification, which is an unsolved problem in
the current literature. In this project, the investigators will provide
systematic solutions to QS experiments, addressing challenges in design,
modeling, uncertainty quantification, and active learning. The outcome of this
project will help save experimental costs in applications involving QS factors.
The applications to chemotherapy will help advance cancer research in the U.S.,
while the applications to manufacturing processes will enhance the industrial
competitiveness of the U.S. Also, this project provides research training
opportunities for graduate students.

Active learning in experiments, aka reinforcement learning under the broad
context of machine learning, allocates runs in an adaptive manner, which is
generally more efficient than one-shot experiments for optimizing the
experimental settings. This project will establish new Gaussian process-based
models for physical experiments with QS factors, based on which new active
learning procedures will be developed. For analyzing computer experiments, a
novel Hopfield process (HP) framework will be established as an accurate
surrogate for interpolating binary (and categorical) outputs, which will
facilitate uncertainty quantification and active learning. Optimal QS
experimental designs will also be constructed by combing several Williams-
transformed good lattice point sets, which possess desirable properties
including space-filling, orthogonality, and paired balance. This research
project will provide systematic solutions for various types of QS experiments
that are of interest in scientific research and industrial applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.