* 2311164
* A new parametric model, likelihood methods, and other advancements for multivariate extremes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Cooley, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 299,965.00

Understanding extremal dependence in high dimensions is essential for
quantifying risk arising from a combination of multiple factors in a variety of
disciplines including the environmental and climate sciences. When dependence is
described by covariance, many statistical methods exist to characterize and
model structure for high-dimensional data. Covariance, however, is a poor
descriptor of a distribution's joint tail and methods specifically designed for
extremes are necessary for accurate quantification of joint risk. While
theoretically-justified frameworks for describing extremal dependence are known,
statistical methods for high dimensional extremes are very much needed by
practitioners. Building on the investigator's previous work, this project will
present and develop the properties of a new multivariate distribution for
extremes. The distribution is characterized by a parameter matrix which
summarizes pairwise tail dependencies like a covariance matrix, but which is
linked to a theoretically-justified framework for extremes. This distribution,
coupled with tools in development by the investigator, will allow a practitioner
to model and characterize risk for high dimensional data arising in finance,
insurance, or meteorological applications. The project will also involve
training a graduate student in extreme value analysis and collaboration with
atmospheric scientists in government labs.

In more detail, recent work on transformed-linear models for extremes coupled
with characterizing extremal dependence via the tail pairwise dependence matrix
(TPDM) has built connections between extremes modeling and traditional linear
statistics methods. Extremal analogues to principal component analysis, spatial
autoregressive models, linear autoregressive moving average (ARMA) time series
models, linear prediction, and partial correlation have been constructed.
However, parameter estimation has thus far been somewhat ad-hoc, and has been
based minimizing squared differences between the model's TPDM values and
empirical estimates. This project presents a new probability distribution, the
transformed-linear T-distribution, which has the TPDM as a parameter. As this
distribution has a closed-form density, it makes likelihood estimation of the
TPDM possible. Additionally, this project will extend the investigator's recent
linear time series work to build non-causal models, as the causal analogs to
classical ARMA models show an asymmetry not seen in the data. This project will
also extend the recent partial tail correlation work to add causal direction to
the graphical models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.