* 2311274
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: New Theory, Algorithms and Applications for Large-Scale Bilevel Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kaiyi Ji, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,190.00

In recent years, the world has witnessed significant progress in optimization
for emerging fields, including meta-learning, fine-tuning, automated
hyperparameter selection, continual learning, fair batch selection, adversarial
learning, and artificial intelligence (AI)-aware communication networks.
Problems arising from these fields often exhibit a common nested optimization
structure, which has motivated the study of bilevel optimization. However, there
are many theoretical and computational challenges in large-scale bilevel
optimization problems, e.g., those arising from machine learning on massive
amounts of data in high-dimensional feature domains that have manifold
constraints. This project will provide a comprehensive study of bilevel
optimization theory, algorithms, and applications for large-scale problems. The
outcomes of this project will benefit researchers in academia, government labs,
and industry aiming to solve large-scale nested optimization problems in science
and engineering. New applications in information science, signal processing,
communications, statistics, and machine learning will be studied.

This project consists of three intertwined thrusts. The first thrust focuses on
developing fast and scalable Hessian-free bilevel algorithms with convergence
rate guarantees. Specifically, several Hessian-free approaches will be designed
and analyzed using methods of fully single-loop momentum, finite-difference
matrix-vector estimation, and residual response Jacobian estimation. The second
thrust aims to develop primal-dual, primal, and pessimistic bilevel methods, in
addition to the analysis of convergence in the difficult case where no unique
lower-level solution exists. In the third thrust, the investigators will develop
algorithms for solving bilevel problems on non-linear manifolds and analyze the
associated convergence of these algorithms. The developed algorithms will be
implemented in the context of real-world applications, including fairness-aware
machine learning, continual learning, resource allocation over communication
networks, hyperparameter selection of principal component analysis, and
dictionary learning models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.