* 2311356
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Legacy of the Gulkana Site: Collaborative Digital Archaeology and Northern Dene Technology
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Harold Cooper, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2026
* USD 62,800.00

The Gulkana archaeological site (GUL-077) presents early and significant
evidence for metalworking innovation in the Subarctic. Nearly one third of all
pre-contact copper artifacts recovered from the Alaska-Yukon region were found
at GUL-077. The site is therefore important to archaeological understanding of
Northern Dene technological adaptation as well as the origins and development of
metalworking in North America more generally. The Gulkana site is also
meaningful to the Ahtna, who are descended from the siteâ€™s inhabitants. By
applying digital techniques and collaborating with Ahtna communities to
interpret the site, this project will advance knowledge of Indigenous
metalworking in Alaska and make legacy records of previous research on Northern
Dene technological innovation more accessible to archaeologists, Ahtna people,
and the broader public.

The objectives of this research are to: understand copper technologies at the
Gulkana site; conduct spatial analysis of the site using a behavioral framework;
and work collaboratively with Ahtna communities and organizations to interpret
site materials and manage resulting data. Phase 1 of the project involves
digitization of the excavation records associated with the site and creation of
a site map; these activities will provide opportunities for community engagement
through internships and annual youth camps. Phase 2 employs spatial analysis to
identify activity areas to understand distribution of copper and other artifact
types within the site. Findings will be collaboratively interpreted to advance
understanding of Northern Dene technology. Broader impacts include training and
experiential learning for middle-grade youth and enhanced local engagement with
the Ahtna past through outreach activities. Results will be disseminated through
a dissertation and a collaborative conference presentation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.