* 2311638
* EAGER: ATMARS, an AuTonomous underwater vehicle with ancillary optics to measure MARine Snow size, concentration, and descent rate.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Jules Jaffe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2025
* USD 298,461.00

It is well known that the ocean sequesters approximately 25% of atmospheric
carbon dioxide which is critical to the mediation of climate change. This
therefore promotes the need for enhanced understanding of carbon sequestration
and transport in the ocean. Given the importance of oceanic sequestration and
the global crisis due to the greenhouse effect, an accurate assessment of carbon
flux into the deep ocean is imperative. Despite this need, our capability to
calculate the transport of marine snow, a major mechanism for carbon storage,
has lagged. A now classic review in 1988 (Aldridge and Silver) outlined the
importance of marine snow from many points of view, including both the
production and the presence of microbial activity. Interestingly, they state
“The greatest challenge to the study of marine snow at present is the
development of appropriate technology to measure abundances and characteristics
of aggregates in situ.” That challenge remains today. Among the most promising
techniques are optical methods. However, advances are needed to enable the
optimal translation of imaged marine snow into carbon content and sinking
velocities. Specifically, an underwater vehicle is needed that will solve the
problem that has vexed the estimate of marine snow descent rates by creating a
vehicle that is both “going with the flow” and, at the same time, measuring
particle vertical descent velocity. Based on this need, the project goal is to
develop a reasonably priced device for measuring carbon flux. To achieve this
goal, a relatively inexpensive (~$10k) autonomous, underwater, self-ballasting
vehicle with an onboard optical imaging system will be designed and tested.
Necessary developments to accomplish this goal are the design, fabrication, and
test of a vehicle that can both “see” and “track” particles as they descend
throughout the water column without affecting their descent rate. First, the
optical imaging system will be tested with water samples obtained from different
depths at sea. The researchers will then optimize the imaging system by testing
cameras and a variety of lighting options. Considering vehicle design, a vital
aspect is to provide images of sinking particles without affecting their descent
rate. The researchers will therefore test several vehicle configurations in deep
tanks that are filled with appropriately sized particles while the vehicle is
moved up and down. A positive result will be the observation of undisturbed
particles. Another important aspect of the development cycle will be to create
control software that will adjust vehicle buoyancy to follow particles as they
sink, thereby maintaining the particles in the field of view of the camera
system. Again, the researchers will test this with particle seeded deep tanks.
Following successful hardware development and lab tests, the researchers will
conduct sea tests to judge the vehicle’s capability to track descending
particles. The ensuing data set will be made available to the community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.