* 2311557
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Building an open source DFT+eDMFT database for quantum materials
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kristjan Haule, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,965.00

The discovery of new quantum materials plays a crucial role in technological
advancements. The use of data science tools, coupled with artificial
intelligence (AI), has the potential to greatly accelerate materials discovery.
However, the effectiveness of these tools relies on having large, high-quality
material databases. Unfortunately, many existing databases built over the past
decade have been inadequate in accurately predicting the properties of quantum
materials. Quantum materials exhibit highly correlated quantum mechanical
phenomena at the atomic scale, which manifest socially useful properties like
magnetism and superconductivity at the macroscopic scale. This project aims to
develop an open-source, high-fidelity materials database by implementing high-
throughput algorithms using modern quantum many-body methods, which have not yet
been employed for large-scale database creation. Additionally, the project
enhances existing large-scale materials databases using AI tools. To ensure
accessibility, this project will make the infrastructures and tutorials for
these databases freely available to the scientific community.

Important materials databases include exclusively physical property data created
from Density Functional Theory (DFT) engines which describe the physical
properties of simple materials in terms of independent electrons in the presence
of an average potential. For strongly correlated quantum materials, which cannot
be treated in this averaged manner, DFT often fails to predict correct physical
properties, while the Dynamical Mean Field Theory (DMFT) approach allows far
more accurate calculations of the same properties at a higher but still
practical cost. To overcome the DFT-based shortcomings of existing materials
databases and to transform data-science-driven materials discovery into a new
era, the team aims to build an open-source high-fidelity database of quantum
materials properties in which the DFT engine is replaced by the more precise
many-body method based on a combination of DFT and DMFT (DFT+DMFT), through the
development of a new high-throughput DFT+DMFT workflow. This high-fidelity but
the smaller database will be used to correct the existing large-scale DFT
databases using artificial intelligence tools, such as transfer learning,
allowing the automatic repair of the systematic errors in the less accurate DFT
data once the high-fidelity data in a smaller domain is known. This research
also aims to expand the knowledge and skills of students in quantum theory, AI
careers, and interdisciplinary fields that bridge materials and data science.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.