* 2311471
* ELEMENTS: CLAD  ENABLING DIFFERENTIABLE PROGRAMMING IN SCIENCE
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* David Lange, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Scientists face a rapidly growing scale and complexity of data. Deep learning
has proven to be a tremendously effective way of understanding large data sets,
using backpropagation techniques that rely on automatic differentiation (AD) to
provide efficient and scalable gradient-based optimization methods. Efforts to
generalize deep learning have resulted in the emerging Differentiable
Programming (DP) paradigm by incorporating a wide set of numerical computations
and allowing the use of general numerical codes in optimization-based pipelines.
Tasks such as parameter estimation, inverse problems, and apparatus design are
naturally formulated as optimization problems amenable to gradient descent. The
DP paradigm enables researchers to leverage domain knowledge while using
powerful new techniques to enhance their science. This project will enable the
use of differentiable programming techniques in large-scale science. C and C++
are the languages of choice for performance-sensitive scientific computing.
However, C++ is currently a major challenge for AD implementations, which do not
yet provide good feature coverage and adequate performance. Robustness,
performance, native language support, and support for modern hardware
architectures are critical for adoption in complex scientific pipelines.

This project will extend the source transformation AD tool “Clad” to provide
extensive C++ language support and interoperability capabilities. Deeply
integrated into the LLVM compilation toolchain, Clad re-uses the Clang compiler
frontend to differentiate C++ constructs, where it has access to the language
details to support the necessary C++ features. By using the compiler to
differentiate code, Clad provides advanced control over the differentiation
process. Clad is already a very capable software for AD research. This project
will: (a) extend support for C++ entities, including concurrency primitives to
easily take advantage of GPUs while respecting high-level program structure; (b)
facilitate AD interoperability and integration with large-scale scientific
codes; and (c) ease differentiable programming adoption in science. This
proposal will change Clad into sustainable cyberinfrastructure, and will engage
scientists from numerous domains to use Clad as part of a DP pipeline to gain
new insights from their data.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Physics within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.