* 2311597
* Collaborative Research: III: Small: Efficient and Robust Multi-model Data Analytics for Edge Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yan Wang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Many advanced edge computing applications rely on large-scale data analysis for
high-level decision making. Edge computing makes computing faster and more
efficient because it takes place near the physical location of either the user
or the data rather than sending all the information to the cloud. For example,
augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR) applications utilize data from high-
definition sensors (e.g., cameras, motion sensors, and microphones) to enable
accurate and robust human-computer interactions. Drones and electric vehicles
perform tracking, adjustments and obstacle recognition and avoidance via
analyzing data at the level of the vehicle. However, the current ability to
understand and manage various high-dimensional sensing data is obscured by
significant knowledge and data gaps due to the heterogeneous edge device and
environments, hindering the building of precise models for emerging edge
computing applications using data analytics. One important trend in edge
computing is utilizing artificial intelligence (AI) to extract complex knowledge
from various sensor measurements for precise modeling. However, most edge
devices have limited computing and memory resources, making it challenging to
perform sophisticated data analytics using AI while satisfying the time
requirements of most applications. Therefore, a heuristic data analytic
framework is needed to enable efficient and robust edge event prediction using
multi-model learning on resource-constrained edge devices. The goal of this
project is developing transformative machine learning and data analytics
technologies for enabling AI-based applications on resource-constrained edge
computing devices (e.g., IoT devices, AR/VR headsets, and drones). The outcome
of this project will advance data analytics and machine learning research of
deriving and integrating various high-dimensional sensing data from diverse data
sources and building robust predictive models for generic edge computing
applications.

This project addresses two major problems: 1) the gap between the data
complexity and limited computing resources on edge devices and 2) the gap
between the robust performance requirement and the multi-dimensional data and
complex data modeling from heterogeneous edge devices and environments. The
project develops an efficient and robust edge computing framework to provide
correctness guarantees on heterogeneous edge computing hardware across different
environments. In particular, deep neural network acceleration techniques are
designed to enable fine-grained data analytics on resource-constrained
commercial-off-the-shelf edge devices. Novel multivariate data analytic models
are developed to characterize the unique features of the target event based on
high-dimensional sensing data. Such models advance the usage of data science in
generic edge sensing tasks that usually suffer from long training times, low
prediction accuracy, and ineffective parameter selection. Additionally, the
project addresses the challenges arising from the heterogeneity in devices and
environments by developing environment-transferable features and models, which
enable easy deployment of AI-enabled applications across devices and
environments. The project seeks to integrate computer science research with
graduate and undergraduate curricula and promote female engineering student
involvement. The outcomes will be shared through conferences, journals, and
website accessibility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.