* 2311103
* Finite multivariate density mixtures: applications and new approaches
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Levine, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 160,000.00

Cluster analysis and classification of multivariate datasets are two of the most
important tasks in modern statistical and data sciences. By leveraging copula-
based density mixtures, this project will introduce new methods for clustering
and classification of multivariate data which exhibit sophisticated dependence
properties. The proposed methods will provide more reliable clustering solutions
that could be in turn used, for example, for development of new therapeutic
drugs and more precise quantification of gene interactions. This project will
involve students, both at the undergraduate and graduate levels, to work on the
computational aspects of this interdisciplinary research. The particular focus
of the project will be on bolstering broader participation in statistical
sciences and involvement of mentees from the underrepresented groups. Many of
the students will be recruited through the National Alliance for Doctoral
Studies in the Mathematical Sciences (commonly called simply “Math Alliance”)
that is headquartered at Purdue University.

Multivariate mixture models are widely applicable in many areas of statistics.
They are particularly useful in clustering and classification of multivariate
high-dimensional data. The majority of model-based clustering techniques for
multivariate data are based on multivariate normal models and their direct
generalizations. However, this approach is quite restrictive since, in most
cases, it is difficult to model clusters of non-elliptical shapes. Even where it
is possible, these models tend to be limited in their capabilities to cluster
multivariate data of mixed types that include both continuous and discrete
random variables. This project will develop an alternative to the existing
model-based clustering methods for multivariate data. This alternative is based
on using copula-based density mixtures which will allow for modeling a vast
variety of dependence structures. Furthermore, the proposed solution will also
allow for the principled clustering of datasets containing both continuous and
discrete observations. The immediate outcome of this project will be the
development of a family of computationally efficient algorithms. Such algorithms
will provide reliable clustering of objects under the minimal assumptions. The
proposed methodology will be widely applicable to such areas as clustering of
genes and other biological entities in transcriptomics data as well as
clustering of text documents, where the number of dimensions may be equal to the
size of the vocabulary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.