* 2311969
* III: Small: Statistical Inference through Data-Collection and Expert-Knowledge Incorporation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mahdi Imani, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 384,214.00

Recent technological advances have provided opportunities for studying a wide
range of complex systems in science and engineering, including biological and
environmental processes, cyber-physical systems, and social systems. Accurate
modeling of these systems can help characterize their temporal behavior,
diagnose and forecast abnormalities, and predict and control their future
behavior. For instance, advances in single-cell high-throughput technology have
recently provided the opportunity for the deep system-level understanding of
genomic systems and the discovery of new effective solutions for early
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of chronic diseases. However, the lack of
access to targeted data and the difficulty of acquiring such data pose
significant challenges to accurately modeling complex systems. This project aims
to develop algorithms that advance data collection and incorporate user and
expert knowledge into the modeling process. Furthermore, the research will
support the cross-disciplinary development of a diverse cohort of PhD and
undergraduate students at Northeastern University and promote diversity in
research through multiple initiatives.

This project aims to advance inference of dynamical systems by developing
statistical methods that leverage advanced techniques such as reinforcement
learning, Bayesian statistics, and machine learning. The technical aims of the
project are divided into two thrusts. The first thrust develops statistical
learning techniques that effectively capture and quantify valuable expert
insights into the inference process. These methods quantify the expert knowledge
incorporated within data without requiring expert oversight. The second thrust
develops approaches to systematize data collection for causal and accurate
inference of complex systems and processes. The proposed approaches leverage the
system and data structures, as well as the associated uncertainty, to achieve
effective data collection. The project employs the proposed methods in genomics
applications, including topology inference in gene regulatory networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.