* 2311098
* Dynamic treatment regimes  via smooth surrogate loss: theory, methods, and computational aspects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nilanjana Laha, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 33,914.00

In complex diseases such as cancer, sepsis, or depression, patients often
require treatments in multiple stages due to the dynamic nature of the disease.
In such cases, physicians may need an algorithm or policy to switch to an
alternative treatment option when necessary, in addition to prescribing the
initial treatment. Furthermore, since patients respond differently to
treatments, physicians need to personalize the treatment policy based on each
patient's specific needs and profile. This project aims to utilize modern,
flexible machine learning techniques and existing patient data to identify the
optimal treatment policy, known as the optimal dynamic treatment regime (DTR),
in such time-varying situations. Ensuring scalability to real-world electronic
health record data with a large sample size will be a key focus. This project
will also develop and distribute user-friendly open-source software and provide
research training experiences for graduate students.

Recent research has connected DTR policy learning to sequential classification
problems, enabling the integration of machine learning techniques. However,
currently, computationally efficient methods for solving the resulting
classification problems are limited to specific cases, such as binary-treatment
settings, and are prone to variance inflation. The first step of this project
aims to demonstrate that the underlying sequential classification in any DTR
policy learning problem can be provably solved via a smooth surrogate problem.
This surrogate problem will be amenable to scalable machine-learning tools, such
as stochastic gradient descent, facilitating fast implementation. In the second
step, this project will combine the aforementioned machine-learning-based method
with model-based techniques to construct a more stable hybrid estimator that is
robust to potential model misspecifications. In addition, this project will
comprehensively investigate the performance limits of the resulting methods by
integrating classification theory, offline reinforcement learning, and the
theory of nonparametric statistical inference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.