* 2311024
* Robust and scalable algorithms for learning hidden structures in sparse network data with the aid of side information
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Adel Javanmard, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 275,000.00

Network data is becoming increasingly relevant in various areas, including
social sciences, biology, computer science, and engineering. In the social
sciences, network data is used to study social interactions and relationships,
such as friendship networks, political affiliations, and knowledge transfer
networks. In biology, network data is used to model and analyze biological
systems, such as gene regulation networks, protein-protein interaction networks,
and food webs. Learning the hidden structures within networks, in particular
detecting and modeling community structures, is of paramount importance. This
process not only enhances the interpretability of data but also enables data
compression, manages data heterogeneity by detecting latent subpopulations and
fitting appropriate models to each, and addresses the issue of missing labels.
Despite a plethora of clustering algorithms, current approaches often suffer
from scalability and robustness issues, limiting their effectiveness in real-
world applications. Furthermore, as data sharing becomes more prevalent, there
is often a wealth of contextual information available about the nodes in a
network, such as demographic information or browsing history for users on an
online platform, that can be effectively combined with network data to greatly
enhance the effectiveness of clustering procedures. To tackle these limitations
and advance the field, this project will develop robust and scalable inferential
network methods, which adapt to the heterogeneity of node degrees and allows to
combine nodewise side information with pairwise interaction data for a more
effective analysis. This project will support education in statistical and
machine learning research by providing training opportunities for graduate
students, from diverse backgrounds, to participate in cutting-edge research. It
also benefits society by providing tools for understanding and managing complex
network systems.

This research consists of three interrelated parts, which work in concert to
provide a unifying framework for learning latent structures in sparse network
data. In the first part, we devise clustering algorithms based on semidefinite
programming which allows us to combine the high-dimensional contextual
information on the nodes with the interaction graph. In the second part, we will
develop methods to improve the robustness of the inferential algorithms to
adversarial perturbations in the nodewise contextual data or the interaction
graph. The third part builds on the algorithms devised in the previous two parts
and provides low-computation and memory-efficient implementation of these
algorithms that can scale to large-scale network data. In addition, the project
will investigate the potential uses of this project across diverse domains,
utilizing the resulting clustering algorithms and optimization-statistical
tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.