* 2311013
* HSI Hubs: Leveraging Insights to Strengthen Regional Talent and Opportunities (LISTO)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Marla Franco, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,179,055.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Resource Hub titled “HSI Hubs: Leveraging
Insights to Strengthen Regional Talent and Opportunities (LISTO) aims to
support, engage, and work smarter across HSI communities to strengthen capacity
and scale readiness for broadening participation in STEM at HSIs. “Listo” in
Spanish translates in English to “clever”, “smart” and “ready”, which conveys
the spirit of the proposed work. The number of HSIs has increased by 80% over
the past ten years, yet few regional or statewide consortiums exist that provide
an intentional, networked approach to support institutions in moving toward an
understanding of what it means to be an HSI and develop strategies for
strengthening institutional capacity to serve and graduate Latinx students and
other students underrepresented in STEM. Project LISTO will generate broader
societal impacts by scaling infrastructure based on proven practices to
accelerate capacity building across HSIs. Impacts will be broadened in STEM at
HSIs by scaling evidence-based practices, modeling intentional and effective
structures for creating communities of practice across states or regions, and
establishing STEM workforce development efforts between HSIs and industry.
Project LISTO will contribute intellectual advancements in the areas of
evidence-based capacity-building practices at HSIs, proven strategies for
community building across HSI types (e.g., 2- and 4-year, rural, urban, private,
etc.), and offering structural blueprints for building statewide HSI coalitions
and communities of practice.

Project LISTO will support a growing community of HSIs and its stakeholders by
(1) scaling existing capacity-building practices to increase reach and impact,
(2) documenting the design of a statewide HSI consortium, and providing a
blueprint to inform community and capacity-building strategies in other states,
and (3) generating new knowledge on the impact of this statewide consortium on
broadening participation in STEM and associated leading factors. These goals
will be accomplished by implementing eight project activities, including
strategies to scale the infrastructure needed to generate and disseminate new
knowledge, successful practices, and effective design principles informed by
research and practice at HSIs. Outcomes will generate timely and in-demand
knowledge to inform regional or statewide coalitions of HSIs and will inform the
NSF HSI NET Centers and other Hubs. Intellectual merit will offer effective
practices for mutually meeting higher education and STEM workforce needs and the
much-needed know-how for establishing successful partnerships between the two.
Impacts will be broadened in STEM by scaling evidence-based practices, modeling
structures for creating communities of practice across states or regions, and
modeling strategies for establishing STEM workforce development efforts between
HSIs and industry. Results will be broadly disseminated through a variety of the
project’s activities (i.e., AZ HSI Summit, HSI Grants Development Institute,
Centering Servingness Webinar Series). The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.