* 2311124
* Collaborative Research: Elements: FaaSr: Enabling Cloud-native Event-driven Function-as-a-Service Computing Workflows in R
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 85,000.00

This project develops FaaSr, a new software that will facilitate the programming
and deployment of scientific computing applications written in the R language in
Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) cloud computing infrastructures. The FaaS model of
cloud computing supports dynamic, on-demand execution of computing functions in
servers that are automatically provisioned and managed, in a way that is both
cost-effective and scalable: users do not need to manage cloud servers
(including on-demand scaling) nor pay for idle time of unutilized servers. The
FaaS model thus has much potential for reducing the complexity and cost of
performing scientific computing in cloud infrastructures. To date, however, FaaS
platforms have been primarily designed to support Web-based applications,
resulting in a major gap between existing FaaS platforms and the scientific
community. This gap is particularly evident in the environmental sciences, where
R is the focal programming language. This is because: 1) there is no native
support for the R language in FaaS platforms, and 2) each FaaS platform has a
unique interface to deploy and manage workflows consisting of multiple
functions, thereby creating barriers for users to develop and deploy
applications on one or more FaaS platforms. This project bridges this gap by
developing open-source software to accelerate the adoption of event-driven FaaS
workflows for scientific applications. The FaaSr software will be distributed as
an easy-to-install R package and will provide simple interfaces to programmers,
while supporting multiple open-source and commercial cloud computing
infrastructures. The software will support a wide range of scientific computing
applications, in particular those that require dynamic event-driven processing
(such as forecasting and continuous data quality) in environmental science
subfields (including ecology and biodiversity). Ultimately, the project aims to
develop scalable, generalizable, and robust workflows that will advance the
capacity, practice, and training opportunities for ecological forecasting, an
active area of scientific research poised to significantly increase predictive
capacity for effective environmental decision-making and management.

The FaaSr software developed in this project will greatly expand the adoption of
FaaS cloud computing infrastructure. Currently, there are significant challenges
to be overcome before scientific applications written in the R language can
fully realize the potential of FaaS platforms, because R is not supported
natively, and because different platforms have different, incompatible
programming interfaces. Furthermore, scientific applications require workflows
consisting of multiple functions that are executed dynamically and communicate
by exchanging data as files in cloud storage. Different FaaS platforms have
different programming interfaces to accomplish these capabilities, leading to
increased complexity for developers and users. This collaborative,
interdisciplinary project overcomes these challenges by integrating expertise in
distributed systems, ecology, and forecasting together to design and implement
software that: is driven by scientific computing use cases; creates easy-to-use
interfaces; and builds on state-of-the-art distributed computing techniques and
frameworks. Specifically, the FaaSr software will make multiple novel technical
contributions, including: 1) it will allow end users to program a workflow at a
high abstraction level and with the R language; 2) it will include a unified,
easy-to-use interface for handling event invocation and argument parsing that
hides the complexity of programming for multiple FaaS interfaces from
developers, while supporting multiple FaaS frameworks, including GitHub Actions,
OpenWhisk, IBM Cloud Functions, and Amazon Web Services Lambda; 3) it will
include an easy-to-use interface for handling cloud data storage and access that
hides low-level details (e.g., access endpoints and credentials) using de-facto
standard interfaces and file formats; and 4) it will implement a unified
approach to compose directed acyclic graph workflows that can be automatically
mapped to programming interfaces supported by different FaaS platforms.
Experiences with the design, implementation, and deployment of FaaSr will
contribute new techniques and technologies in distributed/cloud computing, with
lakes and reservoirs studied as part of this project providing a realistic
testbed for assessing performance, extensibility, and availability of the
software. Furthermore, our team will build on and expand our existing program
for cross-disciplinary research exchanges of undergraduate and graduate students
that provide novel training at the intersection of computer science, freshwater
science, and ecosystem modeling.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.