* 2311169
* I-Corps:  Clinical Opportunities for Lens Free Holographic Urinalysis
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Nicholas Durr, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device for improving the management of indwelling urinary
catheters (IUC) in the hospital setting. Tens of millions of IUCs are inserted
each year in the United States to relieve urinary retention, monitor urine
output, and manage urination. However, a significant problem occurs with
catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CA-UTI) - the most common
nosocomial infection in the United States â€“ which are caused by bacterial
colonization of the urinary tract following placement of an IUC. A significant
risk factor for CA-UTI is prolonged use of an IUC, and a majority of these cases
are believed to be preventable through timely intervention. Currently, the
standard of practice is to examine urine with the naked eye for problems and
measure volume intermittently. Early detection of inflammatory biomarkers and
bacterial load in the urinary system using the proposed technology may enable
objective and timely removal of the IUC before the onset of CA-UTI. In addition
to enabling the development of evidence-based triggers for catheter removal,
real-time monitoring of urine flow has the potential to increase fluid
management precision and detect acute changes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a lens-free imaging device
capable of continuous, non-invasive analysis of urine for measuring clinical
biomarkers to detect early signs of catheter-associated urinary tract infections
(CA-UTI). The proposed device sits in-line between an indwelling urinary
catheter (IUC) and an attached urine drainage bag, providing real-time
urinalysis at the bedside. Lens-free digital holography is used to acquire
holograms of the urine as it flows through the device. A 3D sparse phase
recovery reconstruction algorithm transforms single raw 2D hologram images into
reconstructed 3D volumes. Particulates in each 3D volume are classified and
quantified for reporting clinically relevant information including bacteria
colony forming units (CFUs), white blood cell count, and the presence of red
blood cell casts. A benchtop prototype system has been validated using human
urine with known additions of red and white blood cells and/or E. coli bacteria.
Measurements made with the benchtop system were compared with measurements from
conventional methods, and the system was confirmed to be sensitive to
concentrations several orders of magnitude above and below thresholds of pyuria,
hematuria, and bacterial CFUs used for the diagnosis of UTIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.