* 2311078
* CAREER: Automated Synthesis of Compound Machines Using Computational Design Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Kai James, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 09/30/2024
* USD 157,421.00

Computer algorithms have been used to automatically generate and optimize
designs for everything from aircraft wing structures to cardiovascular stents.
However, these algorithms are typically limited to the design of single-body
structures, with all motion occurring by means of structural deformation. This
limits the complexity of the designs that can be synthesized, preventing the
design of multi-body systems containing several moving parts. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) project will advance the science of
automated computational design by creating new algorithms capable of generating
and optimizing multi-body systems. Starting with only a mathematical description
of design materials and physical environment, the algorithms will automatically
generate assemblies for compound machines that combine multiple basic components
such as levers, hinges, wheels, and axles, which together form the foundation of
all mechanical design. This work will enable a new level of automated
computational design not previously possible under existing design frameworks.
The knowledge obtained from this research will benefit a wide range of
applications including nanoscale mechanisms for delivery of medications and
self-reproducing robotic systems. The project also involves an integrated
education program featuring a STEM Pipeline program for undergraduate students
from underrepresented minority groups. The program includes bi-weekly labs and
seminars, team design projects, and K-12 outreach activities.

The algorithms created in this project will rely upon several novel design
formulations devised specifically for the design task. Chief among these will be
an original topology optimization-type framework in which the internal
topologies of multiple planar design domains are optimized simultaneously, while
also optimizing the connectivity between adjacent domains to form compound
mechanisms whose components can slide and rotate freely with respect to one
another. The mechanical behavior of the designs will be modeled using a
combination of finite element analysis and flexible multibody dynamics to
capture the rigid body motion and the elastic deflection of the system
components. Additionally, adjoint sensitivity analysis will be used to derive
and compute the design sensitivities that will power the gradient-based
optimization algorithms. The new design framework will be validated via high-
fidelity computational simulations, as well as through fabrication and
experimental testing. This testing will be used to quantify the efficiency of
the generated designs, as determined by their mechanical and geometric
advantage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.