* 2311206
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Quakeworx - An extensible software framework for earthquake simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Yehuda Ben-Zion, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2028
* USD 570,000.00

Physics-based forecasts of seismic hazard from future earthquakes are important
for developing plans for land use, building codes, transportation and
communication infrastructure, power and water systems, and many other aspects
that are integral to society. The Quakeworx framework is a new multi-
disciplinary collaboration to enable a wide community of users to access state-
of-the-art physics-based models of rupture forecasts, further improve existing
tools, and validate model results. Quakeworx also helps advance the science of
rupture forecasts, obtain new insights on earthquake physics, improve seismic
hazard estimates, and create new opportunities for STEM education and
engagement. Quakeworx enables rapid immersion of students, post-docs, and early
career scientists with state-of-the-art simulation and analysis tools that aid
in modernizing education and training in earthquake physics, computational
modeling, software engineering, and related fields. The project contributes to
the national interest by supporting a more resilient society with improved
capabilities for forecasting earthquakes and assessing seismic hazard, which are
foundational for mitigation of seismic risk, contributing to STEM workforce
development, and facilitating translation of results to the society at large.

A core element of Quakeworx is a new science gateway, which provides access to
state-of-the-art methods that combine novel physics-based modeling frameworks
with standardized pipelines for simulations, data-based assimilation to inform
and validate models on-demand, and machine-learning pattern recognition on big
datasets. The project enables simulations of coupled evolution of earthquakes
and faults producing diverse outputs (seismicity, ground motion, fault network
configuration, strain rates, topography), and facilitates the development,
validation, application, and reproducibility of improved rupture forecasts for
research and education. Quakeworx curates and seeds many leading tools and data
products that leverage existing community data models describing fault and rock
properties as simulation input. Additionally, the gateway enables the research
and education community to contribute, curate and share tools for simulations,
data analysis and visualization, data products and knowledge base. The project
provides a foundation that eliminates barriers due to lack of expertise and lack
of access to compute resources, and it delivers an innovative service-oriented
and easy-to-use cyberinfrastructure to a large user community.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education
(RISE), the Division of Earth Sciences (EAR), and the Geophysics Program within
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.