* 2311324
* I-Corps: Thermophotovoltaic system without a vacuum or air gap
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Longji Cui, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of novel zero gap thermophotovoltaic technology based on fundamental
discovery in energy conversion science and material engineering. The innovation
provides a feasible pathway, both technologically and economically, to
revolutionize the field of waste heat harvesting and management. This new
technology will improve the scientific understanding of a broad range of
relevant physical effects and potential enhancement mechanisms to further
improve energy conversion performance in other waste heat and renewable energy
technologies. From the societal and commercial perspective, this project will
impact the global trillion-dollar energy and building markets, leading to the
improvement in both energy efficiency and substantiality and helping to address
the grand challenge of the zero emissions by 2050.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a high performance
thermophotovoltaic energy conversion technology (zero gap thermophotovoltaics)
that provides thermophotovoltaic renewable power generation to the residential
thermal energy market and co-generation to improve the energy efficiency and
sustainability of existing residential thermal energy systems. The fundamental
mechanism behind the proposed zero gap thermophotovoltaic technology has been
validated with proof-of-concept device fabrication and tests. The unique device
structure addresses the existing issues of traditional thermophotovoltaic
technology, allowing much higher power output and efficiency, and making it
possible for cost-effective, large-scale manufacturing and maintenance-free
system level integration. These products, including energy co-generators and
heat pump performance augmentation add-on devices, can be integrated easily
within existing residential thermal energy systems. They provide a significant
competitive advantage to solve the existing challenges faced by the current
thermal energy systems manufacturers and integrators: the tradeoffs among energy
efficiency, cost, and greenhouse emission reduction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.