* 2311746
* Conference: Bridge to Postsecondary Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Bryan Twarek, COMPUTER SCIENCE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2024
* USD 556,134.00

The Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) will lead the Bridge to
Postsecondary Computer Science (CS) project and host convenings of the CS
Education community and produce a report outlining recommendations on the
content of a high school computer science course to satisfy a graduation
requirement, the alignment of such a course with Advanced Placement computer
science courses and introductory post-secondary courses, and model pathways for
high school computer science beyond an introductory course for all students. The
Bridge to Postsecondary CS project seeks to understand and provide
recommendations based on how these forces should inform the future of
foundational high school computer science, AP Computer Science, the introductory
experience at institutions of higher education, and course pathways in high
school. Timed to provide recommendations ahead of updates to the CSTA Standards
and AP computer science course frameworks, the results of this project have the
potential to influence content used by over 40 state departments of education,
curriculum and professional development providers across the field, and high
school courses taken by tens of thousands of students annually.

Across 18 months, the Bridge to Postsecondary Computer Science (CS) project will
host convenings of the CS Education community and produce a report outlining
recommendations on the content of a high school computer science course to
satisfy a graduation requirement, the alignment of such a course with AP
computer science courses and introductory post-secondary courses, and model
pathways for high school computer science beyond an introductory course for all
students. With the long-term goal of creating clear alignment of CS courses that
fulfill a high school graduation requirement, AP computer science courses, and
introductory post- secondary computer science courses, Bridge to Postsecondary
CS partners expect the following project outcomes over the grant period: (1)
three meetings of representatives from across the K- 13 CS education landscape
(including teachers, administrators, 2- and 4-year college instructors,
curriculum developers, and industry), with written summaries shared with the
public; (2) release of a written report with recommendations on the content that
should be included in courses satisfying a high school graduation requirement,
and how future CSTA standards and AP courses could be adjusted to align with
such a course; (3) models of high school computer science courses (high level
course descriptions and outcomes) that create potential pathways beyond an
introductory course for all students; and (4) a framework that enables a
systematic and deliberate process for examining and recreating similar pathways
in the future. To broaden participation, the project will seek to align various
stakeholders, at a time when momentum is on CS educationâ€™s side, to create an
aligned and coherent course framework that could increase access, participation,
high school and college course credentials, and have it aligned to industry
needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.