* 2311399
* Making Use of the Curse of Dimensionality in Modern Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hao Chen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2026
* USD 275,000.00

This research project delves into cutting-edge data analysis, frequently dealing
with high-dimensional or non-Euclidean data, such as sensor readings, genomic
information, imagery, and network datasets. Such data is commonly encountered
across diverse disciplines, including biology, social science, computer science,
and astronomy. A major challenge in analyzing this data is the curse of
dimensionality, which causes traditional tools to degrade rapidly as the number
of dimensions or features grows. While previous attempts have focused on
reducing the dimensionality of the data or through regularization techniques,
these methods often exhibit limitations. In contrast, this project adopts an
innovative strategy by harnessing the patterns that emerge as a result of the
curse of dimensionality to bolster data analysis. The project aims to provide
valuable tools for data analysis and explore the role of statistics in the era
of big data. The tools developed within this project will be made available as
open-source software packages with thorough documentation, enhancing
collaboration between the statistics community and researchers from various
scientific fields and making data analysis procedures more transparent. The
project also includes training and educational components for undergraduate and
graduate students, equipping them with interdisciplinary data analysis skills
that will be invaluable for the next generation of researchers.

This project seeks to develop innovative methodologies and foundational theories
for crucial data analysis tasks involving high-dimensional and non-Euclidean
data. Specifically, the project will create a pioneering high-dimensional
classification framework that leverages interpoint distance ranks and takes into
account the curse of dimensionality, resulting in significantly reduced
misclassification rates compared to existing methods across various settings.
Moreover, the project will establish a unified community detection framework
capable of identifying all three community structures -- assortative,
disassortative, and core-periphery â€“ without prior knowledge of which community
structure the network is. By linking these distinct structures to high-
dimensional data behaviors, where the core-periphery structure naturally emerges
due to the curse of dimensionality, the unified framework exhibits superior
performance in numerical studies on simulated and real datasets across all three
mixing patterns, whereas existing methods struggle in at least one of these
patterns. Lastly, the project will develop an innovative high-dimensional
clustering framework that employs the patterns of curse of dimensionality to
reduce misclustering rates. These methodological and theoretical advancements
will enhance the understanding of modern, complex data from diverse fields,
promoting the comprehension of significant scientific issues in these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.