* 2311708
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Scalable Performance and Accuracy analysis for Distributed and Extreme-scale systems (SPADE)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Shirley Moore, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 797,666.00

Advances in computer simulations have made scientific discoveries more
accessible. However, with the evolution of computing technology, each new
generation of hardware and software presents unique performance and reliability
challenges. These challenges must be addressed to fully harness the potential of
these evolving technologies. SPADE is a project aimed to tackle these issues
head-on. At its core, SPADE builds on the PAPI performance monitoring library -
a tool used by the High-Performance Computing (HPC) community for over two
decades. SPADE aims to enhance this legacy by creating methods that can assess
and improve performance and accuracy on a wide range of advanced and evolving
hardware and software technologies. This endeavor is not just about improving
computational science but also about fostering diversity and education of a new
generation of application scientists, engineers, and computer scientists. By
providing an understanding of, and the ability to, navigate the intricate
details of emerging technologies in the computing realm, SPADE is directly
contributing to the advancement of this field. This will also democratize access
to HPC, allowing a more diverse range of researchers and institutions to
contribute to scientific discovery. Moreover, as SPADE aims to improve the
capabilities of computer simulations, it enhances the ability to tackle a broad
range of challenges - from understanding climate change to drug discovery. In
essence, beyond advancing the HPC field, SPADE intends delivering a real-world
impact by unlocking the full potential of computational science.

The SPADE project focuses on advancing the monitoring, optimization, evaluation,
and decision-making capabilities for extreme-scale systems. These critical
capabilities are pivotal for both the High-Performance Computing (HPC) community
and the scientific applications community that leverage these systems. With the
evolution of HPC resources toward extreme scale, there is an increasing need for
integrated performance and accuracy analysis frameworks to understand and
mitigate performance and reliability challenges. To meet these needs, SPADE aims
to deliver software and application programming interfaces (APIs) that broaden
support for heterogeneity and scalability across a diverse range of computing
platforms, including emerging vendor technologies. The SPADE project intends to
utilize the established PAPI performance monitoring library to address the
demands of scientific and machine learning applications effectively.
Specifically, SPADE's mission includes: (1) developing monitoring capabilities
for innovative and advanced technologies across the hardware stack; (2)
designing novel abstractions that encapsulate the internal behavior of software
components and facilitate interoperability across the software stack; (3)
implementing a new performance and accuracy analysis framework that capitalizes
on the efficiency and flexibility of C++'s object-oriented nature; (4)
integrating new analysis functionality with various software stack layers and
scientific and machine learning applications; and (5) examining new accuracy vs.
performance trade-offs introduced with low-precision floating-point types. In
essence, SPADE facilitates innovations in cyberinfrastructure development by
enabling efficient and comprehensive resource utilization of extreme-scale
platforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.