* 2311355
* Frameworks: SCiMMA: Real-time Orchestration of Multi-Messenger Astrophysical Observations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Dale Howell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2027
* USD 3,554,724.00

The first neutron star merger detected in gravitational waves (GW170817), the
associated prompt gamma ray burst, and kilonova afterglow, opened a new window
on the universe revealing insights into many areas of astrophysics, including
stellar evolution, the neutron star equation-of-state, cosmology,
nucleosynthesis, the opacity of heavy elements, gamma-ray burst and jet physics,
galactic evolution, tests of general relativity, and more. This is but one
example of the power of multimessenger astrophysics (MMA), where electromagnetic
information is combined with sensing the universe in completely different ways,
either through the detections of particles or gravitational waves. MMA events
present unique challenges - bringing together previously siloed groups and
requiring standardization between different subfields, rapid response, and
global coordination of limited resources. This necessitates an overhaul in the
outdated communications infrastructure currently employed, where a relatively
modest investment can produce huge gains in the efficiency of billion-dollar
investments for experiments such as the LIGO-VIRGO-Kagra (LVK) collaboration,
the IceCube Neutrino Experiment, and the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. The SCIMMA
team is developing the infrastructure to bring together these siloed facilities
and their data in real-time, enabling for the first time a coordinated national
astrophysical ecosystem. This infrastructure will improve the efficiency of
identifying the electromagnetic counterparts to gravitational waves, high energy
particle and neutrino experiments, permitting more novel discoveries at the
intersection of high-energy physics and astronomy, and providing new ways to
probe the nature of gravity itself.

In previous work, the SCIMMA team surveyed the community and developed tools to
serve their needs, such as Hopskotch, a robust, rapid, and scalable Kafka-based
messaging system. On top of that SCIMMA has layered the Hopskotch Enabled Real-
time Messaging Service (HERMES), a web-based graphical user interface and
associated API. This solves the problem of standardization and is both simple to
use (no software needs to be installed), and yet complex enough to achieve new
kinds of automation through APIs. With the Hopskotch framework and HERMES
service, SCIMMA brings together a disparate network of facilities, orchestrating
follow-up during the LVK fourth observing run and beyond. HERMES blends human
and machine readability, a critical piece of missing infrastructure necessary
for the robotic and queue-based telescopes that are essential for the rapid
follow-up of MMA events. Hopskotch is in use, and has become critical for
internal LIGO use, including the distribution of LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA (LVK) alerts
in the O4 observing run. SCIMMA is taking Hopskotch from a prototype to a
production state and adding new features as requested by the community. New
features include connecting LVK to particle detectors such as IceCube, which in
turn will be connected to and interconnect ground-based observing facilities
such as the upcoming Vera C. Rubin Observatory. This builds on associations like
the Astrophysical Multi-messenger Observatory Network (AMON), and the
Astronomical Event Observatory Network (AEON). These efforts include: (1) a
devops team to insure continuous uptime, security, and gather feedback; (2)
upgrades to the Identity and Access Management system to allow private topics so
that sub-teams can use the same infrastructure to communicate as they would on
the public system; (3) the continued development of Hopskotch and HERMES to take
it from prototype to an industry-leading communications and standardization
tool; (4) interfacing with existing infrastructure, both astronomical
facilities, as well as services such as NASA GCNs, the Transient Name Server,
Treasure Map, brokers, and the TOM Toolkit. Together, these improvements reduce
redundancy in observations, allow for more rapid and frequent discovery of
electromagnetic counterparts, and make observatories more efficient.
Additionally, HERMES lowers the barriers to entry faced by smaller or less well-
resourced communities. SCIMMAâ€™s aim is to give everyone across the globe
streamlined real-time access to all the relevant public data for MMA events to
make it increasingly easier for all researchers to facilitate discovery, thereby
democratizing science.

This project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Physics at the Information
Frontier program in the Division of Physics within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.