* 2311610
* CSR: Small: A Fine-Grained Hierarchical Memory Management System for Applications with Dynamic Memory Demand on GPUs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Peng Jiang, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 168,646.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become an important component of modern
high end computer platforms due to their ability to deliver high throughput,
efficient computation. GPU utilization is therefore crucial to the performance
of many applications. Despite over a decade of study in GPU programming, an
important class of applications with dynamic memory demand is not well
supported. This research aims to simplify the programming and improve the
performance of dynamic-memory applications on GPUs. The outcome of this project
will unlock the power of GPUs for a wide variety of applications with complex
and dynamic memory usage, including bioinformatics, scientific computing, and
machine learning. Additionally, this project will contribute to the development
of high-performance computing courses and provide research opportunities to
underrepresented students at the institution.

There are mainly three challenges for supporting dynamic-memory applications on
GPUs. First, the dynamic data sizes in these applications require data storage
at multiple memory levels. Accessing and synchronizing data across the memory
hierarchy can be complicated and time-consuming. Second, the dynamic memory
consumption makes memory allocation nontrivial, as the amount of memory
allocated to each data object at different memory levels can significantly
affect performance. Third, many of these applications have complex and skewed
memory access patterns, which makes it difficult to determine the optimal data
placement in the memory hierarchy. This project aims to address the above
challenges by introducing a fine-grained, hierarchical memory management system
on GPU. The system provides a novel programming interface for managing multi-
dimensional tensors in the GPU memory hierarchy, which will facilitate the
development of dynamic-memory applications. Our system also provides automatic
memory pre-allocation and memory access optimizations, which simplify
performance optimization for these applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.