* 2311250
* Collaborative Research: Non-Parametric Inference of Temporal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hongyuan Cao, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 173,740.00

This project is driven by the need to address inquiries in diverse fields,
including environmental sciences, epidemiology, and economics among others. The
study of extreme weather events, such as tropical storms, requires
meteorologists to determine whether more potent tropical storms occur more
frequently than mid or low-level tropical storms over time. Epidemiologists
studying the transmissibility and severity of COVID-19 utilize clinical
laboratory data to evaluate the pattern of the trends. In investigating sea
pollution levels, earth scientists gather data on mercury concentration in
animals to determine whether there has been a rising trend in mercury
concentration over the years. The primary objective of this research project is
to enhance the methods used to tackle these questions and effectively
communicate findings to the scientific community and the public. More informed
decisions can be made based on the findings. This project also involves training
and mentoring graduate students through their active involvement in the
research.

The research team aims to develop innovative statistical methods to study
temporally observed or time-indexed multi-sample data, which consist of
measurements of different subjects made at different time points. Such data do
not fall within the conventional univariate or high-dimensional time series
since measurements at different time points may not have an inherent connection.
The investigators and collaborators will develop a systematic asymptotic theory
to address this challenge to estimate and infer temporally observed multi-sample
data. They will establish consistency, asymptotic normality, and an extremal
distribution theory for various associated statistics and study simultaneous
confidence bands and change points analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.