* 2311632
* GOALI: Frameworks: At-Scale Heterogeneous Data based Adaptive Development Platform for Machine-Learning Models for Material and Chemical Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* George Karypis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,500,000.00

This project seeks to establish a new technological paradigm and the software
infrastructure necessary for the development of Machine Learning (ML) models
capable of predicting the properties of unseen molecular and materials
systems/structures, thus enabling modeling of atomic behavior and the
computational discovery of new molecules and materials at significantly higher
throughput than afforded by existing first principles (quantum) methods. ML-
enabled materials discovery is poised to play a critical role in addressing
modern societal challenges such as energy sustainability and, as such, the
technology and infrastructure developed by this project are expected to have a
transformative impact across many scientific and engineering domains. The
platform facilitates access, sharing, and discovery of vast amounts of first
principles and experimental data, removing inefficiencies and accelerating
scientific discovery by enabling the development of ML models on a scale
previously inaccessible. To achieve these goals, this project is carried out in
partnership with Amazon Web Services (AWS), providing the necessary know-how for
the development of specialized open-source tools for training ML models at
scale. This project is committed to the advancement of diversity, equity and
inclusiveness in higher education, and as such it incorporates a variety of
mechanisms to include underrepresented and low-income students (high-school and
undergraduate) in its research activities across the four participating
universities (New York University, University of Minnesota, University of
Florida, and Brigham Young University), in addition to the mentoring of graduate
students, the development of teaching materials, and workshops aimed at
industrial outreach and training. To assure alignment between the
platform/software and community needs, this project is supported by an Advisory
Board of experts in cyberinfrastructure development, machine learning, material
and chemical sciences, and STEM outreach who evaluate and provide strategic
advice to the PIs.

The key technological advance that serves as the basis of this work are
"foundation models", an approach for building ML systems in which a model
trained on extremely large amounts of diverse and easily available data can be
adapted to diverse applications with a small amount of additional model fitting
(fine-tuning). This project thus focuses on the development of a foundation
model, called FERMat, for molecular and material property prediction, and ML
interatomic potentials for modeling atomic behavior. FERMat is to be delivered
via an integrated adaptive platform in the form of a software package and an
online framework for developing and deploying specialized ML models for
materials and chemistry applications, called "FERMat Apps". In collaboration
with AWS this project seeks to develop open-source software for training
foundation models like FERMat at scale on large amounts of highly heterogeneous
and multi-modal data. The high data needs will be met by leveraging and
significantly expanding the ColabFit Exchange, an online repository of first
principles and experimental data optimized for training of ML models, in
cooperation with a large number of materials and molecular data repositories,
standards organizations, and existing cyberinfrastructures. FERMat and any ML
model derived from it is designed to support uncertainty quantification (based
on information geometry, Bayesian, and frequentist approaches) to ensure the
robustness of predictions. As guiding target applications, this project
considers two problems of scientific interest: 2D material driven catalysis and
the prediction of molecular crystal polymorphs.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Materials Research within the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.