* 2311035
* Modeling Complex Functional Data and Random Objects in Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Yaqing Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 05/31/2026
* USD 74,181.00

The rapid advancement of technology has led to a surge in complex data across
various disciplines and society. This poses challenges for statistical analysis
and is the driving force behind this research project. Examples of such complex
data include brain connectivity correlation matrices, taxi trip networks,
microbial compositions, and age-at-death distributions, for which algebraic
operations such as sums and scalar multiplications are not well-defined and
hence cannot be directly analyzed by conventional statistical tools that rely on
algebraic operations to extract relevant information. This project aims to
develop statistical methodology to address these data analytic needs, supported
by theory and efficient computational implementations. This research project is
anticipated to lead to substantial insights, including characterization of the
co-evolution of brain regions of interest in early neurodevelopment, or
comparison of mortality or income distributions across different countries. The
methodology will also enable the detection of differences between groups of
complex data, such as between brain connectivity networks during normal aging
and pathological aging, and determine associations between different data
objects, such as body mass compositions and physical activity intensity
distributions. The project will also provide opportunities of statistical
training and research for undergraduate and graduate students. This research
project will develop statistical modeling and inference methods for functional
data and random objects that take values in a metric space which by default does
not possess vector space structures. The lack of linearity eliminates the
applicability of existing methods that have been developed for Euclidean data
and necessitates the development of novel tools for the analysis of such data.
One focus of the research is modeling of sparse multivariate functional data. A
factor analysis approach will be developed that lends itself to handling extreme
temporal sparsity through nonparametric regression, which will be used to
estimate the cross-sectional covariance matrices with the choice of a suitable
metric. Another focus of the research is statistical modeling and inference for
random objects in metric spaces. Principal component analysis (PCA) methods will
be developed to model general object data using metric geometry. An application
of the proposed object PCA to samples of random distributions in the Wasserstein
space will be investigated, which benefits from the Wasserstein geometry
potentially in conjunction with functional data analysis techniques. Inference
methods will be devised for testing homogeneity and independence for samples of
object data based on depth profiles, which uniquely characterize the law of
random objects for a wide range of metric spaces. These developments will be
accompanied by theoretical analysis and justification as well as scalable and
stable algorithms that will be made into publicly available software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.