* 2311330
* Collaborative Research: Aggregation and Electrification in a Laboratory-scale Volcanic Plume
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Stephen Solovitz, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 07/31/2026
* USD 312,929.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions have significant impacts on air traffic,
infrastructure, human health, and global climate. These events are a challenge
to monitor due to hazardous conditions, uncertainty in eruption timing, and
remote eruption locations. Hazard mitigation requires (1) remote detection of
eruption conditions and (2) an understanding of the ash distribution above the
volcano, which can then disperse across the upper atmosphere. This study will
address both critical issues by exploring the link between turbulence, ash
particle dynamics, and electrification. Following an eruption, volcanic ash
particles encounter turbulence, which can promote particle interaction, electric
charging, and clustering. Electrified plumes can trigger volcanic lightning, a
spectacular phenomenon that may be used to study hazardous eruptions in near
real-time. These discharges generate broadband radiation (e.g. radio waves) that
can carry information about the interior of the flow far beyond the immediate
vicinity of the volcano. Electrical forces can also cause clustered particles to
combine, accelerating their fall back to the ground. In addition, particle
aggregation is strongly influenced by moisture in the plume and the atmosphere.
These processes are critical to the hazards of volcanic ash, yet they are
challenging to model. The effects of turbulence, aggregation, and
electrification are closely linked, but their interactions have never been
experimentally quantified. Hence, there is a need for improved measurements of
these effects, which can be used to create accurate models of volcanic ash
transport. This project will enhance the education of three graduate students
through participation in these experiments and through scientific communication
training through which they will develop hands-on demonstrations for public
outreach.

This project aims to develop improved predictions of volcanic plume behavior
through high-accuracy experiments and advanced computational models. The
research team will conduct experimental measurements of turbulent jets filled
with particles, examining both aggregation and electric fields. High-resolution
optical techniques will study turbulence and clustering in the particle
mixtures, both with and without moisture. Electrical sensors will measure
particle charging, and the measurements will be linked to models of the eruption
conditions. The results will be integrated into a computational model, which can
be used to examine volcanic plume conditions remotely. In addition, the research
will be presented to the public through a series of hands-on demonstrations at
the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) and the Smithsonian
Institution. This project was supported by both the Geophysics and the Petrology
and Geochemistry programs.

This project is jointly funded by the Geophysics Program, Petrology and
Geochemistry Program, and the Division of Earth Sciences to support projects
that increase research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide
variety of institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.