* 2311493
* Fostering Two-Year College Collaborations with Disciplinary Societies
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* R Macdonald, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will serve the national interest by enhancing the involvement of
two-year college faculty in the fabric of disciplinary societies. Two-year
colleges play a critical role in undergraduate education, development of the
local workforce, and promoting the stability of their communities. As such, they
hold tremendous potential for disciplines to expand the number and diversity of
majors and professionals in the field. Yet, national and disciplinary reports
highlight a disconnect between two-year college instructors and their respective
disciplinary societies. This project will facilitate and evaluate a multi-stage
virtual workshop that includes participants from disciplinary societies and two-
year college faculty to enhance two-year college disciplinary engagement and
raise awareness of funding opportunities applicable to two-year colleges. The
workshop will be significant in supporting the development of discipline-
specific action plans, exploring cross-disciplinary possibilities, and
identifying ways to sustain two-year faculty involvement in disciplinary
societies.

The virtual workshop will include 60 to 75 participants from 12 disciplines from
multiple institutions and will consist of two synchronous two-day meetings with
asynchronous work in between. The goal will be for participants to develop and
initiate discipline-specific and cross-disciplinary action plans that enhance
the involvement of two-year college faculty in their respective disciplinary
societies. During the first two days of the workshop, participants will
participate in active plenary sessions, develop discipline-specific action plans
and explore multi-discipline STEM-focused projects. Then, asynchronously over
several months, teams will receive feedback, revise action plans, and begin
implementation. Finally, during the last two days of the workshop, teams will
present and receive feedback on action plans and learn more about external
funding opportunities. Cross-disciplinary teams will also engage in discussions
regarding initiating and sustaining ongoing support for partnerships between
two-year colleges and disciplinary societies. The project will be evaluated
through surveys and project artifacts and will advance understanding of how
organizational identity influences change processes. The project website and the
associated report will be distributed to all participants, professional
disciplinary societies, and will be available to all in the professional and
academic scientific community. The NSF program description on Advancing
Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions
of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at
two-year colleges. The program description promotes innovative and evidence-
based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.