* 2311738
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: PlantTransform: The Genetic Basis of Maize Regeneration and Applications to Plant Transformation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Sanzhen Liu, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,920,710.00

Genetic engineering of plants is critical for crop improvement and requires
regeneration of whole plants from genetically modified cells. While all plant
species possess genetic components to form whole plants from single cells, many
crop plants, including maize, have a limited ability to regenerate from cells
that are subjected to genetic modification. Master genes are hypothesized to be
involved in the process of plant regeneration. This is strongly related to the
ability of cell proliferation, an increase in the number of cells as a result of
growing and multiplying of cells. In this project, maize genes responsible for
controlling cell growth and multiplication will be identified using a novel
high-throughput screening approach. Validating key candidate genes in regulating
maize regeneration will be carried out through further testing. The primary goal
of this project is to better understand the genetic basis of plant regeneration
for improved genetic engineering strategies. This project will provide new ways
of analyzing and understanding plant genetics through the use of new genome
editing technologies, large amounts of data, and computational tools. It will
also offer training opportunities in various fields such as plant genetics,
genomics, molecular biology, genome editing, bioinformatics, and machine
learning.

Plant transformation and regeneration are key procedures of genome engineering.
The overarching goal of this proposal is to improve our understanding of the
genetic basis of plant regeneration. As each plant genome possesses totipotent
components to form an entire plant but the capability to regenerate is at low
levels in many crop species, it is hypothesized that conserved master genes for
totipotency governing embryogenesis exist and that additional non-conserved
genes account for differing regeneration ability, and these genes are associated
with the ability of cell proliferation and growth. In this project, maize genes
controlling cell proliferation and growth will be identified by conducting
analysis of transcriptomic gene networks, genomic comparisons, high-throughput
CRISPR screening, and functional validation of individual genes. The project
will provide innovative approaches, massive data, and computational tools for
integrative genomic analysis and discoveries. T

This project is jointly funded by the Plant Genome Research Program in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.