* 2311210
* Track 3: Mentoring for the Formation of Research Careers in Engineering (M-FORCE)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Rhonda Franklin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 06/30/2028
* USD 800,000.00

NSF and many others have long recognized the need for more underrepresented
minority (URM) participation at every level of the engineering workforce. While
some progress has been made in the past decade, it is clear that URMs tend to
encounter social and personal obstacles that their well-represented counterparts
do not face as they navigate the road from undergraduate training to workforce
participation and career development. We believe that key mentoring strategies
at the graduate school level, along with targeted introductions to research and
mentoring opportunities for undergraduates, will help increase both the quantity
of URMs entering the engineering workforce and the quality of experiences URMs
need to thrive in high-level engineering careers. In particular, we aim for
“best practices” mentoring that enables URM engineering graduate students to
better understand and envision 1) research-based engineering careers; 2)
transdisciplinary, team-based approaches needed to solve complex problems; and
3) ways to translate solutions into the market through technology transfer.
Having such an understanding and vision, typically achieved by effective
mentorship, is crucial for developing the leadership, communications, and
professional competencies that future technology leaders in industry, academia,
and government need from graduate education. To accomplish our goals, we propose
Mentoring for the Formation of Research Careers in Engineering, or M-FORCE. This
innovative, inclusive, open-access mentoring hub is designed to meet the goals
of Track 3 of NSF’s Broadening Participation in Engineering program (NSF
22-514).

M-FORCE, which is a partnership between the University of Minnesota, Morgan
State University, and the National GEM Consortium, will create belonging and
inclusion for URM engineering graduate students that will enhance knowledge of
the research enterprise and its career pathways. It will also provide a model
for a collaborative community that can be adapted to any graduate program. Data
collected through the M-FORCE hub will advance understanding of 1) the role that
collective and individual mentoring can play in improving URM graduate school
training and career development experiences; 2) how mentoring and network
formation impacts graduate students’ perception of belonging and inclusion,
which strongly influences their consideration of a research career in
engineering; 3) how early exposure to research career concepts impact URM
graduate student motivation to pursue and complete terminal degrees; and 4) how
exposure to research and graduate school preparation activities influences URM
undergraduates’ interest in and decisions about research careers in engineering.
M-FORCE will leverage the best practices of minority serving institutions like
HBCUs, which have been exceptional at providing community and a sense of
belonging to URM engineering undergraduate and graduate students. It will also
leverage best practices of very high-research R1 (and predominately white)
universities that have been transitioning research from siloed to convergent
approaches that are needed to solve today’s complex problems. Finally, M-FORCE
will give URM undergraduates exposure to research and formal graduate school
preparation and the rare opportunity to meet a critical mass of URM graduate
students performing research and preparing to become leaders in technology
fields. After five years, our hub model will be customizable for any campus
research community to support and prepare URM engineering graduate students,
especially first-generation college students. It will also provide a model of
fairness and equity in institutional and program structures that can supplement
formal academic training for engineering graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.