* 2311618
* Impact of Salivary Rheology on Expiratory Aerosol Formation in the Vocal Folds during Phonation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel Cates, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 589,982.00

More people die from lower respiratory diseases, like influenza and COVID-19,
than any other type of infectious disease. After much early confusion during the
COVID-19 pandemic, the scientific consensus now is that many airborne diseases
are spread via “aerosols,” which are very tiny droplets emitted by humans when
they speak or otherwise exhale. These tiny droplets are much too small to see,
but they are sufficiently large to carry viruses or other pathogens. Although it
is believed that many tiny droplets are formed at the vocal cords during speech,
to date no work has directly examined this hypothesis. In this research project,
a trained medical doctor will insert a fiber optic camera through the nose of
human study participants to provide the first direct video observations of the
vocal cords during droplet formation. Simultaneous experiments by engineers will
measure the overall rate of droplet emission, as well as the ‘viscosity’ or
thickness of the saliva in each participant. The research will thus directly
test the hypothesis that the rate of droplet emission responsible for air-borne
disease transmission is directly related to the viscosity of the saliva in
infected individuals.

The droplet formation rate is hypothesized to be governed by a balance of
elastic, capillary, and inertial effects in the saliva that lines the glottis,
as characterized by the Deborah and Ohnesorge numbers. Each time the vocal folds
move apart (up to hundreds of times per second), thin fluid filaments are
stretched and eventually pinch apart, yielding satellite droplets that are
caught in the expiratory airflow and ultimately exhaled into the surrounding
environment. The research team includes an otolaryngologist with much experience
visualizing patients’ vocal folds using a laryngoscope (which features a fiber
optic cable inserted through the nose). A stroboscopy video system will be used
to directly visualize and record the vocal folds in vivo of participants during
vocalization at systematically varied loudness, while simultaneous measurements
of the expiratory aerosol emission rate will be performed using an aerodynamic
particle sizer. Saliva samples from each participant will be collected to
measure the storage and loss moduli of the saliva with a double-gap geometry
rheometer, and to measure the extensional viscosity and drop formation dynamics
using capillary break-up rheometry in a liquid bridge geometry. The combination
of these multiple data streams over a statistically significant number of
different participants will inform complementary fluid mechanics modeling and
provide unprecedented and fundamental insight into expiratory droplet formation,
potentially providing a fluid mechanical explanation for why some individuals
are super-emitters of expiratory aerosols.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.