* 2311181
* A National Resource Hub for Culturally Relevant and Responsive STEM Environments at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Iesha Jackson, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,776,250.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Program (HSI Program), this Hub project aims to accomplish three
distinct goals to: 1) foster Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) collaboration
and networking; 2) support HSI faculty professional development; and 3) generate
and disseminate knowledge by and about HSIs. In an effort to simultaneously
engage multiple levers of change to achieve equitable educational outcomes and
culturally validating environments for students that represent the full spectrum
of diverse talent at HSIs, many HSIs respond by offering professional
development for faculty on culturally responsive and relevant pedagogies. These
worthwhile local efforts can be enhanced by creating opportunities for
leveraging limited resources. This project will offer an alternative to a
decentralized HSI information landscape by creating a freely accessible web-
based HSI-Resource Hub for the nationâ€™s growing network of public and private
HSIs.

This HSI Resource Hub will bring together STEM faculty across the hundreds of
current and emerging HSIs in the United States. The project will create a
community of STEM scholars who not only adopt, but also advance/cultivate their
culturally responsive and relevant pedagogy. The Hub will synthesize and
regularly update information on what works in HSI contexts to minimize trial and
error approaches to education reforms and to nurture an ongoing community of
practice. The project intends to improve educational equity and STEM education
for students at HSIs by developing a professional development toolkit on
culturally relevant and responsive teaching, offering faculty professional
development, enabling seamless resource sharing, leveraging knowledge
production, and enhancing opportunities for networking. In addition, the Hub
will include other activities focused on the dissemination of practical and
scholarly knowledge by and about HSIs, including a database of scholarly
research on STEM education at HSIs, bi-annual topical briefs on asset-based
approaches for broadening participation in STEM, an online professional learning
community, and an online forum for faculty at HSIs to collaborate and share
resources. These efforts will facilitate the spread of empirically based
practices supporting culturally responsive and relevant pedagogy. This project
is funded by the HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.