* 2311577
* Collaborative Research: Applying the stress gradient hypothesis to understand the microbial facilitation of seagrass responses to thermal stress
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emilia Sogin, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2026
* USD 688,793.00

Eelgrass is a marine flowering plant that lives within coastal regions
throughout the Northern Hemisphere. These marine plants provide essential
habitats for fisheries, protect coastlines from erosion, ameliorate negative
impacts of ocean acidification, and help to bury organic carbon. Yet, in the
past century there has been an overall net loss of eelgrass habitat due to
various environmental stressors including climate warming, eutrophication, and
disease. This project assesses how microbial symbionts protect eelgrass from
global climate change stress. Eelgrass forms intimate relationships with a
diverse set of microorganisms that live within their roots, but the metabolism
and physiology of these microorganisms, and consequently their role in mediating
eelgrass health under thermal stress, is largely unknown. Results from this
project help better define the role of these microorganisms under increasing
thermal stress and consequently inform conservation and restoration efforts that
aim to protect these iconic ecosystems. As such, research is disseminated to
stakeholders involved in seagrass conservation and restoration including the
State of California Ocean Protection Council, the Greater Farallones National
Marine Sanctuary and the Global Seagrass Nursery Network, which aims to bring
best practices to seagrass cultivation for restoration. Research activities are
directly integrated into a cross campus course based undergraduate research
experience that allows students at UC Merced and UC Davis to engage with one
another during the academic year on research design through a CURE (course-based
undergraduate research experience).

In a rapidly changing world, it is essential to determine if and how organisms
and populations will cope with increasing stress. Current theory centered around
the stress gradient hypothesis (SGH) predicts that under elevated stress
individual species may become more reliant on facilitative or beneficial
interactions that work to buffer harsh environmental conditions. Despite the
growing recognition of the importance of the microbiome for the health and
survival of almost all plant and animal hosts, the SGH and its corollaries have
rarely been used in the evaluation of the changing structure and function of the
microbiome under environmental stress. This project tests the application of SGH
to a marine host-microbiome system by assessing shifts in the seagrass-
microbiome interactions in the context of acute heating events as driven by
global climate change (GCC). The specific goals of this project are to (1)
assess the assembly and function of the Zostera marina (eelgrass) microbiome
under ambient and experimentally elevated temperature conditions, (2) determine
how plant exudation changes as a function of increased temperature by
quantifying the composition and release of small molecules to the eelgrass
rhizosphere that may influence microbial recruitment, and (3) culture putatively
beneficial bacteria and experimentally test the effects of shifts in the host
microbiome on host growth and survival under a range of temperature conditions.
The results of this project extend and modify the prevailing paradigm of how
facilitative interactions change with environmental stress by including primary
data showing how microorganisms facilitate the establishment and growth of
eelgrass. In doing so, this project will help define the role of the eelgrass
microbiome in mediating the health, survival and maintenance of this foundation
species found along three continents throughout the northern hemisphere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.