* 2311054
* RUI: Search for the Electric Dipole Moment of the Neutron (nEDM)
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shirvel Stanislaus, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 113,000.00

Precision measurement of the properties of the neutron presents an opportunity
to search for violations of fundamental symmetries and to make critical tests of
the validity of the Standard Model. Measurements of the neutron’s electric
dipole moment provide some of the tightest constraints on extensions to the
Standard Model. The Valparaiso University (VU) group, as a part of a wider
neutron Electric Dipole Moment (nEDM) collaboration consisting of 20 US and
international institutions, will search for the electric dipole moment of the
neutron. The nEDM experiment will be carried out at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). The VU group will be working with the scientists at Los
Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) carrying out research and development of the
Central Detector System (CDS) of the nEDM apparatus.

Valparaiso University is an undergraduate educational institution. The PI is
strongly committed to have undergraduate students actively participate in this
research program. Each summer, during the R&D phase of the experiment, 2
undergraduate research students, mentored by the PI, will spend ten weeks at
LANL, participating in the research being carried out. When the experiment moves
to the construction and installation phase, VU students will spend ten weeks
each summer at ORNL, working on the installation of the detector components.
Working in these research environments and interacting with renowned scientists
from several other institutions and national laboratories will enhance and
enrich their education and will motivate and prepare them well for graduate
studies later on.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.