* 2311182
* I Corps: A Psychologically-Informed Contact Tracing Tool
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Jacqueline Evans, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an interactive, online platform that conducts patient-led,
interviewer-free, contact tracing interviews (CTI). Contact tracing is a well-
established public health measure used to contain the spread of contagious
diseases such as HIV, Ebola, and COVID. In its current state, interviewer-led
contact tracing is costly, inefficient, and results in the omission of
potentially infectious contacts, allowing the continued spread of disease. The
proposed technology takes well-established, empirically validated psychological
approaches from cognitive and social psychology that bolster recall and applies
them to public health. This new application of existing psychological approaches
to CTIs may increase interview yield by 50%. In addition, the proposed tool may
be used to span multiple infectious diseases and may quickly conform to the
parameters of any infectious disease and any language.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a digital platform that
applies cognitive psychological techniques to improve contact tracing to combat
the spread of contagious disease. The proposed digital platform removes the
interviewer from the contact tracing interview without a loss of efficiency.
Self-led interviews empower patients to choose the time, place, and pace of the
interview. The result is fewer contacts forgotten, rapid results, and cost
savings as the technology facilitates data collection through technologically
driven distribution channels without hiring, training, and compensating contact
tracers. In addition, the proposed platform also uses natural language
processing and artificial intelligence to aggregate the data and detect patterns
in contagious outbreaks. Prior research reveals that the psychological methods
utilized in the proposed technology help increase the amount of information that
interviewees may recall, thus helping better inform decision-making by
businesses and government entities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.