* 2311215
* Collaborative Research: Multiple Hypothesis Testing on the Regression Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Xing, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 125,667.00

This research project will develop new theories and methodologies for tackling
fundamental issues related to false discovery rate (FDR) control under
regression analysis. Novel statistical tools will be provided to analyze data
from various scientific studies, such as brain imaging, genome-wide association
studies, and atmospheric science. The development of statistical methods to
analyze complex data will facilitate discoveries of key variables related to
blood pressure, coronary heart disease, stroke, and other critical health
issues. Furthermore, this research project will provide training opportunities
for graduate students, who will acquire the skills to meet the growing demand
for data scientists in industry and academia and software will be developed and
made available on publicly accessible websites.

Analyzing high-dimensional data using multiple testing under the general
framework of regression analysis is a critical challenge in the era of big data.
This project will develop a new framework for performing model-free multiple
testing for regression analysis, as well as optimal multiple testing for high-
dimensional regression model in terms of maximizing the power of detecting the
true alternatives subject to the type I error rate control. This framework
enables statistical inference for sufficient dimension reduction when the
dimension diverges with respect to the sample size and expands the current
literature on multiple testing to more complicated data structures where
commonly assumed model assumptions are not valid. The framework could also be
applied to draw inference for explainable neural networks. The research project
not only aims to advance theories in multiple testing but also targets
applications of the developed theories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.