* 2311376
* Sustainability: Atmospheric Physics Needs for Community Climate Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Peter Lauritzen, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 998,699.00

Earth System Models (ESMs) serve a range of purposes. Cutting edge ESMs are used
to generate climate projections for the coming decades, but they are also used
as tools by the research community to gain understanding of processes and
interactions that occur within the Earth System. The cutting-edge components of
ESMs continue to grow in complexity and computational expense, which is a
necessary evolution for improving state-of-the-art projections of future
climate, but at the same time, this reduces the ability of researchers with
limited computational resources to perform targeted experiments to address their
problem of interest. As such, there is an important role to be played by
computationally streamlined, yet still realistic, options within ESMs. The
Community Earth System Model (CESM) is an ESM that is widely used within the
research community of the USA and worldwide. The aims of CESM are not only to
produce cutting edge climate projections but to provide the necessary tools to
the research community to gain fundamental understanding of the behavior of the
Earth System. The atmospheric component of CESM (the Community Atmosphere Model,
CAM) is one of the most computationally expensive components of CESM. CAM is
moving toward a new framework for connecting physical parameterizations to the
host model in order to simplify the implementation of new physics packages
moving forward. However, this means that some physical parameterizations that
can be used to build a cheaper atmospheric model for gaining fundamental
understanding will be lost, unless they can be refactored to be compatible with
this new framework. This work will refactor previous generations of atmospheric
physics packages within CAM to allow them to remain functional within CESM and
continue to be used as an important resource for researchers worldwide. This
refactoring will be accompanied by the development of documentation and
tutorials that will allow users to configure and set up their model simulations
with their own choices of physical parameterizations that can balance
complexity, with computational expense, to suit their needs. This will allow
CESM to continue to support a broad and diverse user base and to provide an
educational tool that can allow individuals to gain a hands-on climate modeling
experience at minimal computational expense.

The Common Community Physics Package (CCPP) is a framework that is designed to
facilitate the implementation of physics suites or individual parameterizations
in atmospheric models. CAM is moving toward exclusive use of this framework in
the near future which means that any physical parameterizations that are not
refactored to be compatible with CCPP will no longer be available to the
research community within CESM. This work will refactor the key components of
previous generations of CAM physics (CAM4 and CAM5) to allow researchers to
continue to build atmospheric configurations that are scientifically close to
CAM4 and CAM5 and/or mix and match their capabilities together with newer
physical parameterizations. This will ensure that these physical
parameterizations remain functional within CESM, thereby retaining them as
important, yet computationally streamlined, research tools for the Earth System
research community. The CCPP framework contains a library of physical
parameterizations that conforms to selected standards, and an infrastructure
that enables connection of these parameterizations to the host model. This
project will port CAM4 and CAM5 physics parameterizations to the CCPP framework.
Part of this process is to implement explicit interfaces where variables passed
in/out of the parameterization are defined in a variable dictionary since the
parameterization can no longer access shared memory spaces between physics
parameterizations (known as pbufâ€™s in CAM) and all variables must be passed
explicitly. Hence it will be clear to the user exactly what variables a
parameterization is using (and if there are implicit dependencies to other
parameterizations) to ultimately provide tendencies back to the host model. To
accompany the implementation of these physical parameterizations within CCPP,
documentation and tutorials will be developed that will allow users to configure
and set up model configurations that closely resemble CAM4 or CAM5 or to mix and
match different physical parameterizations to suite their purpose, thereby
filling out the atmospheric model hierarchy to support a broad range of research
purposes.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences within the Directorate for
Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.