* 2311870
* Elements: Portable Library for Homomorphic Encrypted Machine Learning on FPGA Accelerated Cloud Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,992.00

Privacy Preserving Computations (PPC) that utilize Homomorphic Encryption (HE)
to perform computations on encrypted data directly have become attractive
recently. HE based Machine Learning (HE ML) inference enables preservation of
privacy in a wide variety of application domains that range from healthcare,
financial transactions, edge cyber physical systems, etc. Privacy sensitive
applications that rely on processing in a public cloud or data center can use HE
ML inference to preserve privacy. While HE ML inference offers strong privacy
guarantees, computations on encrypted data are orders of magnitude slower than
unencrypted computations and require significant hardware resources to make them
attractive for end users. Emerging data centers and cloud platforms are
augmented with Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). With the fine grained
programmable architecture of FPGAs, these platforms are well suited for
accelerating HE ML.

This work will leverage novel algorithmic, architectural and memory
optimizations on FPGAs to develop a portable and configurable library to enable
secure, resilient, and trustworthy cyberinfrastructure for end-to- end privacy
sensitive ML inference. The library will provide FPGA accelerated Intellectual
Property (IP) cores for HE kernels (L1 Library) as well as a FPGA Application
Specific Processor (ASP) for inference of widely studied HE ML models (L2
Library). The library will support various HE schemes, security levels, machine
learning models and FPGA platforms. It will include several software and
hardware innovations along with various HE specific optimizations such as
efficient data layout, memory efficient scheduling and scalable interconnect to
maximize memory utilization and to improve data reuse using on-chip memory.
Using the IP cores in the L1 Library, this project will compose a FPGA ASP with
a domain-specific Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) and a compiler. The FPGA
accelerator can be programmed in software to realize real-time HE ML
computations. The library will be released to the Computer & Information Science
& Engineering (CISE) communities, including Machine Learning, Software, and Data
Science communities, to accelerate the adoption of homomorphic encryption for
privacy preserving computations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.