* 2311165
* EAGER: Chemically-Inspired, Tunable Quantum Computing Architectures for Dynamics of Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Philip Richerme, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Philip Richerme and Srinivasan Iyengar of Indiana
University, are developing quantum devices inspired by and for the study of
quantum chemical dynamics. The chemical processes studied by Richerme and
Iyengar play central roles in the reactive chemistry of most biological,
materials, and atmospheric systems. For instance, quantum chemical dynamics
likely underlie catalytic transformations of global importance, including the
reduction of CO2, which is critical to converting this greenhouse gas to useful
feedstocks, artificial photosynthesis, and nitrogen fixation. Classical
approaches toward modeling these processes have been unsuccessful, since they
would require exponentially large computing resources to accurately describe the
large numbers of quantum-mechanical electrons and nuclei within the system.
Instead, Richerme and Iyengar will use fundamentally quantum hardware, whose
design mirrors the geometry of the molecules under study, to emulate the
dynamics of these chemical systems. This may allow them to directly calculate
wavepacket dynamics and vibrational spectra for these systems without the
significant overhead of gate-model quantum computation. In addition, this
project will provide a rich training environment for experimental and theory
graduate students – both at the MS and PhD levels – and will enable the
development of a Quantum Chemistry track within the Indiana University Quantum
Master’s degree program, addressing the nationally-recognized need for workforce
development in the area of Quantum Information Science.

Richerme and Iyengar will develop a new approach to mapping the microscopic
quantum interactions of chemical systems to engineered quantum hardware. Their
central insight is that the relative geometry of quantum objects drives their
connectivity, and hence, behavior and offers significant simplifications when
designing quantum hardware to emulate natural processes. Drawing inspiration
from the geometry of the molecules themselves, they arrange the geometry of
trapped-ion qubit arrays to natively replicate the interactions and timescales
of entanglement propagation between the various nuclear degrees of freedom. This
approach is motivated by the observation that closely-spaced trapped-ion qubits
interact strongly, while interactions decay quickly as the ion-ion distance is
increased. This difference in coupling strengths, emerging from the relative ion
positions, provides a framework in which multiple nuclear dimensions are
simulated in parallel within multiple closely-spaced groups of ions; weak
couplings across these ion clusters then generates correlations among the
effective nuclear degrees of freedom. The spacing between ion clusters is
controllable to sub-micron precision by changing the confinement voltages
applied to ion-trap electrodes, similar to prior work which controls the trap
voltages to achieve equally-spaced ion strings. Once these native interactions
are encoded through the system geometry, analog quantum simulation methods
should enable propagation of the molecular dynamics and extraction of the
vibrational frequencies in the system, without requiring exponential numbers of
quantum gates. Success in this approach has the potential to be transformational
in the fields of quantum dynamics and vibrational spectroscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.