* 2311125
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Study of Nutron-Rich Nuclei and Neutron Detector Response
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Anthony Kuchera, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2026
* USD 210,000.00

This award will advance understanding of the nature of neutron-rich atomic
nuclei, with undergraduate student participation as an integral component.
Experiments will be conducted at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at
Michigan State University (MSU) using the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) and the
Large-area multi-Institutional Scintillator Array (LISA), both constructed and
tested by undergraduate students from several institutions in the MoNA
collaboration. The PIs, along with their team of undergraduate students and
other collaboration members, will investigate the structure of light neutron-
rich nuclei near the limits of their stability, which will provide tests for
current theoretical models of nuclear structure. These weakly-bound or unbound
nuclei exhibit different structures compared with their stable counterparts.
They are produced by collisions of an accelerated beam of nuclei with a stable
target. In order to test and improve upon the accuracy of computer simulation,
critical for analysis of data and extraction of physics results from
experimental data, the PIs also conduct experiments at the Los Alamos Neutron
Science Center (LANSCE) at Los Alamos National Laboratory. These experiments
will directly observe neutron scattering in 16 MoNA detectors as a test of the
simulation. The collaboration has a long-standing tradition of involving
undergraduate student participation at the heart of its research activities.
This research program provides cutting-edge research opportunities for
undergraduate students, helping to train the next generation of scientists.

The PIs and their undergraduate students will participate in two FRIB
experiments using the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA), analyze recent and future
data, and contribute to the improvement of Monte Carlo simulation used in data
analysis. The two approved MoNA experiments at FRIB will study neutron-unbound
states in neutron-rich nuclei (specifically 30F and 53Ca). The goal of the first
experiment is to measure the 30F ground state for the first time, which will
provide details on the structural changes in the fluorine isotopes. The goal of
the second experiment is to better understand the N = 32 subshell closure by
measuring unbound excited states in 53Ca. Both experiments provide data relevant
for testing modern nuclear structure models. The PIs also seek to improve the
computer modeling of neutron interactions in these plastic scintillators,
critical for improving detector resolution and filtering of data for FRIB
experiments. They will conduct a third approved neutron-scattering experiment at
LANSCE using a diamond detector as active target in conjunction with 16 MoNA
detectors. Two previous experiments by the PIs at LANSCE exposed some
shortcomings of current simulation packages. The diamond detector, which
consists only of C nuclei, allows for a focus on the neutron-carbon interactions
that cause dark scattering in the plastic scintillators, which decrease position
resolution in the array.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.