* 2311338
* A statistical framework for the analysis of the evolution in shape and topological structure of random objects
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Andrew Blumberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 329,639.00

Modern data sets often consist of sequential collections of point clouds that
are samples from underlying objects with intrinsic geometry, such as curves,
surfaces, or manifolds. Analyzing the dynamics of these time series of random
objects requires qualitative inference methods that capture information on the
geometric properties, i.e., the evolution of descriptors of the 'shape.'
Analyzing shape is of paramount interest in many research areas such as
genomics, climatology, neuroscience, and finance. In this project, we develop
novel methodology and provide probabilistic and statistical foundations to
model, analyze, and predict the evolution over time of geometric and topological
features of data sets. The research will broaden the scope of the methodological
interface between mathematics, computer science, statistics, and probability
theory and will have direct applications to genomics and cell biology. We focus
our theoretical work to support applications coming from two areas in genomics;
cell differentiation in development and tumor evolution. This will be done in
collaboration with the Herbert and Florence Irving Institute for cancer dynamics
(IICD) at Columbia University. The research findings are also expected to
influence model-building and data analysis techniques in geospatial data.
Besides the theoretical contribution, we will provide software packages to make
the inference methods available to a broad audience. The PIs further propose to
design classes and produce expository notes from a cross-disciplinary
perspective, and provide projects at the interface of mathematical statistics
and topological data analysis for summer undergraduate mentoring.

Over the past few decades, there has been substantial interest in the area of
geometric data analysis known as topological data analysis (TDA); this provides
qualitative multiscale shape descriptors for point clouds. However, in order to
draw reliable qualitative inferences on shape and topological features, it is
crucial to account for the (evolving) spatial and temporal dependence present in
the data. To address these questions, we take the point of view that the
fundamental datum is a function, i.e., the observations are points in a function
space. This perspective integrates statistical methodology and TDA in the
context of functional time series (FTS). We provide novel methodology to model,
analyze and predict data generated from nonstationary metric space-valued
stochastic processes. Our framework establishes the statistical and
probabilistic foundations for applying multiscale geometric descriptors to
meaningfully capture their evolving geometric features as well as the
investigation of topological invariants. This new methodology will allow
practitioners to perform statistical inference to address important scientific
questions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.