* 2311005
* Bayes factor functions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Valen Johnson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Interpreting the evidence provided by experimental and observational studies is
essential to the process of scientific discovery. The most commonly used
indirect measures of evidence are P-values. Unfortunately, P-values do not
directly reflect the probability that a new discovery has been made and are
often mis-interpreted. Bayes factors represent an informative alternative to
P-values for reporting outcomes of hypothesis tests. They provide direct
measures of the relative support that data provide to competing hypotheses and
are able to quantify support for true null hypotheses. The Bayes factor
functions developed in this project will be defined from classical test
statistics and will summarize evidence in support of scientific discoveries. The
resulting Bayes factor functions will provide clear summaries of the outcome
from a single experiment, eliminate arbitrary P-value thresholds, and are ideal
for combining evidence from replicated studies. They will enhance both the
reproducibility and replicability of scientific studies. The project will also
provide research training for graduate students. The Bayes factor functions
developed in this project will advance Bayesian testing theory and application
in several ways. These include defining Bayes factors directly from classical
test statistics (which are readily available from standard statistical
analyses); modeling the distributions of these test statistics as functions of
standardized effect sizes (the quantities of primary interest in scientific and
observational studies); specifying scientific hypotheses so that there is a
clear distinction between the null hypothesis of no scientific/treatment effect
versus a new effect or benefit; and providing easily calculable expressions for
the Bayes factors corresponding to given effect sizes. These innovations will
allow scientists to easily assess statistical evidence arising from scientific
studies conducted across a wide range of scientific disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.