* 2311383
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: A community platform for accelerating observationally-constrained regional oceanographic modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* David Nicholson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Marlon Pierce
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,615,487.00

Oceans are a critical element of the climate system and global carbon budget.
Oceans also support food security, global trade, and energy production. A fusion
of observations and results from high-fidelity models of the ocean's state are
needed to understand and manage these uses and their impacts. Presently, this
capability is available to only a small expert community. This project augments
the capabilities of the Community Earth System Model (CESM) to enable a larger
and more multidisciplinary community of users to address important questions
about Earth's oceans. New observational efforts, such as the Ocean Vital Signs
Network (OVSN), can leverage the tools generated by this project to design
better observing systems, maximize information gained from observations, and
ultimately provide the decision support needed to meet stakeholder needs. The
project aims to greatly expand community access to fit-for-purpose ocean
simulations and state estimates, thereby enabling applications by a more diverse
community. The infrastructure will explicitly support robust usability in the
context of end-to-end workflows. The project will produce clear documentation,
include explicit mechanisms for disseminating the tools, and feature
conscientious efforts to educate and train a diverse community of users,
including from beyond the traditional research community. Internships will
support participation of historically under-represented groups and a series of
workshops will build capacity in traditionally underserved communities.

This project will deliver software infrastructure facilitating rapid
configuration, deployment, and analysis of the Modular Ocean Model version 6
(MOM6) within the CESM. A common framework will support high-resolution regional
domains forced laterally by datasets or embedded online within a global model
for fully-coupled or ocean-only simulations. These configurations will support
flexible ocean biogeochemistry simulations using the Marine Biogeochemistry
Library (MARBL) and the application of data assimilation using the Data
Assimilation Research Testbed (DART). Development will be tested and motivated
by the technical requirements of a novel use case: designing and supporting
interpretation of an intensive, community-oriented observational array, the
OVSN, which seeks to dramatically improve capacity to measure and understand the
function and future evolution of the ocean's physical, chemical and biological
dynamics, with a focus on carbon cycling. This project will reduce technical
bottlenecks within all stages of modeling workflows. The ultimate objective is
to accelerate advances in regional ocean state estimation and facilitate
applications by a diverse community.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education
(RISE) and the Division of Ocean Sciences (OCE) within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences, and funds for development of a National Discovery Cloud (NDC) for
Climate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.