* 2311140
* Conference: Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing (PEARC22)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Alana Romanella, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,502.00

The Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing (PEARC) Conference
series aims to provide a forum for discussing challenges, opportunities, and
solutions among HPC center directors and managers, computational scientists, end
users, students, facilitators, educators, HPC system administrators and user
support staff, as well as industry and government agency representatives from
across the United States and around the world. The PEARC22 conference follows
the successful ten-year NSF supported Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) conference series. The conference will be held in Boston, MA
from July 10-14, 2022. This is a project to fund students to participate in the
conference, especially in the student program activities. Some students will
present papers and posters at the conference, and students from underrepresented
groups in computing and economically disadvantaged sectors will be specifically
recruited to attend. The project serves the national interest, as stated by
NSF's mission, to promote the progress of science as it provides a forum to
disseminate research efforts, connect researchers, and train the next generation
of scholars.

The student program committee for the conference is recruiting students with an
emphasis on diversity and inclusion of underrepresented groups and from a
diverse set of institutions. As part of the the student program, students will
participate in (1) an orientation and welcome session, (2) a student internship
spotlight session that enables students who have participated in internships to
share their experiences, (3) a student mentor program that pairs a student with
a senior mentor to help guide the student through conference activities, (4) a
student volunteer program, to help run and organize the conference, (5), an
exhibitor Q&A and networking event, where students can meet 1-on-1 with
conference exhibitor representatives, and (6) a series of evening events called
“The Village” for students to explore training programs, peer training, and
competition strategies focused on a wide range of research computing/data
skills. The funding provided by NSF will have a significant impact on the
careers of the future generation of researchers in high performance computing,
while encouraging diversity in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.