* 2311108
* New Directions in Bayesian Model Criticism
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Blei, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,000.00

This project will address the problem of Bayesian model criticism, which is
crucial for the effective use of Bayesian statistics and probabilistic machine
learning. Currently, the process of designing Bayesian models relies heavily on
creativity and experience. This research will develop new statistical tools to
evaluate the adequacy of Bayesian models, providing guidance for model design
and revision. The project will focus on two innovative approaches: population
predictive checks (population PCs) and the posterior predictive null (PPN).
These methods combine Bayesian and frequentist ideas to enhance the robustness
and rigor of Bayesian model checking. The research will contribute to the
foundations of Bayesian statistics, foster connections between different
statistical approaches, and advance the field of deep probabilistic models. This
will also contribute to the research training of a graduate student who will be
involved in the project.

Specifically, the research will develop two innovative approaches for Bayesian
model criticism that will contribute to the field's technical advancements. The
first approach focuses on population predictive checks (population PCs), which
combine Bayesian and frequentist principles to provide population-based
evaluation of Bayesian models. By leveraging the strengths of both paradigms,
this research will develop novel methods that effectively assess the adequacy of
Bayesian models, enabling researchers to gain insights into their behavior and
performance for informed decisions on model design and revision. The second
technical thread centers around the posterior predictive null (PPN), a novel
type of model criticism that explores whether data generated from one proposed
model can "fool" the model check of another model. By developing statistical
tools to address this question, this research will assess the distinctiveness
and Bayesian models, and give new directions for finding parsimonious solutions
to data modeling. Through theoretical investigations, empirical evaluations, and
real-world applications, including medical informatics and computational
astrophysics, this research will demonstrate the efficacy of these innovations.
The ultimate goal is to provide a comprehensive and practical workflow for
building, evaluating, revising, and selecting modern Bayesian models. To ensure
widespread access, the algorithms will be disseminated as open-source software,
empowering statisticians, scientists, and probabilistic modelers to effectively
employ these tools and advance the adoption of Bayesian statistics and
probabilistic machine learning methodologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.