* 2311665
* Development of Natural Product-Inspired Ubiquinone Mimics as Next Generation Agrochemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* William Wuest, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 640,332.00

With the support of the Chemistry in Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor William Wuest of Emory University is developing novel
agrochemicals inspired by compounds produced in nature. Blight is a disease that
kills large quantities of crops and is primarily caused by bacteria and fungi.
The organisms that cause blight continually evolve to resist the treatments that
farmers use causing these practices to fail. Therefore, chemists will need to
continuously identify new methods to sustain current farming practices. Two
compounds have been identified that target blight-causing organisms and chemical
methods and biological tests will be used to validate the proposed hypotheses.
These studies will provide an ideal training ground for undergraduate and
graduate students to develop specialized skills in organic synthesis and will
prepare them for careers in either academia or industry. The project also
integrates two outreach programs focusing on graduate student career
development. The first program will provide training in course design for
graduate students while simultaneously teaching undergraduates about the process
of joining a research lab in college. The second program specifically trains
graduate students in innovation, entrepreneurship, and consulting through their
involvement in the activities provided by the Emory Biotech Consulting Club.

The research project seeks to characterize and develop natural products and
derivatives thereof for their implementation as inhibitors of agriculturally
relevant pathogens. Focus will be placed on compounds found within the
rhizosphere as they have likely evolved to specifically inhibit plant pathogens.
This proposal will use a variety of methods ranging from synthetic organic
chemistry to microbiology to interrogate two specific families of natural
products that likely mimic the natural cofactor ubiquinone. Specifically, this
investigation is focused on the synthesis and evaluation of peniciaculin-
inspired inhibitors of plant pathogens of 4-hydroxypyridinone natural products.
With a better understanding of the key interactions of these natural products
with their targets, further enabled through the collaboration with industry
partners, the research team aspires to ultimately be able to design and build
the next generation of anti-fungal compounds for applications in the
agrochemical industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.