* 2311928
* Frameworks: An Advanced Cyberinfrastructure for Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Science (AMOS): Democratizing AMOS for Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Kathryn Hamilton, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,336,585.00

A challenge facing the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Science (AMOS) community
is the lack of a coordinated approach to using and sharing the computational
tools and data that have grown organically in the theoretical community. The aim
of this project, therefore, is to create a platform for computational AMOS via
the AMOSGateway, enabling both experienced and novice users to produce new and
needed scientific results on a scale heretofore impossible. This science gateway
will initially host ten state-of-the-art AMOS software suites, with applications
capable of tackling problems that are central to AMOS, while impacting many
other areas of applied science and technology. Properly designed user
interfaces, tutorials, and periodic lectures will vastly improve how students at
all levels, as well as interested members of the public, learn AMOS and its
impact on applications that they use every day. This provides an invaluable
preparation for entering a diversified workforce, for application fields such as
quantum information science and engineering, cold atoms and molecules, plasma
physics, and astrophysics, all of which build on a fundamental knowledge of
AMOS.

The importance of developing robust theoretical and computational approaches for
computing the bound and continuum states of atoms and molecules, and their
interaction with electromagnetic radiation, is central to Atomic, Molecular, and
Optical Science (AMOS), while impacting many other areas of applied science and
technology. The proposed project seeks to democratize research and education in
this area by creating a comprehensive cyberinfrastructure (CI) where AMOS
practitioners can access a synergistic, full-scope platform for computational
AMOS via the AMOSGateway. The AMOSGateway user interface development engages
iterative design, implementation, testing, and deployment strategies of state-
of-the art computer codes to treat atomic collision processes, specifically
electron and positron scattering from atoms, ions, and molecules, as well at the
response of those targets to short-pulse intense electromagnetic radiation.
Atomic and molecular structure codes are also included, either to be run in
stand-alone mode for structure-only purposes or to provide the necessary input
description for the targets of interest in the subsequent calculations of the
dynamics. The Apache Airavata ecosystem, with recent developments in the NSF-
funded Cybershuttle project, provides advanced integrated infrastructure to
facilitate the deployment of the latest versions of the programs. Graphical user
interfaces will be developed to further simplify the use of the complex packages
by the AMOS community. The project will change the way practitioners acquire the
expertise needed to perform cutting-edge computational AMOS research, and data
generated from the project will be of direct use to plasma modelers and many
other areas of applied science.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Physics at the Information Frontier in the Division of Physics within the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.