* 2311109
* U-statistic Reduction with Accurate Risk Control
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yuan Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 199,999.00

U-statistics are a class of statistics that play central roles in many modern
statistical learning tools. However, the heavy computational cost haunts their
practical application. Despite considerable research efforts since the 1970s
towards computational reduction for U-statistics, there exists little study on
the important problem of accurate risk control in statistical inference for
reduced U-statistics. Also, how computational speed trades off with risk control
accuracy remains uncharacterized. This project will bridge this significant gap,
providing the urgently needed infrastructual techniques that enable
statisticians to securely scale up their U-statistic-based learning tools. The
results of this project will provide profound benefits to a wide spectrum of
research areas and applications, including nonparametric statistics, machine
learning, sociology, computer vision and biomedical sciences. The project will
also provide research training for graduate students.

This project will study both classical "noiseless" U-statistics and network
U-statistics, an important subset of noisy U-statistics. The research will
introduce innovative theoretical analysis techniques that lead to a sharp
characterization of computational-statistical trade-offs and formulate new
methods outperforming existing ones based on resampling and subsampling. The
project aims to establish a general framework for principled analysis of
different popular U-statistic reduction schemes. The research findings will be
summarized into practical, step-by-step guides for easy implementation and
tuning. The PI's team will also develop and disseminate user-friendly software
for public users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.