* 2311291
* Safe and Robust Causal Inference for High-Dimensional Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yang Ning, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

Understanding causal effects among multivariate variables is central to many
empirical and experimental types of research. In an era where data is vast,
statisticians are faced with the challenge of drawing causal inferences from
massive data. For example, the analysis of data can be complicated by the
presence of potentially confounding variables, heterogeneity, and temporal
dependence within populations. This poses tremendous computational and
statistical challenges to existing causal inference methods. Driven by the
availability of modern datasets, the research project aims to develop cutting-
edge machine-learning methods to address the theoretical, methodological, and
computational challenges of drawing causal inferences from massive data. The
development of the proposed research would not only push the frontier of causal
inference theory but also benefit a broad range of researchers in a variety of
areas, including medicine, epidemiology, computer science, and social science.
This project also provides research training opportunities for graduate
students. The goal of the project is to develop a novel high-dimensional causal
inference framework that is influence-function doubly-robust and safe relative
to a class of base estimators. Specific projects include proposing a covariate
balancing methodology coupled with modern machine learning techniques for
efficient causal inference with high-dimensional data, optimally distributed
covariate balancing for massive heterogeneous data, and a sequential covariate
balancing approach for marginal structural models in longitudinal data. A common
theme throughout is the use of the covariate balancing methodology, which comes
from the ``propensity score tautology,” the estimated propensity score is
appropriate if it balances the covariates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.