* 2311961
* Undergraduate Biology Education and Research - A New Vision for Change: Re-imagining Biology Education through Social Justice
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Heather Seitz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 119,520.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by convening experts to
showcase the latest research on broadening participation in undergraduate
biology. The conference is part of the Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
portfolio, which consists of hundreds of conferences each year, three of which
are in education areas. The Undergraduate Biology Education Research GRC is a
premier, international scientific conference focused on advancing the frontiers
of science through the presentation of cutting-edge and unpublished research,
prioritizing time for discussion after each talk and fostering informal
interactions among scientists of all career stages. The Undergraduate Biology
Education Research GRC is the first in the GRC family to focus exclusively on
investigating how attention to social justice issues can inform improvements in
undergraduate biology learning and teaching. This conference will bring together
students, postdoctoral scholars, researchers, educators, administrators, policy
makers, and publishers, providing a forum to share emerging research and
practices that promote inclusion, diversity, equity, access, and social justice
in undergraduate biology education across disciplines and sectors.

The undergraduate biology education research community has witnessed significant
changes in its discourse since the last Gordon Research Conference and Gordon
Research Seminar in 2019. Two key drivers for such changes include disruptions
to the educational system by the COVID-19 pandemic and intensified conversations
about the important role that learning environments informed by a social justice
lens can play in leading to improved biology learning and teaching. A renewed
recognition emerged from these disruptions: The community of undergraduate
biology education researchers and practitioners values partnering with students
and scholars from different communities and intersections of identities to
create inclusive learning environments. This recognition compels renewed
conversations on research that may reshape institutional practices and policies,
propelling further action to implement changes at institutions across the
nation. Specifically, the conference invites on-going scholarship that strives
to center people and communities, foster collaborations and systemic changes,
and create new visions toward social justice. This project is funded by NSF's
IUSE: EDU Program, which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students and by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.