* 2311074
* Collaborative Research: Predicting Micro to Macro-scale Hot-spot and Hot-moment dynamics in Arctic Tundra Ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Mario Muscarella, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2027
* USD 25,130.00

Rapid climate warming in the Arctic is thawing frozen soils, also known as
permafrost, which is not only reshaping surface topography but also increasing
the release of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. Due to the speed in which
Arctic landscapes are changing, and the massive carbon pools locked in
permafrost, improving knowledge of the key interactions between plants and
micro-organisms and their impacts on greenhouse gas release is essential for
predicting how thawing Arctic soils will contribute to global climate change.

The overarching objective of this project is to determine the micro-scale
mechanisms driving hot-spot and hot-moment carbon dynamics, for improving
predictions of macro-scale carbon balance. We hypothesize that the altered
spatiotemporal distribution of degrading nutrient-rich permafrost has and will
fundamentally alter the structure and function of northern tundra ecosystems,
from microbes to landscapes. This multi-scale interdisciplinary project will
transform our knowledge of fundamental plant-soil-microbial interactions that
govern past and projected carbon cycle dynamics in permafrost ecosystems, while
advancing knowledge of the key biogeochemical consequences of permafrost thaw
over space (i.e., plot to landscape) and time (i.e., seasonal to decadal). The
spatiotemporal mechanisms of hot-spots and hot-moment carbon dynamics will be
characterized using a combination of low and high-precision ground and airborne
flux observations to determine the location and assess the magnitude of carbon
dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) hot-spots. Ground and remote sensing
observations will determine the controls on the observed spatial distribution of
hot-spots and fluxes, space-for-time analyses of plants, microbes, and
landforms, coupled with the timing of permafrost degradation will infer the
existence of hot-moments, while incubation experiments will illuminate the
mechanisms driving hot-moments across sites across the Arctic Coastal Plain of
northern Alaska. The proposed research will therefore provide the foundation for
next-generation mechanistic and process-based models to represent novel
disturbance regimes in the new Arctic. These research efforts will be
complimented by a growing collaborative network of Alaskan native high-school
student involvement in Arctic disturbance ecology. Students will use drones to
measure their environment and share results across campuses and with the broader
scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.