* 2311304
* Trustworthy Reinforcement Learning: Inference, Reproducibility, and Adaptivity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Koulik Khamaru, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 175,000.00

In recent years, we have seen a surge of interest in the applications of
statistics and machine learning to various problem domains in science and public
policy, ranging from healthcare to education to engineering. This growth in the
popularity of statistical methods comes with the new fundamental questions.
First, most modern machine learning models, including deep learning and, more
recently, deep reinforcement learning, are high-dimensional, thereby requiring
development of novel statistical approaches for inference for such models.
Furthermore, the datasets used in these models are often collected sequentially
and, as a result, the data may not satisfy the assumptions of being independent
and identically distributed. Examples include data for self-driving cars, online
advertising, online recommendation systems, and personalized treatments. This
project aims to develop novel statistical inference tools as well as
computationally efficient approaches for reinforcement learning in independent
non-identically distributed settings, with a particular focus on high-
dimensional regimes. The project will offer numerous opportunities for
interdisciplinary research training and professional development of the next
generation of statisticians and data scientists.

The project consists of the two key thrusts at the interface of statistical
sciences and reinforcement learning in high-dimensional settings. The first
thrust is geared toward statistical inference for reinforcement learning under
the high-dimensional scenarios where the data are independent and identically
distributed. The focus of the second thrust is to design computationally
efficient algorithms, specifically focusing on online and offline reinforcement
learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.