* 2311385
* NODE - Network Opportunities for Developing Equitable and Effective Evaluation at HSIs
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2029
* Amy Wagler, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2029
* USD 2,250,639.00

This project aims to build capacity for HSIs to conduct evaluation and research
to strengthen and document the effectiveness of NSF-HSI funded projects. With
six years of congressional investment, now is the opportune time to build
capacity for evaluation and research on these projects’ contributions to
improving STEM learning environments and outcomes. Yet, HSIs have historically
lacked capacity to conduct evaluation and research about their equity-centered
STEM approaches, and do not have a standard, culturally relevant approach to
follow. Building such capacity requires novel, rigorous evaluation and research
approaches that map new territory to assess fairly and with integrity how these
projects are serving Hispanic and other minoritized students in STEM fields. As
an interdisciplinary effort to integrate database creation and analysis
techniques from both educational research and data science, Network
Opportunities for Developing Equitable and Effective Evaluation at HSIs (NODE)
project will generate a model of how to address complex data using quantitative
and qualitative methods to develop standardized and comparable measures and
analyses of NSF HSI Program-funded grants that collect their data in different
ways. The outcomes will be (1) a database platform for grantees’ evaluations,
(2) a standardized evaluation framework, (3) professional development for
grantees to use the evaluation database and framework, (4) impact reports about
the NSF HSI Program portfolio overall effectiveness, and (5) research frameworks
to improve equity-centered STEM approaches in HSIs and beyond.

The goals of HSI-CERS NODE are to (1) create a framework to evaluate the impact
of the NSF HSI Program’s funded grant portfolio, (2) build capacity of current
and potential NSF HSI Program grantees in conducting evaluation, and (3)
strengthen and refine assessment and research about STEM equity in HSIs and
beyond. These goals will be accomplished by five objectives: (1) create a
database about NSF HSI Program grantees’ activities; (2) analyze this database
to develop an evaluation framework for grantees; (3) provide professional
development using the evaluation framework and database to grantees; (4)
generate impact reports to assess the effectiveness of the overall NSF HSI
Program portfolio; and (5) generate adaptable and transferable knowledge about
evaluation and research concerning HSIs and equity-centered STEM approaches.
Using quantitative and qualitative research methods, the project will yield
culturally sustaining HSI STEM evaluation approaches and a refined research
framework of servingness that account for HSIs’ diverse institutional and
organizational contexts. These evaluation and research approaches will be
disseminated through venues like professional associations, journal outlets, and
a project website. Impact reports will address the collective effectiveness of
the NSF HSI Program in meeting its intended goals. Project results will inform
NSF and other federal agencies about how to diversify the workforce through
supporting multi-institutional partnerships with HSIs. In the longer term, these
many benefits will yield an increase in the representation of minoritized
scientists in the nation. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.