* 2311370
* Elements: Software to enable first-principles multi-scale simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 596,948.00

The project supports the development of a scale-bridging software infrastructure
to predict non-equilibrium behavior of materials from first principles. In the
course of its development, the software infrastructure is being applied to
predict the thermodynamic and kinetic properties of important lithium-metal
alloys. Lithium alloys are currently of great interest to serve as anodes in
all-solid-state Li batteries, where they can replace the graphite anodes of
commercial battery technologies and thereby enable significant increases in
energy densities. Beyond its application to lithium alloys, the software tools
are designed to empower scientists and engineers to generate fundamental and
mechanistic insights about the dynamic response of materials in both functional
and structural applications.

A multi-scale approach is pursued that relies on first-principles statistical
mechanics to calculate the essential thermodynamic and kinetic ingredients of
generalized phase-field models that describe morphological evolution of a
material out of equilibrium. A key component of the approach is the use of
cluster expansion based surrogate models to interpolate first-principles
electronic structure calculations within Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics
simulations. The infrastructure consists of libraries, executables and jupyter
notebooks that expand upon the CASM software package, a first-principles
statistical mechanics code suite, and thereby enable the parameterization of
machine-learned cluster expansion surrogate models for both crystalline and non-
crystalline states of matter. The software infrastructure consists of (i)
enumeration tools to generate a rich database of crystallographic and non-
crystallographic models to train machine-learned interatomic potentials (MLIPs);
(ii) software to sample surrogate models for uncertainty quantification in
calculated thermodynamic and kinetic properties; and (iii) software to enable
coarse-graining schemes that map predictions of MLIPs onto crystal-based cluster
expansion Hamiltonians. The ability to link macroscopic non-equilibrium behavior
to properties at the electronic structure level enables the formulation of
powerful design principles with which new materials can be discovered through
subsequent high-throughput first-principles calculations.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Materials Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.