* 2311400
* I-Corps:  Low-cost biochemical sensors to optimize agricultural inputs
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Ana Arias, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wireless biochemical sensor nodes that will provide crop
growers with real-time data on the chemical properties of their soil or
hydroponic solution. Every year, 12 million hectares of arable land are lost due
to soil degradation, erosion, and urban commercialization. At the same time,
fertilizer prices have increased by 260% since November 2020. With land becoming
more unusable, increasing fertilizer prices, and a changing climate, crop
growers are struggling to produce sufficient yields reliably and are searching
for potential solutions. The proposed wireless sensor nodes address these issues
by providing crop growers, crop consultants, municipalities, regulators, and
others with valuable information to improve efficiency, profitability, and
resilience. A controlled environment agriculture (CEA) producer adopting the
proposed technology may obtain an estimated 15-20% increase in net profit
according to a techno-economic analysis. In addition, this technology may be
expanded by creating sensors for other signals (such as pH, microbial/enzymatic
activity, electrical conductivity, and/or temperature), fluids of interest
(river water or groundwater), and by expanding to additional markets outside of
industrial agriculture, such as consumer gardening, environmental monitoring,
and/or chemical processing.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of low-cost, biochemical
sensors that measure concentrations of critical factors influencing plant
growth, such as nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, phosphorus, and potassium (NPK).
Currently, high-temperature silicon manufacturing methods are employed to
produce biosensors with limited material compatibility. The proposed technology
uses nanoparticle-based inks that contain polymer binders printed onto plastic
substrates. In addition, scalable printing technologies are used to fabricate
the ion-selective sensor array into a single replaceable sensor strip. The
replaceable sensor strips are connected to an integrated circuit (IC) unit where
a battery and an antenna for wireless data transfer are placed. These sensor
nodes are programmed to take sensor measurements at regular intervals and
wirelessly upload the data to the cloud. Previous results demonstrate that the
sensors may accurately measure chemical concentrations in hydroponic solutions
and several soil types. The nature of the sensors enables the collection of soil
data at high spatial and temporal densities, which in turn enables an
understanding of the relationships between agricultural inputs and soil health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.