* 2311180
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Shape Matching in a Messy World Using Frechet Distance
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Amir Nayyeri, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Shape matching is a computing process that compares data sets based on their
interpretation as geometric shapes. Good shape matching methods lead to many
useful outcomes including a better understanding of human health, consumer
preferences, and patterns in nature. The Frechet distance is often used for
shape matching curves describing the movement of people or the shapes of the
proteins used as the building blocks of the human body. Its popularity is
largely due to its many nice mathematical properties, but there are several
issues with its use on real-world data which is often large and messy in nature.
Also, the possibilities for expanding its use to settings other than curves are
not as well understood. The project seeks to study Frechet distance computing in
the presence of messy data. It seeks new methods for computing Frechet distances
that can be done quickly even for complicated curves. It also seeks ways to
extend the main mathematical ideas behind the Frechet distance to data types
other than curves. The project is collaborative and will lead to exchange of
knowledge and student training opportunities between the investigators'
institutions. It will lead to new shape matching software being made freely
available to those who will find it useful.

The research activities have three components reflecting the expertise of the
project's team of lead researchers. The first component specifically seeks new
algorithms for studying messy curve data, focusing on problems designed to
address noise and misalignments of the curves' representations. The second
component seeks faster and effective approximation algorithms for the Frechet
distance and some closely related problems. The third component seeks to apply
insights made from work on the first two components to design new algorithms for
extensions of the Frechet distance, including a novel interpretation of the so-
called discrete Frechet distance in surfaces. Some of the theoretical algorithms
designed for this work will be implemented and software made freely available
for the general public. The work performed and knowledge gained during the
research activities will be used to train new graduate students and offered as
course material at the researchers' institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.