* 2311559
* Elements: A new generation of samplers for astronomy and physics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Uros Seljak, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Statistical inference is fundamental to scientific data analysis, and is often
facilitated by the Bayesian methodology, which leverages posterior inference via
Monte Carlo sampling. Traditionally, this has been a computational challenge,
with the methodology often constituting the largest computational expense in
many scientific fields, including but not limited to astronomy, cosmology,
lattice quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and molecular dynamics. Fortunately,
recent years have witnessed considerable academic progress in sampling methods,
often resulting in significant computational reductions on synthetic examples.
The primary objective of this project is to develop a software infrastructure
that facilitates the use of these new and efficient samplers by a diverse range
of scientists. The outcome of this research is anticipated to provide speedy and
precise samplers that boast a user-friendly interface. These tools are not
limited to applications in astronomy and physics but can be applied broadly
across various scientific and engineering fields. Additionally, these innovative
methodologies can be introduced into the curriculum of courses where statistical
inference plays a key role, including courses on Data Science and Statistics for
Science, thereby further enhancing the academic and practical understanding of
these vital tools in the scientific community.

The technical endeavor of this project involves developing software
infrastructure for two cutting-edge samplers to facilitate Bayesian uncertainty
quantification in various scientific fields. The first sampler, PocoMC, based on
the Preconditioned Monte Carlo algorithm, utilizes Normalizing Flows and
annealing for swift and accurate posterior analysis. The second sampler, the
MicroCanonical Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, employs gradient-based methods effective
in very high-dimensional scenarios where gradient-free methods fall short. Both
samplers offer significant computational cost reductions compared to existing
alternatives, presenting themselves as potential standard tools for scientists
applying Bayesian methods. The project's scope encompasses the deployment of
these new samplers as standalone packages and their integration into several
widely-used Probabilistic Programming Languages, ultimately aiming to
revolutionize statistical inference methods used in science and engineering.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Physics at the Information
Frontier program in the Division of Physics within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.