* 2311047
* Collaborative Research: Forest fragmentation and climate change result in understory warming that adversely affects tropical avian biodiversity at the BDFFP.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* David Luther, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 90,491.00

Tropical birds are in trouble, especially those that eat mostly insects.
Population declines are taking place in both large and small areas of forest,
although at a faster rate in small forests or “fragments”. Exposure to sun along
the edges of fragments causes their interior to become hotter and drier, which
reduces habitat quality for many birds. Scientists do not know exactly how
warmer and drier conditions cause trouble for birds, but they think it is due to
less food and more stress. In this study, researchers will study whether longer
and hotter dry seasons are responsible for the decline of birds in continuous
forests and which species are most susceptible to changes in climate. To do
this, they will collect physiological data and combine it with climate data from
the past forty years to understand the relative role of climate and forest
condition on birds’ diet, health and survival. Results will improve our
understanding of how forest loss and climate change affect birds, and ways in
which we might mitigate the loss of biodiversity.

The PIs posit that remnant bird communities in forest fragments are a precursor
of future bird assemblages in continuous forest. Increased physiological stress
and/or dietary specialization are likely determinants of avian survival and
reproductive success under global change. This project has three objectives: (1)
Assess the impact of climate change as the primary driver of long-term bird
declines in continuous forest at the Biological Dynamics of Forest Fragmentation
Project (BDFFP) through the inclusion of 40 years of climate and bird banding
data in a series of survival models. (2) Determine the interactive effects of
climate change and fragmentation on the viability of bird populations at BDFFP
through demographic modeling. (3) Measure how dietary and behavioral
specialization of model bird species (two experiencing declines: Turdus
albicollis and Willisornis poecilinotus, and two experiencing population growth:
Calyptorhynchus spirurus and Pithys albifrons) interact with variation in
understory microclimates to affect fitness. Researchers will measure diet using
a combination of eDNA and isotopic niche analysis (from fecal samples, feathers,
and toe nails) and stress using a combination of B-OH butyrate, triglyceride,
and corticosterone, across seasons and between continuous and fragmented
forests. Results will yield mechanistic insights into the role that niche
specialization and understory drying play in driving demographic responses of
tropical birds to forest fragmentation and climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.