* 2311062
* Nonparametric Testing: Efficiency and Distribution-freeness via Optimal Transportation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bodhisattva Sen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Statistical hypothesis testing is the formal setup a statistician employs to
decide between two competing hypotheses about the underlying data generating
mechanism. Nonparametric methods have become increasingly popular in the theory
and practice of statistics in recent times, primarily because of the greater
flexibility they offer over parametric models. This research project
investigates some problems in nonparametric hypothesis testing for multi-
dimensional data. Modern computational capabilities, and the expanded data sets
produced by modern scientific equipment have greatly increased the scope of such
flexible statistical inference procedures. The investigator will develop a
framework for "distribution-free" inference with multivariate data that
generalizes many well-known and popular statistical ideas used for analyzing
univariate data. On the collaborative front, the investigator will continue
interdisciplinary research in astronomy. Further, some of these research
problems will form the dissertation thesis of a current PhD student at Columbia.
The investigator also plans to continue the tradition of mentoring undergraduate
summer interns.

The main thrust of this research is to study distribution-free methods for
multivariate and Hilbert space-valued data, based on the theory of optimal
transport -- a branch of mathematics that has received much attention lately in
applied mathematics/probability/machine learning. These methods generalize the
classical univariate rank-based methods to multivariate data. In the second part
of the proposal, the investigator will study the asymptotic relative efficiency
(ARE) of nonparametric tests and provide a characterization of ARE when the
underlying test statistics converge weakly to an infinite mixtures of chi-square
distributions, under the null hypothesis. This framework includes many
interesting examples that arise in practice, including two-sample testing,
independence testing, testing multivariate symmetry, inference on directional
data, etc. The investigator will also develop a theoretical framework for
estimating the ARE in this setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.