* 2311978
* TS: Advancing and Broadening Access to Laser-Ablation (U-Th)/He Thermochronlogy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* James Metcalf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2028
* USD 161,156.00

This project will provide funds for human infrastructure support in the CU TRaIL
(University of Colorado Boulder - Thermochronology Research and Instrumentation
Lab) to help transform high-spatial resolution, LA-(U-Th)/He thermochronology
from a specialty method accessible to only a handful of geochronologists
worldwide into a technique available for widespread use by the national
geoscience community. (U-Th)/He dating is now a fundamental tool for
constraining thermal histories, with applications across a spectrum of tectonic,
structural, geomorphic, sedimentary, petrologic, volcanogenic, and planetary
studies. Nearly all existing (U-Th)/He data are conventional whole-crystal
analyses. Laser ablation (LA)-(U-Th)/He dating, in which one or more analyses
are acquired on a small portion of a crystal, holds tremendous potential to
enrich a wide variety of research.

The CU TRaIL currently serves as a major source of whole-crystal (U-Th)/He data
and training for the U.S. Earth science community. This project will similarly
create a community resource for LA-(U-Th)/He data and training in TRaIL, by
accelerating TRaILâ€™s LA-(U-Th)/He development activities and providing the
resources necessary to offer this powerful technique more widely. Areas of
application include more efficient generation of large-N detrital (U-Th)/(He-Pb)
double-date datasets, multi-spot (U-Th)/He date profiles to constrain bedrock
thermal histories, single-grain intracrystalline (U-Th)/He maps that can be
integrated with other types of intra-grain data (e.g., Raman), in situ
petrochronology, and analysis of minerals for which analytical challenges are
posed by the conventional method. The new TRaIL team member will also establish
new and engage in existing BAJEDI-focused activities that include a new
partnership with a 79% minority, STEM-focused public high school in Denver,
involvement of the lab for the first time in the CU Uplift Research Program that
entrains underrepresented minorities in STEM research projects, and interacting
with underrepresented minority students who are obtaining a summer research
experience in TRaIL through the RESESS (Research Experiences in Solid Earth
Science for Students) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.