* 2311205
* Exploring electrodynamics of correlated 2D transition metal dichalcogenides using on-chip terahertz spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Feng Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 392,601.00

Nontechnical description: Just as we can see the world via electromagnetic
waves, one can learn the properties of electronic states in solids by measuring
their electromagnetic responses. However, these measurements are sometimes
challenging in materials formed by stacks of atomically-thin crystals such as
graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). The properties of these
materials can give rise to novel quantum states of many electrons, but the
characteristic frequencies of such states often fall into the range where the
electromagnetic wavelength far exceeds the possible sample size. In this
project, the PI develops advanced on-chip THz spectroscopy with integrated sub-
wavelength waveguide to study the electromagnetic response of these novel states
in TMD heterostructures. The research can advance our fundamental understanding
of interacting electrons and lead to new functional THz devices. It can also
provide an active learning environment for graduate and undergraduate students
to gain interdisciplinary skills. The project engages undergraduate students at
UC Berkeley, especially those from underrepresented groups, to drive the
frontier of science and technology in the future.

Technical description: This project aims to investigate the terahertz
electrodynamic responses of correlated quantum phases, such as flat-band metals,
correlated insulators, and Wigner crystals, in two-dimensional (2D) transition
metal dichalcogenide (TMD) heterostructures. These highly tunable
heterostructures have emerged as one of the leading platforms for studying novel
states formed by interacting electrons. However, despite the great interest, the
electrodynamic properties of these states at their characteristic frequency
scales remain largely unknown. In this project, the PI develops advanced on-chip
terahertz spectroscopy to study these properties. Specifically, the PI explores
three research directions in the project: (1) Studying a new type of 2D plasmon
in flat bands with frequency exceeding the upper bound for single electron-hole
decay. Such plasmons may have enhanced lifetimes and exhibit properties
reflecting the underlying correlated phases. (2) Measuring the full doping
evolution of the frequency-dependent conductivity in heterostructures resembling
the triangular-lattice Hubbard model, a paradigmatic model of correlated
electrons. (3) Investigating the electron vibration modes in Wigner and
generalized Wigner crystals, as well as their evolutions across the quantum and
thermal melting of these electron crystals. The proposed project can advance our
fundamental understanding of the TMD heterostructures and the long-standing
correlated electron problem. It also provides an interdisciplinary learning
environment for graduate and undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.