* 2311756
* Collaborative Research: Elements: ProDM: Developing A Unified Progressive Data Management Library for Exascale Computational Science
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Liang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 239,952.00

Effective management of scientific data produced by extreme-scale simulations
and instruments is crucial for advancing scientific discoveries. Due to the
scale of data and the diverse requirements of scientific analytics, there is a
growing need to manage data in a progressive manner, such that users can stream
as much data as they need to carry out their data analytics with reduced data
movement and computation. However, little effort has been put into creating
robust and scalable cyberinfrastructure services that link the recent
algorithmic innovations in progressive methods with scientific data analytics,
leaving these capabilities inaccessible to scientists. This project aims to
develop a sustainable framework ProDM that supports the progressive management
of scientific data to facilitate its use in scientific applications. The success
of this project will enable new scientific research and novel findings by
providing a new way to manage and analyze data. Furthermore, outcomes of this
project will be delivered as publicly available software to enhance research
cyberinfrastructure, promote education and teaching, and broaden participation
in computing.

ProDM is centered upon the unification of viable progressive representations and
tailored development for in-situ and post-hoc analytic routines. In particular,
it involves three key activities. First, a data engine will be built to unify
state-of-the-art progressive representations, and provide portable hardware
support for accelerators as well as interoperative software interfaces to other
data management and analytic libraries. Second, an in-situ engine will be
developed to facilitate the use of progressive representations for in-situ data
analytics, which include a redesign of in-situ semantics and adjustment of
runtime dynamics. Third, a post-hoc engine will be developed to efficiently
access progressive data and improve the performance of data retrieval for post-
hoc data analytics. ProDM will be deployed on campus-wide computing
infrastructures and leadership systems for integration and evaluation with real-
world scientific applications from climate, fusion, molecular dynamics, and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.