* 2312185
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Transparent and Customizable Android Container-Based Virtualization Architecture for Dynamic Malware Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Jiang Ming, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 465,628.00

With the success of Android mobile device markets, Android malicious software
(malware) threatens billions of smartphone users. Driven by financial profit,
malware authors are highly motivated to evade detection and to challenge
forensics procedures. In the malware detection/evasion arms race, defenders
apply analysis techniques that require a highly controlled environment to
collect data about malware actions and gain insights into their intents, while
still preventing malware from discovering that it is operating in an analysis
environment. The project introduces a novel and customizable malware analysis
environment capable of handling evasive Android malware. The software artifacts
generated and made publicly available to the open-source community have the
potential to revolutionize the way analysts perform forensics tasks, thus
protecting smartphone users and their Android devices against cyber-attacks.
Furthermore, this project, performed in a Hispanic-serving institution, involves
recruitment of students from under-represented groups in computing.

This project innovatively applies container-based virtualization to address the
long-standing challenge of efficiently analyzing evasive malware. Current
Android malware dynamic analysis platforms (i.e., Android emulators and bare-
metal machines) have limitations. Powered by the transparent and customizable
virtual environment, this out-of-the-box malware analysis approach overcomes
existing analysis techniques' limitations and amplifies their benefits. This
analysis environment is more resilient against evasive malware than standard
Android emulators. Furthermore, the environment is stealthier and provides
better flexibility and productivity for analysis than bare-metal machines. The
novel Android container architecture has cross-disciplinary contributions: it
improves resource utilization, reduces hardware costs, thus advancing automated
malware analysis and streamlining the tasks of malware analysts. Moreover, other
researchers can develop new techniques to boost more powerful malware analysis
methods, such as behavior-based malware clustering and evasive malware
detection. The success of this research potentially revolutionizes dynamic
malware analysis methods and tips the balance of the malware war toward the
defender.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.