* 2312448
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium: An Integrated Multi-Time Scale Approach to High-Performance, Intelligent, and Secure O-RAN based NextG
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Huacheng Zeng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Recent movement to open up radio access network (RAN) interfaces, led by the
O-RAN Alliance, has introduced a new paradigm for future wireless networks. With
its key features of openness and intelligence, O-RAN enables a ``mix-and-match”
approach to RAN development and deployment, allowing telecom carriers to select
the best hardware and software from different vendors. Such openness also
catalyzes the integration of machine learning (ML) based intelligence into the
RAN and promises further performance improvement. This project aims to address
several major challenges in O-RAN, with the objective of enhancing its
performance, intelligence, and trustworthiness. Through innovation in wireless
algorithm and protocol design, ML, and network security, this project expedites
the evolution of O-RAN ecosystem. The outcomes of this project provide valuable
insights to the wireless industry and academic research community regarding new
potentials, challenges, and innovative solutions surrounding O-RAN technologies.
Moreover, the project promotes the participation of women and students with
diverse backgrounds in wireless communications and computer science research
while enhancing pedagogical activities through new course materials.

This project aims to enhance the performance, intelligence, and trustworthiness
of O-RAN by tackling several fundamental challenges across its control loops of
three different time scales. The project consists of three interconnected
research thrusts. The first thrust focuses on real-time multi-user multi-input
and multi-output (MU-MIMO) beamforming in O-RAN’s distributed unit (O-DU). It
develops a data-driven approach for beamforming that accounts for channel
uncertainty. The second thrust focuses on the design of ML algorithms for MU-
MIMO control within the near-RT RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC). It establishes
an optimization-based framework to generate high-quality labeled datasets for
training ML models. The third thrust aims to advance knowledge of the
vulnerabilities of ML models in the non-RT RIC of O-RAN and develop safeguard
solutions against data manipulation attacks. The three research thrusts are
tightly integrated vertically within the O-RAN architecture and their outcome
lays the foundation for designing a comprehensive solution for O-RAN.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.