* 2312413
* Workshop: Emerging Methodologists in Qualitative and Multi-Method Research
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Diana Kapiszewski, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2026
* USD 49,760.00

This project lays the groundwork for an ongoing annual conference in methodology
for qualitative and multi-method research. A collaborative effort led by a
diverse team of political scientists that aims to expand the community of
scholars who develop and publish on methods for generating and analyzing
qualitative research data, and for combining such techniques with their
quantitative counterparts. The project promotes the progress of science by
encouraging and empowering researchers from under-represented groups to bring
their perspectives to methodological debates and to develop their methodological
ideas. The work of these qualitative researchers will enlarge the set of
available tools for creating and working with qualitative data, will strengthen
the discipline's methodological foundations, and will encourage advancements of
the qualitative field. More broadly, the diversification of the community of
methods faculty can have important downstream effects as those faculty serve as
role models, inspiring the students who work with them to become the next
generations of methodological innovators.

This award funds three inaugural Emerging Methodologists Workshop for
Qualitative and Multi-Method Explanatory Research (EMW-QMER) will be held in
Fall 2023, 2024, and 2025. At each workshop, six advanced graduate students and
junior faculty from under-represented groups will present and receive feedback
on a paper they have written on methods for collecting, generating, or analyzing
qualitative data, and/or strategies for integrating qualitative and quantitative
methods. The workshops will be attended by political scientists interested in
developing, publishing on, and teaching qualitative and multi-method research.
Project personnel and a broad team of senior scholars recruited to serve as
mentors for each presenter will offer intensive support, introducing presenters
into networks and working to build an inclusive community. The initiative will
bring new voices, perspectives, and ideas to the development of methods for
generating and analyzing qualitative data, and for integrating qualitative and
quantitative techniques. As more scholars from under-represented groups innovate
methodologically and publish their work, their contributions will broaden,
diversify, and thus enrich the research community focused on developing such
approaches. Ultimately a multiplier effect is anticipated through which
undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented groups are
increasingly motivated to develop their own ideas about research methods because
they see faculty to whom they can closely relate writing on, teaching, and
leading organizations dedicated to such methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.