* 2312899
* EAGER: Resolving the issue of pairing symmetry in Sr2RuO4
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Ying Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 253,202.00

Non-technical description:

Superconductivity is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon highly relevant to quantum
computing and other quantum technologies. The drive towards quantum computing
calls for deeper understanding of the fundamental physics of superconductivity.
For example, the implementation of fault tolerant topological quantum computing
may be achievable with exotic spin-triplet superconductors. Single-layer
strontium ruthenate (SRO) had been a leading candidate for a spin-triplet
superconductor up to 2019. However, it turned out that one of the experiments
that supported that claim in SRO is incorrect. This led to a controversy on the
nature of superconductivity in this material. This experimental and theoretical
project will aim to address this controversy as well as train future scientists
from underrepresented minority communities in STEM to help meet the human
resource needs of emerging quantum technologies.

Technical description:

The symmetry properties of the superconducting order parameter, which consists
of orbital and spin parts, are of fundamental interest for superconductivity
research. Single-layer strontium ruthenate (SRO) was considered a leading
candidate for spin-triplet superconductivity up to 2019 when results from an
important NMR Knight shift experiment from 1998, which probes the spin part of
the order parameter, was shown to be incorrect. This led to suggestions by some
researchers that SRO is actually a spin singlet. On the other hand, the
Josephson effect based phase-sensitive experiments on SRO, which have remained
largely unchallenged, suggest that the orbital part of the order parameter in
SRO is of an odd parity, which implies that SRO is a spin triplet due to the
presence of an inversion symmetry in this material. The heated debate on the
pairing symmetry in SRO calls for new theoretical insights and additional
experimental inputs. This project aims to strengthen the previous determination
of the odd parity order parameter in SRO as well as identify ways to reconcile
this with work probing the spin degrees of freedom.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.