* 2312616
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Towards Harmonious Federated Intelligence in Heterogeneous Edge Computing via Data Migration
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Linke Guo, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 07/31/2027
* USD 669,867.00

Edge computing has promoted a plethora of emerging applications that benefit
people's daily life, such as smart cities, advanced manufacturing, and connected
health. As the key enabler to this promising paradigm, the widely adopted
Federated Learning (FL) algorithms can reshape the edge computing by offloading
the training of large-scale data to nearby edges. To achieve federated
intelligence with high accuracy and high efficiency, a major hindrance is data
and system heterogeneity. When deploying FL algorithms to a practical edge
computing system, the collected raw data may be corrupted and participating
edges may experience different computational loads. Those heterogeneity issues
significantly degrade the training efficiency and accuracy for achieving the
ideal system performance. This project develops a Harmonious Federated
Intelligence framework to allocate the collected data to its most favorable edge
for training based on its intrinsic characteristics and required hardware
resources. By enabling data migration across nearby heterogeneous edges, both
learning models and heterogeneous data can be fed to the optimal edge for
training without either wasting or overly exploiting hardware resources. The
software-hardware co-design of harmonious federated intelligence fully unleashes
the computational and communication potential of exiting edge computing
infrastructures in transportation systems, manufacturing industries, home
automation, and connected healthcare. This project seeks to broaden the
scientific view of undergraduates and underrepresented students in the field of
edge computing, machine learning, and data compression, and prepare them with
the cross-disciplinary skills needed to succeed in the modern workforce.

By introducing data-system-algorithm harmony, this project innovates the
federated learning in heterogeneous edge computing to fundamentally tackle the
data heterogeneity and unbalanced hardware resources usage. Given heterogeneous
data samples with imbalanced feature spaces, Thrust 1 develops an imputation-
based approach to complement missing features and values. Thrust 2 designs a
Parallel Grow-and-Prune sparse training framework to schedule the sparse
topology of learning models with joint consideration of both hardware resource
budget and data characteristics. To enable efficient data migration, Thrust 3
develops adaptive data compression schemes, including both lossy and lossless
compression algorithms, in different hardware settings. Thrust 4 proposes a
fine-grained control mechanism for semi-asynchronous Vertical Federated Learning
to adapt hardware resource reallocation and data migration, in order to minimize
the impact of individual edge staleness due to system heterogeneity. The
software-hardware co-design will be evaluated through data-driven simulation and
experimental validation using an integrated platform consisting of a variety of
edge devices featuring diverse computation and communication capabilities. To
further validate the scalability, the team will develop a large-scale prototype
on the NSF FABRIC testbed with core and edge nodes across the US.

This project is jointly funded by the Software and Hardware Foundations (SHF)
core research program in the Computing and Communication Foundations (CCF)
Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.