* 2312491
* Mentoring Psychology Research Experiences through Replication with the Collaborative Replication and Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jordan Wagge, Avila University
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,891.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
research training in psychology through the use of direct replication as a
learning tool. The project will accomplish this through a series of virtual
summer workshops for psychology instructors who will learn how to teach students
to conduct research by having students complete their own study from start to
finish. The workshop series would introduce instructors to the Collaborative
Replication and Education Project (CREP), a group that supports direct
replication of published work by encouraging instructors to have students
conduct these replication studies in their courses. Replication is a hallmark of
good science, and work that supports replication through education is a priority
for the National Science Foundation. Additionally, the field benefits from
direct replication of published work and students are excellent candidates to
carry out direct replication, as demonstrated by recent calls for students to
engage in this work for their projects and theses (Quintana, 2021). The proposed
workshops will take an existing system for student replications, CREP, and
provide instructors time and support in developing teaching materials and
preparing their courses to use this approach.

This series of workshops for undergraduate psychology faculty will be held
virtually in Summer 2023 and will be delivered to up to 14 participants. The
workshops will introduce CREP and demonstrate how it can be used in the context
of courses, and then provide resources to support instructors in teaching
students how to write meaningful extension hypotheses related to diversity,
equity, inclusion, and access. During the series, the facilitators will meet
with instructors individually to assist in tailoring each instructorâ€™s work to
their specific institution and students. Participants will contribute to a
teaching manual for CREP projects and, following the workshop series, will also
be invited to contribute to a manuscript related to this manual and their
experiences teaching with CREP. Teaching materials and select workshop
recordings will be available for other instructors. This project will therefore
not only impact these 14 instructors and their students, but also any other
instructor who is interested in adopting these projects in the future. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.