* 2312858
* Conference: 2023 STEM Summer Camp for Indigenous Middle School Students in Utqiagvik, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Ming Xiao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,615.00

Engineering workforce development (EWD) is a national priority and need that is
particularly critical in producing the next-generation engineers in Indigenous
communities in Alaska who can address the increasing infrastructure challenges
due to accelerated climate change. EWD should start at as early an age as
possible to instill STEM interests and concepts in K-12 students. Pennsylvania
State University (PSU) will organize a 7-day STEM workshop with a focus on
engineering for Indigenous middle school students in Utqiaġvik, Alaska in summer
2023. The workshop will be organized and led by Dr. Ming Xiao, Professor of
Civil Engineering (CE) at PSU with the assistance of two PSU CE undergraduate
students. The workshop is a collaborative effort with Iḷisaġvik College in
Utqiaġvik, and the college will provide meeting space and logistics.
Participants will include 20 middle school students, mainly from the villages in
the North Slope Borough (NSB), Alaska. Students will participate in seven hands-
on group activities. An elder from the local community will be invited to
participate so that the western science and engineering knowledge and
Traditional Knowledge will be taught together to the participants.

The workshop in Utqiaġvik, Alaska will support development of an interest in
STEM, and particularly engineering, in middle school students with the ultimate
goal of training future Arctic STEM scientists and engineers. The participants
will also have an opportunity to explore how Traditional Knowledge and western
scientific and engineering knowledge can be co-taught to Indigenous Alaskan
middle school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.