* 2312275
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: Architecting GPUs for Practical Homomorphic Encryption-based Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 395,843.00

Cloud computing has become a popular path for efficiently sharing compute
resources. However, the cloud can be an unsafe computing environment. To prevent
data exposure, one can use Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE)-based computing in
the cloud. FHE provides strong data privacy guarantees because it enables
operations on encrypted data. Unfortunately, processing encrypted data using FHE
takes multiple orders of magnitude longer than processing unencrypted data due
to its prohibitively high compute and memory requirements. This project will
explore the use of graphics processing units (GPUs) to accelerate FHE-based
computing. We consider three different FHE schemes: Brakerski-Gentry-
Vaikuntanathan (BGV), Brakerski/Fan-Vercauteren (B/FV), and Cheon-Kim-Kim-Song
(CKKS), thus supporting operations on both integers and floating-point numbers.

This project will advance the state-of-the-art in GPU compute and memory
architectures to enable practical FHE-based computing in the cloud. We will also
deliver new FHE benchmarks for GPUs and simulation tools. The outcomes of the
proposed research will have a direct impact on the design of next-generation
privacy-preserving computing systems. We will work with a network of companies
to evaluate our work in a practical setting and disseminate it. We will also
open-source software and tools resulting from our work to benefit the broader
research community. We will actively participate in the Broadening Participation
in Computing plans at both Northeastern University and Boston University, while
developing a number of new programs to engage a diverse audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.