* 2312982
* OAC Core: Improving Data Integrity for HPC Datasets using Sparsity Profile
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Seung Woo Son, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Scientists conduct analyses that rely on large-scale simulations to achieve
breakthroughs in multiple scientific domains, such as climate, energy, quantum
physics, and more. As system complexity increases, future large-scale systems
and the data generated, processed, stored, and transmitted by them are subject
to increasingly higher occurrences of soft errors or silent data corruption.
Importantly, this silently compromised data may go undetected because current
High-Performance Computing (HPC) software stacks largely lack mechanisms to
inform scientists of silent data corruption that could adversely affect the
integrity of their scientific interpretation. In order to combat silent data
corruption in HPC systems, this project introduces highly efficient and cost-
effective mechanisms to monitor and detect soft errors. Through the use of
unsupervised error detection, this project increases scientists’ confidence in
extreme-scale scientific simulations and data analyses, which advance the data-
intensive science discovery needed to solve some of the world’s most complex
contemporary problems, such as predicting severe weather conditions, designing
new materials, making new energy sources pragmatic, and others. The
methodologies of this project are also applicable to general-purpose computing
systems, increasing security and reliability on traditional computing and
Internet of Things devices.

This research applies compressive sensing and machine learning, especially an
unsupervised approach, to accurately detect soft and hardware errors in current
and future HPC systems. A compact representation that corresponds to the
original dataset is efficiently obtained through compressive sensing coupled
with a hardware-assisted data collection mechanism that requires no changes to
existing infrastructure. This is used with a spatiotemporal anomaly detection
model for in situ characterization of soft errors and errors caused by a
hardware malfunction, detecting anomalies deviating from acceptable ranges. The
approach is built into the scientific workflow and operates seamlessly with the
application without requiring application modification or customization.
Validation of the mechanism across multiple HPC platforms using scientific
workflows allows scientists to analyze and verify their datasets with increased
levels of trust.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.