* 2312191
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory and Modeling Studies to Resolve a Grand Challenge for Upper Atmospheric Science
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Konstantinos Kalogerakis, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 559,349.00

This collaborative project will exploit the synergy of space-based observations,
atmospheric modeling, and laser-based laboratory experiments to resolve the
origins of the CO2 15-um emission. It aims to provide a better quantification of
upper atmospheric radiative cooling by IR emissions through multi-disciplinary
research and educational activities that promote a broader appreciation of the
complexity of thermal energy balance in planetary atmospheres. The project will
enable improved determination of atmospheric temperature profile retrievals from
satellite observations of the CO2 15-um emission and advance our understanding
of radiative balance in the atmospheres of Earth, Mars, and Venus. The work has
the potential to add new knowledge to the radiative energetics of the MLT and
address the long-standing question of CO2 15-um excitation and deexcitation
processes. It will also advance new knowledge relevant to other research areas
such as molecular energy transfer, chemical lasers, extrasolar planetary
atmospheres, the extreme environments in the shock waves generated during space
vehicle reentry, as well as chemical reaction dynamics and kinetics. The results
of this research benefit modelers of planetary atmospheres within and beyond our
solar system, theoreticians, and experimentalists, and enhance the scientific
returns of ground- and space-based remote sensing observations. This project
will also contribute to the education and formative research experiences of a
Ph.D. graduate student and one or more postdoctoral fellows and summer
undergraduate students.

The most important process controlling the population of CO2(nu-2) is assumed to
be its excitation and relaxation in collisions of CO2 with thermalized atomic
oxygen in its ground state, O(3P). This process is poorly understood despite
numerous studies over the past several decades. There are telltale signs of a
major fundamental deficiency in our understanding of the underlying processes.
This collaborative research effort combines (1) analysis of ground- and space-
based observations to quantify previously unrecognized sources of the CO2 15-µm
emission, (2) laser-based laboratory experimental studies of the O + CO2
interaction, and (3) state-of-the-art, non-LTE atmospheric modeling calculations
to reevaluate the global thermal balance of the MLT in the 15-µm CO2 band. The
team will conduct laboratory studies of O + CO2 collisions to 1) measure the
rate constant for relaxation of the CO2(010) vibrational level by O atoms, 2)
determine its temperature dependence from 150 K to 600 K, 3) investigate the
collision energy dependence of CO2 vibrational excitation in collisions with O
atoms, and 4) characterize the concentration of O atoms in the interaction
region and their diffusion out of the observation volume. They will also perform
observation analysis of SABER and LIDAR data, theory, and Non-LTE modeling
studies of O + CO2 Collisions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.