* 2312927
* CSR: Small: CONCERT: Designing Scalable Communication Runtimes with On-the-fly Compression for HPC and AI Applications on Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Hari Subramoni, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

In a world where Artificial Intelligence (AI) and High-Performance Computing
(HPC) hold immense potential for transformative advancements, this research aims
to develop CONCERT, an innovative communication and compression stack, to unlock
the full power of heterogeneous architectures and drive high performance and
scalability. By leveraging emerging accelerators and networking hardware,
CONCERT seeks to address fundamental challenges in utilizing heterogeneous
architectures, scaling communication, and integrating application agnostic on-
the-fly data compression. The project's significance lies in its potential to
advance the field of AI and HPC by enabling efficient utilization of
heterogeneous resources, resulting in enhanced performance and scalability.
CONCERT's impact extends beyond scientific advancements. The project will
provide valuable guidelines for designing and deploying next-generation HPC
systems, benefiting users in academia and industry. By actively promoting
diversity and inclusion, particularly among underrepresented minorities and
female students, the project fosters a more inclusive STEM environment. The
research outcomes will contribute to curriculum advancements, supporting
education and research in HPC, Deep/Machine Learning, and Data Analytics.
Additionally, the dissemination of results to collaborating organizations will
positively impact their HPC software applications, benefiting society as a
whole.

Over the last few years, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and High-Performance
Computing (HPC) applications have been continuously enhanced for performance by
exploiting the latest trends in highly heterogeneous hardware in modern HPC
systems. These applications have high communication requirements and exchange
massive amounts of data given a clusterâ€™s limited bandwidth. However, it is
challenging for an application to efficiently use all resources available in the
system to scale up communication with the emerging on-the-fly compression
support. For this reason, an adaptive communication/compression stack called
CONCERT (sCalable cOmmunicatioN Runtimes with On-the-fly Compression for HPC and
AI Applications on hEterogenous aRchiTectures) is proposed. CONCERT dynamically
employs dedicated resources through load and architectural aware Functional
Partitioning (FP). It enhances the existing de-facto standard for programming
large-scale applications using the Message Passing Interface (MPI). Specific
issues to be focused under this research are: 1) Efficient support for
MPI/Hybrid programming models on heterogeneous hardware to scale-up
communication and on-the-fly compression, 2) Designing FP-based schemes to
offload communication /compression tasks, 3) Designing a
communication/compression FP scheme to support scale-up requests from thousands
of endpoints, and 4) Studying the benefits of these schemes in terms of
performance and scalability. The transformative impact of the proposed research
enables a broad range of AI and HPC applications to efficiently and
transparently leverage the emerging accelerators and networking hardware from
multiple vendors. A strong software distribution and data dissemination plan is
also proposed to have a broader impact on academic and industrial HPC/AI
communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.