* 2312048
* Collaborative Research: Interactions of Sustainable Urban Design with Gentrification Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Charlyn Pearsall, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2026
* USD 224,732.00

Cities around the world aim to advance sustainable and resilient built
environments that equitably reduce carbon emissions, mitigate heat island
effects, and enhance urban livability. However, these initiatives can increase
housing prices and the cost of living, ultimately displacing long-time residents
through a process called green gentrification. This research will evaluate and
predict green gentrification associated with various sustainability initiatives
in urban neighborhoods by examining and comparing historical and current imagery
from Google Street View and demographic data from the Census Bureau. Using
Artificial Intelligence tools, the research team will identify the physical
indicators and sociodemographic metrics of green gentrification to analyze
gentrification processes vis-Ã -vis urban sustainability initiatives. These tools
will be developed using the City of Philadelphia as a case study and the
sustainability initiatives it has implemented over the last two decades. These
initiatives include green space development, urban agriculture, tree planting,
energy efficient retrofits, cycle lanes, public transit, and solar energy
installations. The research will be an important step towards addressing
significant societal challenges in Philadelphia and other urban contexts. Urban
policymakers and planners will gain a better understanding of how sustainability
policies and programs influence gentrification and how to mitigate its effects
and improve equitable outcomes. Furthermore, communities and public institutions
will be better able to analyze, predict, and address the negative consequences
of sustainable development, identify the most vulnerable neighborhoods, and
advance equitable sustainability initiatives.

There is a critical knowledge gap in understanding how, when, and which urban
sustainability programs (i.e., improvements to transit, greenspace, and housing)
impact gentrification-led displacement. In this research, the investigators will
develop new models and methods that rely on recent advances in Machine Learning
and the availability of high-volume spatiotemporal and sociodemographic data.
The research team will develop methods at the intersection of urban analytics
and built environment-centered predictive analyses to forecast and map
gentrification susceptibility. The team will integrate these forecasts with
models of urban building energy use, greenspace development, and transit systems
to identify gentrification processes, in all its variants and lifecycle stages,
that are driven by sustainability programs. The research project will harness
artificial intelligence image recognition methods with Machine Learning
algorithms, urban energy modeling, and sociodemographic data with the following
three outcomes: (i) Development of Artificial Intelligence computer vision
methods applied to Google Street View (GSV) image data with a Machine Learning
(ML) algorithm to identify and categorize indicators of green gentrification;
(ii) Integration of sociodemographic and energy data with the GSV-ML model
developed in part (i) to evaluate the relationship between green gentrification
and sustainable interventions. This integrated model will use Machine Learning
to quantify the predictive power of different urban greening features on
neighborhood gentrification susceptibility and develop a tentative forecast of
gentrification for the study area; (iii) Elicidation of sustainable urban design
and policies that are underpinned by social justice and equity concerns and
prevent green gentrification. Ultimately, this project focuses on predicting the
ways in which greening interventions impact gentrification processes to advance
more equitable sustainable urban policies and programs.

This collaborative project is co-funded by the CBET/ENG Environmental
Sustainability program and the BCS/SBE Human-Environmental and Geographical
Sciences program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.