* 2312990
* Research Infrastructure: Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center Support
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Asieh Naderi, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Deer mice (Genus Peromyscus) are the most abundant rodents in North America and
are used extensively by investigators all over the world for research in
disciplines ranging from ecology and evolution, to genetics, physiology, public
health and infectious diseases. Besides academic investigators, Peromyscus users
also include other federal agencies in the U.S. and private entities. The
Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (PGSC) of the University of South Carolina
maintains and distributes animals of 5 different species of Peromyscus. Support
from this award will assist in the uninterrupted operation of the PGSC.

The mission of the PGCS is to maintain colonies of various species of outbred,
genetically diverse deer mice (genus Peromyscus) and distribute them to
investigators in the US and all over the world. Six different closed colonies
are currently maintained, involving 5 Peromyscus species: P. maniculatus (2
colonies), P. polionotus, P. eremicus, P. californicus, and P. leucopus. For all
animals generated in the PGSC, pedigree data since the original establishment of
the colonies are available to external users. The availability of pedigreed
animals, including animals from "reference" wild type populations, is of
particular significance for research reproducibility. In addition, specific
small-scale experimental tasks can be performed upon request and are provided as
contract research operations (e.g., DNA sampling, histologic analyses, special
diets, ovariectomy, or vasectomy procedures). The PGSC also serves as a focal
point for Peromyscus-associated research to accumulates and disseminate
information to the communities of interest and provides training for visiting
investigators on Peromyscus handling and colony maintenance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.