* 2312126
* Intelligent Biology and Medicine in 2023: Advancing Interdisciplinary Education, Collaboration, and Innovation in Data Science and Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Zhongming Zhao, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 05/31/2024
* USD 18,832.00

The fields of bioinformatics, genomics, systems biology, and intelligent
computing have been under rapid growth during the past two decades, thanks to
the advances in biotechnologies and computing power. Research in these fields
requires interdisciplinary training and collaboration, which is challenging for
both students and junior investigators. The International Conference on
Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) was developed in 2012, with its goal to
promote information science, technology, and education to a great variety of
trainees and young investigators, including trainees, faculty, teachers,
scientists, and engineers, and to provide a forum for the cross-fertilization of
ideas and collaboration in these areas. This award provides funding for 20
students and four keynote speakers to attend the International Conference on
Intelligent Biology and Medicine (CBM) to be held in July 2022 in Tampa, FL. The
trainees will participate in several activites including: i) tutorials and
workshops, ii) poster session, iii) a 2 hour session with keynote speakers, iii)
networking dinner with keynote speakers and the organizers. The successful
completion of ICIBM 2023 will help these trainees and junior investigators learn
cutting-edge technologies from distinguished speakers and tutorials and
workshops, share their exciting research works, build collaborations, gain
advice from other peers, and build better careers in the rapidly evolving data
science and artificial intelligence fields.

This award will provide support to develop and provide a series of
interdisciplinary, educational and scientific events in ICIBM 2023, with a
specific focus on data science and artificial intelligence. The conference
program will include eight distinguished lectures from four keynote speakers and
four eminent scholars, four tutorials and workshops, a technology innovation
session, a poster presentation session, and an Artificial Intelligence on Big
Data: Promise for Early-stage Trainees session. As before, the conference will
provide abundant collaborative and interactive opportunities, and encourage
educational and interactive initiatives for both junior and established
researchers. ICIBM will develop program and events to support the career
development of talented trainees and young scientists, including
underrepresented minorities, women, and persons with disabilities. The financial
support will cover the expenses for 4 keynote speakers, as well as allow the
organizers to support 20 trainees to actively participate in all scientific and
technical sessions at ICIBM 2023 through travel grants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.