* 2312263
* Collaborative Research: SHF: MEDIUM: General and Scalable Pluggable Type Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Manu Sridharan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2027
* USD 289,000.00

Given the central role of software in modern society, tools and techniques that
ensure this software behaves reliably is of critical importance. Pluggable type
checking has been shown to be a highly effective technique for preventing a wide
variety of software bugs. However, pluggable type checking is difficult to
adopt, as it requires software developers to spend significant time inserting
additional annotations into their existing source code. This project will
develop techniques for pluggable type inference, automating the insertion of
these additional annotations. The project's novelties are a suite of pluggable
type inference algorithms that work with a wide variety of pluggable type
checkers, infer accurate annotations, and scale to large software systems. The
project's impacts are significantly easing the adoption of pluggable type
checking for existing code, thereby improving the reliability and
maintainability of real-world software systems.

Inference of pluggable type annotations requires high scalability and best-
effort output for programs that do not type check, properties not provided by
existing techniques. The project will develop a suite of pluggable type
inference approaches, suitable for handling a wide variety of pluggable type
systems and checkers. The project will explore search-based, "black-box"
inference techniques that are generic over the type checker implementation;
framework-based, "gray-box" inference techniques that work with any type checker
built on common infrastructure; and specialized "white-box" inference techniques
that utilize type-system-specific reasoning. Additionally, the project will
investigate new type systems and features enabled by effective inference: when
types are mostly inferred, more complex and verbose pluggable type systems will
become practical.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.