* 2312089
* CSR: Small: Leveraging Physical Side-Channels for Good
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Nader Sehatbakhsh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 12/31/2026
* USD 599,856.00

Internet-of-things and cyber-physical systems are becoming increasingly
applicable in industrial and residential environments, opening up new
opportunities for smart homes, sensor networks, and smart manufacturing. While
becoming progressively more capable, this class of computing devices is
typically resource-constrained with limited energy and data storage. It is thus
imperative that critical applications commonly used in these devices, such as
communication and debugging, be carefully designed to have minimal energy,
performance, and area overhead while embracing the diversity of software and
hardware present within these systems. The project’s novelties are presenting
new approaches for enabling low-power low-overhead communication,
fingerprinting, and debugging in internet-of-things systems. The common insight
in all the proposed solutions is, instead of imposing additional overhead for
achieving a particular functionality (e.g., communication or debugging), we
leverage unintentional physical signals created by the system (called side-
channels) to enable the desired functionalities. As a result, we are able to
propose innovative and radically different methods. The project's broader
significance and importance is that the proposed solutions enjoy lower energy,
performance, and area storage overheads since it eliminates the need for
additional infrastructure on the device to achieve the required functionality
while being applicable to a wide range of systems.

The objective of this project is to set out a research agenda for developing
techniques and systems for addressing the fundamental challenges of internet-of-
things systems. The key idea in this proposal is to leverage physical side-
channels, unintentionally created by the target system, for useful purposes.
Specifically, this research aims to fulfill three major objectives: (i) we
design a new method for transmitting AND receiving data using side-channels. The
proposed method relies only on software and is extremely low overhead. (ii) We
develop a new strategy for device detection and authentication by relying only
on physical side-channels as opposed to leveraging radio frequency signals which
are extensively used in the state-of-the-art. (iii) We propose a new method for
debugging Internet of Things devices by using physical side-channels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.