* 2312794
* III: Medium: Towards Inclusive Recommendation Systems with Stakeholder Alignment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Naren Ramakrishnan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cornelia Caragea
* 07/31/2026
* USD 328,121.00

As recommender systems continue to impact diverse stakeholders in various
aspects of daily life, accommodating their distinct objectives is crucial.
Traditional recommendation methodologies have focused solely on optimizing
accuracy and related metrics, neglecting other diverse stakeholder-dependent
objectives. This project represents a systematic effort to incorporate the
objectives of different stakeholders into the design and deployment of a
recommender system. This includes characterizing their objectives, designing
recommendation approaches that incorporate and optimize different objectives,
improving data quality, and understanding the drivers of undesired system
behaviors. This comprehensive effort serves the national interest of advancing
trustworthy AI and will include outreach initiatives such as competitions,
workshops, and interactive demonstrations.

This project aims to investigate the fundamental components necessary for
designing a recommender system that aligns with the objectives of multiple
stakeholders. To achieve this, the research will (i) develop frameworks that use
data as a soft metric to capture complex, context-dependent objectives; (ii)
design methods to improve data quality and facilitate the alignment with
different objectives; (iii) develop game-theoretic recommendation algorithms to
achieve a tradeoff in different objectives that is acceptable to all
stakeholders; and (iv) develop frameworks that attribute system-wide behaviors
to individuals who provide data to a recommender system. Through these efforts,
this project significantly expands the foundational knowledge of alignment
mechanism design for machine learning systems and broadens our understanding of
the impact of data in a multi-stakeholder environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.