* 2312342
* RI: Medium: Techniques for Massive-Scale Strategic Reasoning: Imperfect-Information Subgame Solving and Offering Guarantees in Simulation-Based Games
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tuomas Sandholm, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 854,896.00

Models of strategic interaction have mainly been simple enough for humans to
solve in their heads or on paper. However, many - arguably most - important
strategic settings lie beyond human limits. One such class is problems that are
too large. These include detailed models of reality in settings of practical
importance, as well as many recreational settings. Another class is where the
rules are not provided, and the solver only has access to a simulator in which
to practice. This setup occurs in defense applications, real-time strategy
settings, trading simulations, etc. This research will significantly increase
the scalability of solving algorithms for both classes in the most realistic
setting: multi-step imperfect-information strategic interactions. Although
application independent, these techniques are needed for use cases including
negotiation, business, defense, auctions, strategic pricing, cybersecurity,
medicine, and many more - essentially all strategic interactions. The results
will be incorporated into two new courses: “Computational Game Solving” and
“Cooperative AI”, and into the undergraduate and graduate introduction to AI
courses.

Technically, this research has three main prongs. First, the project will
design, implement, and test novel scalable techniques for subtree solving, the
most impactful development in solving imperfect-information extensive-form
strategic settings in the last two decades. Second, the project will design,
implement, and test novel scalable techniques for subtree solving when the
common knowledge closure (which is the starting point of prior subgame-solving
techniques) is too large to handle computationally. Finally, the project will
design, implement, and test techniques for finding equilibrium strategies in
settings where the rules are not provided, and the solver only has access to a
simulator. Prior techniques have not been able to offer guarantees of low or
zero exploitability in that setup. A recent breakthrough has enabled such
guarantees to be provided, but significant novel work is required to make the
approach scalable. This research will develop such techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.