* 2312090
* Understanding the Internal Structure and Near-Storm Environments of Supercells via Innovative Analysis of Targeted Observation by Radars and UAS of Supercells (TORUS) Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Erik Rasmussen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 678,911.00

The question of why some supercell thunderstorms develop tornadoes while others
do not is an ongoing area of study in the severe weather research community.
Prior research has suggested that certain near-storm environmental conditions
may play a large role in determining whether a supercell will become tornadic.
In 2019 and 2022, NSF and NOAA supported an observational campaign to make fine-
scale measurements of the conditions around supercells. This award will apply
advanced data analysis and modeling techniques to the observational data
collected in that campaign to answer questions about the relationship between
near-storm environmental conditions and tornadogenesis. The societal impact of
this project will be found through the increased understanding of the conditions
that form tornadoes and the dissemination of findings to the operational
meteorological community. Three early-career researchers will be trained under
this award, assuring the development of the next generation of scientists.

This award is for analysis of data collected during the Targeted Observation by
Radars and UAS of Supercells (TORUS) campaign that conducted field seasons in
2019 and 2022. The TORUS project sought to improve understanding of small-scale
processes in supercells by elucidating the relationship of storm-generated
boundaries and coherent structures within storm outflow to the
generation/amplification of near-surface rotation. Under the TORUS umbrella,
this award has the overarching goal of improving understanding of why some
supercells produce tornadoes and others do not. The research team plans to
synthesize TORUS observations via multi-Doppler wind syntheses, diabatic
Lagrangian analyses, and ensemble data assimilation methods to address three
main research foci:

1. Understanding streamwise vorticity currents (SVCs) and storm-internal
boundaries and their relationship to amplification of near-ground rotation in
supercells. 2. Understanding observed relationships between supercell updraft
and inflow properties. 3. Understanding supercell inflow evolution and its
relationship to storm properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.