* 2312149
* Roles of Heme and Protein Conformation in Ligand Binding Cooperativity and Selectivity in Bacterial Globin Coupled Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Emily Weinert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pumtiwitt McCarthy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 798,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Emily Weinert and her research group at Pennsylvania State University
will investigate the signaling mechanisms of proteins that allow bacteria to
respond to oxygen and nitric oxide. Bacteria are essential for the health of
plants, animals, humans, and ecosystems, but some species also can cause
detrimental effects, such as infections. To respond to changes in their
environment, bacteria use proteins to sense oxygen/nitric oxide and then alter
metabolism and phenotypes to enable survival. By understanding how bacteria
respond to changing oxygen/nitric oxide levels, methods can be developed to
alter bacterial behavior or engineer bacteria to elicit a specific function. The
proposed research will characterize how sensing proteins recognize and respond
to oxygen and/or nitric oxide and will use this knowledge to investigate the
possibility of rewiring bacterial regulation. This project will provide
specialized training for students in protein chemistry, spectroscopy, and
structural mass spectrometry. In addition, the outreach program will integrate
research on bacterial sensing and signaling into lesson plans, experiments using
readily available materials, and a board game for high school and undergraduate
students. Dissemination of the outreach materials online and through
presentations at high schools in rural communities surrounding Penn State
University is expected to allow the results of the research program to reach a
wide audience.

This research project seeks to characterize the mechanisms of ligand binding
cooperativity and selectivity within a family of bacterial heme proteins, termed
globin coupled sensors. Globin coupled sensor proteins are widely distributed
within bacteria and often contain output domains involved in cyclic di-GMP
metabolism, which controls phenotypes such as biofilm formation, motility, and
virulence. A range of techniques, including equilibrium ligand binding, enzyme
kinetics, site-directed mutagenesis, resonance Raman spectroscopy, and hydrogen-
deuterium exchange mass spectrometry will be used to interrogate the
interactions that allow for communication between heme domains and ligand-
selective effects on the linked c-di-GMP metabolic domains. Studies in bacteria
will interrogate the effects of ligand binding cooperativity and selectivity on
c-di-GMP signaling and phenotypes within bacteria. Results from this study are
expected to provide new information about the mechanisms controlling cooperative
ligand binding, bacterial gas-sensing proteins, c-di-GMP metabolic domain
regulation, and modulation of bacterial biofilm formation and virulence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.