* 2312974
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Zero-trust and Traceable Data Infrastructure for Health IoT Data Storage and Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* WenZhan Song, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Personal data, such as health IoT data, nowadays is possessed by service
providers’ central data centers, and individuals do not have ultimate control
over the data they produce. This is a growing concern due to the sensitive
nature of such user-generated data. The proposed Web 3.0-based data
infrastructure is an evolution of the current centralized data ecosystem, aiming
to address some of its limitations and challenges. This project aims to build a
zero-trust and traceable data-sharing ecosystem Web3DB, where data ownership and
control are returned to the individuals who generate the data. In Web3DB, the
data owners will be able to define the data access and sharing policy that will
be enforced in a zero-trust manner, i.e., without relying on central
coordinators or infrastructure. During such access control, users’ identities
and credentials will always remain encrypted for their privacy. Access and usage
of individuals’ data will be logged securely such that only the data owners can
monitor the access and usage of their data. Furthermore, this research will
support the development of a diverse cohort of Ph.D., undergraduate, and high
school students.

Underlying the proposed work is a novel zero-trust infrastructure for traceable
data sharing. The project will entail research activities that result in (1)
novel decentralized/self-sovereign identity management and access control with
such decentralized identities in a zero-trust manner, (2) new theories and
capabilities in the field of accountable data sharing as well as secure and
privacy-preserving data auditing, and (3) new theories for optimizing
distributed storage network and new understandings of the capacity of layer 2
blockchain extensions in the non-cryptocurrency blockchain. The research
outcomes will be implemented and integrated into the prototype system of the Web
3.0 database the team has been building. Realistic simulations and real-world
emulations will be conducted. The project outcomes include (1) open-source
projects of Web3DB, a zero-trust traceable data sharing infrastructure, (2) an
actively maintained and growing Web 3.0-based zero-trust data sharing ecosystem
with multiple institutions, and (3) education materials for teaching and
learning research components of Web3DB among undergraduate and high school
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.