* 2312996
* Collaborative Research: Supercell Left Flank Boundaries and Coherent Structures--Targeted Observations by Radars and UAS of Supercells Left-flank-Intensive Experiment (TORUS-LItE)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Gijs de Boer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2025
* USD 325,913.00

Supercell thunderstorms are responsible for the majority of significant
tornadoes in the United States. However, not all supercells form tornadoes and
the false alarm rate for tornado warnings is stubbornly high. This small field
campaign will use a variety of instrumentation, including radar trucks and
uncrewed aerial systems (UAS) to observe atmospheric boundaries that form in
what is known as the left flank region of a supercell. The idea is that
observing small scale motions and boundaries near supercells will allow us to
better understand why some supercells form tornadoes while others do not. Beyond
the practical operational forecasting aspect of this project, the field campaign
will provide 15-20 students with the opportunity to participate in the
collection of data. This award is for the Targeted Observations by Radars and
UAS of Supercells Left-flank-Intensive Experiment (TORUS-LItE), an observational
study of specific processes in the left flank of supercell thunderstorms and how
they relate to tornadogenesis. The research team will deploy UAS, radar,
sounding, and mobile Mesonet assets during a three-week period in May and June
2023 in the Great Plains to directly sample boundaries and coherent structures.
The investigators believe that advancing understanding of the relationship
between supercell tornadogenesis and left/forward flank boundaries and coherent
structures requires cross-sectional datasets that enable characterization of the
structure and evolution of these boundaries and associated coherent structures
in the context of supercell/mesocyclone strength and proximate evolution of
near-surface rotation. The science questions to be studied are: A) How often are
left/forward-flank boundaries coincident with enhanced vorticity and how does
the magnitude of this vorticity relate to the characteristics of the associated
boundaries and environmental/ambient state? B) Do the characteristics of
streamwise vorticity currents (SVCs) and associated boundaries attendant to
tornadic storms differ significantly from those associated with non-tornadic
storms? C) Can the dense-side airmasses of left-flank boundaries be
characterized as density currents and are SVCs the attendant Kelvin-Helmholtz
(KH) billows?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.