* 2312155
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: "Unboxing" Haptic Texture Perception: Closing the Loop from Skin Contact Mechanics to Novel Haptic Device
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* J. Edward Colgate, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 320,987.00

Modern virtual-reality devices attempt to create a realistic sense of touch in
the absence of physical surfaces and objects, but as of yet they fall short.
Indeed, no existing interfaces for the sense of touch, known as “haptic
interfaces," are capable of replicating one of the most fundamental aspects of
touch: how a textured surface feels during direct skin contact. Interfaces that
simulate contact through a tool eliminate features that are available only from
skin contact, but the interfaces that do allow direct skin contact are currently
insufficient to convey material and fine-grained structural details of surfaces.
Put simply, they do not feel realistic. This project promotes the progress of
science and technology by providing a new approach to the design of haptic
devices aimed at producing highly realistic virtual textures, and it will take a
step towards understanding touch perception that addresses a previously
unstudied component: the detailed physical interaction between the skin and the
surface it contacts. The development of our proposed haptic technology and
further understanding of our sense of touch can benefit applications in human-
machine interaction, such as creating more immersive virtual environments and
improving the control of remote robots. There are also multiple applications in
education and virtual-reality development, especially for blind and visually
impaired people, that would benefit from advanced understanding of touch
perception and better tools for creating virtual experiences. In addition, as we
know from past technological developments in the basic science of perception,
such as the study of hearing that led to cutting-edge audio interfaces, it is
likely that we underestimate the technological advancements that will result
from a better understanding of this powerful sense modality.

This project will develop novel haptic technologies based on three complementary
objectives: (1) Formulate models of the contact mechanics of human skin using
direct imaging by “Optical Coherence Tomography” of the fingerpad sliding over a
texture, coupled with Boundary Element and Finite Element Methods that can be
used to characterize and model responses within the skin layers during
interactions with texture. (2) Fabricate haptic devices that instantiate the
model mechanisms and parameters, so as to recreate skin-texture interactions.
These devices will include a pin array capable of spatially distributed, high-
bandwidth control of normal and lateral excitation, as well as an
electromagnetic haptic device that uses elastomers embedded with ferromagnetic
particles to transmit perpendicular and shear forces to the user in response to
controllable magnetic fields. (3) Validate and extend the models by means of
human-user studies with both physical textures and the haptic devices of
Objective 2, using psychophysical experimental techniques and broader haptic
interface studies. This objective will test whether model-based actuation is
sufficient to create rich haptic perceptual experience. Success will establish
principles for realistic texture rendering in next generation haptic devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.