* 2312215
* FET: Small: Simulation-guided design of heterochiral DNA nanostructures for biomaterials applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Matthew Lakin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

DNA nanotechnology aims to use DNA as a scaffolding material to assemble
engineered structures at the molecular scale, with nanometer precision. While
most DNA nanotechnology molecules make use of DNA in the naturally occurring
right-handed form known as D-DNA, an alternative uses chemically synthesized
“left-handed” DNA, known as L-DNA, enabling the creation of DNA objects that
twist in the opposite direction. A practical advantage of L-DNA molecules is
that they resist degradation by enzymes in biological environments, which have
evolved to recognize D-DNA specifically. On the other hand, while D-DNA
molecules are more prone to degradation, they can interface directly with
biological nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA. Therefore, it may be advantageous
to combine the two forms of DNA into a single chiral hybrid, or “heterochiral”,
form of DNA. This project will contribute to advancing the state of the art in
DNA nanotechnology by studying the structure and function of such heterochiral
nanostructures and by using this knowledge to engineer novel functional DNA
nanodevices. Computational models and experimental results will be disseminated
to the broader research community, and this project will train graduate and
undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, in
interdisciplinary research skills. Public outreach efforts will be carried out
in conjunction with local partner institutions.

At the molecular level, a heterochiral DNA junction may have drastic effects on
the stability and structure of a larger DNA nanotechnology object. This project
will use molecular dynamics simulations to study the structures of heterochiral
DNA double helices in the region of a chiral crossover, currently a poorly
understood aspect of DNA structure given the novelty of these molecules. The
results of these simulations will be used to make predictions about the behavior
of heterochiral DNA, which will be validated experimentally. The project will
produce engineering design rules for DNA nanostructures that combine D-DNA and
L-DNA components, with the broad goal of controlling degradation pathways for
these nanostructures in biological environments. These will be verified by
studying the behavior of these components in model biological fluids that mimic
conditions in vivo. The results obtained will enhance knowledge of DNA structure
with regard to the interactions between different chiralities of DNA and will
lead the way to practical applications of heterochiral DNA as a functional
biomaterial for biomedical applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.