* 2312594
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Geographic Dimensions of Humanitarian Care Work
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Scott Kirsch, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2024
* USD 22,340.00

Overlapping conditions of conflict, human rights violations, climate change and
other inequities have resulted in historically high rates of refugee movements.
Given the many challenges facing refugee populations, a range of humanitarian
organizations from grassroots groups to international Non-Governmental
Organizations work to support the social, legal, and material needs of refugees.
This project investigates how care is practiced by refugee humanitarian groups,
the social and political issues affecting care provision and how humanitarian
care work shapes life in refugee contexts. This study uses 1) interviews with
humanitarian care workers, and 2) workshops with humanitarian organizations and
care workers, to understand how care is provided for refugees in the context of
geographic formation and negotiation. Methodologically, this project develops an
approach to understand the geographic dimensions of refugee care provision co-
produced with refugees in the data collection process. This doctoral
dissertation project generates original empirical research on humanitarian
practice and care work through ethnographic participant observation,
participatory workshops and in-depth interviews with humanitarian practitioners.
The research investigates how humanitarian practitioners navigate and negotiate
geographic contexts to support refugees and how care provision is shaped by the
complex social dimensions in border areas. This research advances scholarship on
displacement and feminist geographies by examining care work in border spaces at
the geographical heart of questions over belonging, equity, and ethical
considerations. A series of workshops are used to identify models of care and
these are summarized in publications disseminated to the community of
humanitarian organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.