* 2312979
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium: EdgeRIC: Empowering Real-time Intelligent Control and Optimization for NextG Cellular Radio Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dinesh Bharadia, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

NextG cellular networks must support a wide variety of emerging applications,
such as augmented reality, autonomous vehicles and remote healthcare, which
require radio access with latency, throughput and reliability guarantees
hitherto unavailable. Simultaneously, the wireless environment is becoming
increasingly dynamic over diverse spectrum bands, user mobility and variable
traffic patterns. Complex cross layer interactions imply tractable models are
unavailable, and a machine learning approach to optimal resource utilization is
critical. This project first develops an open, simple and capable platform,
entitled EdgeRIC that supports fine-grain decision making at multiple timescales
across the cellular network stack, and second, develops a structured machine
learning based approach over this platform that optimally utilizes all system
resources to maximize diverse application performance. The project is enhanced
by an education plan focusing on machine learning and wireless networking and
coordinating workshops and tele-seminars for the research community and industry
professionals to disseminate their ideas. Simultaneously, outreach in the form
of summer camps and seminars for high school students focusing on machine
learning enhances the impact of this project in STEM fields.

The project aims at enabling intelligent decision making and control in cellular
networks at realtime (< 1ms), while supporting training and adaptation at near-
realtime (10ms - 1s) and non-realtime (> 1s). It brings together mathematical
methods to develop and analyze reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms and
systems development to integrate them into the cellular stack. The project
addresses the key challenges of doing so via three main themes. The first
focuses on realtime RL algorithms that schedule resources based on the relative
priorities of applications, using the structure of the optimal policy to promote
fast and scalable learning. The second theme focuses on robust and fast
adaptation of these policies, which must operate over dynamic environments and
application needs. The third theme addresses scalable learning to determine
hierarchical policies operating across the network layers and sites. The themes
all come together on a platform, entitled EdgeRIC for implementing multi-modal
learning algorithms using the standardized OpenAIGym toolkit. The immediate
impact of this project is in creating multi-timescale learning and control for
the next generation of cellular networks. This project also advances the
fundamental theory of meta and federated RL. The project supports seminars and
summer camps for outreach, development of new courses focusing on machine
learning for wireless communication, and coordination of workshops and tele-
seminars for the research community and industry professionals to disseminate
research ideas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.