* 2312723
* BRC-BIO: High nutrient submarine groundwater discharge delivery effects on coastal primary productivity on coral reefs in Maunalua Bay, Hawaii
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Florybeth La Valle, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,880.00

Evaluating the effects of multiple stressors on coastal community dynamics is
crucial. In doing so, researchers can understand the resilience of these
ecosystems, prepare coastal management for future scenarios, and aid in
prioritizing restoration efforts. With at least 52% of the US population living
in areas that drain into coastal watersheds, it is imperative for researchers to
study the effects of nutrient pollution in coastal systems. Submarine
groundwater discharge (SGD) is defined as any and all flow of water from the
seabed to the coastal ocean. In areas where the nutrient concentration of
coastal groundwater has been substantially increased by changing land use,
nutrient loading to coastal waters via SGD has been associated with algae blooms
and shifts in the community composition. This research will characterize land-
based sources of nutrient pollution and its effects on coral reef productivity
and community composition. The results from this research will be shared with
state entities. Additionally, the results will aid a non-profit organization
focused on restoring the study site in identifying and prioritizing restoration
sites. This program will engage up to 10 undergraduates and one post
baccalaureate. Peer-reviewed strategies for recruitment and retainment of
underrepresented minority students, such as financial incentives and summer-long
field-based research, will be used.

Maunalua Bay (O‘ahu, HI) has experienced dramatic development and increase in
population over the last 100 years. This has affected the water quality in near
shore coral reefs. Due to the range of onsite sewage disposal systems density,
discrete SGD, and its coral reef habitats, Maunalua Bay is a model system to
study land-based effects on water quality and primary production on coral reef
communities. The main source of land-based inorganic nutrients in Maunalua Bay
is SGD, which delivers both freshwater and inorganic nutrients. This research
will use novel methods to characterize SGD delivery to both the water column
(drone thermal imagery) and benthos (sensors moored to the reef) of two reefs.
The work will also quantify carbon uptake of the main primary producers on
algal-dominated reefs. Finally, the productivity of the algae on a reef with SGD
and without SGD will be modeled. This work will clarify the magnitude of the
effect of SGD on both benthic and water column algal productivity of reefs. More
than just understanding the abundance, distribution, and productivity of coastal
organisms, the proposed research will get to the physical and chemical
mechanisms driving these patterns on a local and regional scale in coral reef
ecosystems.

This project is cofunded by the Building Research Capacity of New Faculty in
Biology Program in the Division of Environmental Biology and the Division of
Biological Infrastructure and Biological Oceanography Program in the Division of
Ocean Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.