* 2312345
* Conference: NanoFlorida 2023: A Conference Supporting Student Research Dissemination and Faculty Engagement
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Swadeshmukul Santra, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Nanoscience and nanotechnology deal with matter at the billionth of a meter
scale, creating new knowledge through advanced scientific research.
Nanotechnology, projected to become a multi-trillion-dollar industry is rapidly
penetrating every industry sector as the new knowledge is translated to real-
life applications. Several ground-breaking discoveries led to new product
developments which include smart phones, high-performance batteries, solar
cells, computers, and mRNA vaccines. At this conference, scientists and
engineers from all disciplines will converge to a common platform, sharing their
knowledge through presentations. NanoFlorida is an interdisciplinary event,
bringing together researchers, government agency representatives, industry
professionals, and students poised to become the next generation of leaders in
the field of nanoscience and nanotechnology. The University of Central Florida
is hosting the 15th Annual NanoFlorida conference, scheduled for March 3 - 5,
2023, which is led by graduate and undergraduate students and expected to
attract a large and diverse student population from across Florida and beyond.
The event hosts a panel of faculty advisors and invited speakers who are experts
in the field and committed to student engagement and learning. The event
features several important topics including nanophotonics, nano-optics,
nanobiotechnology, nanochemistry, nanomaterials, agricultural and environmental
nanotechnology, nanoelectronics, nanophysics, theoretical nanotechnology and
computational nanotechnology. The conference supports students, providing a
platform for the dissemination of their research results and offering extensive
opportunities for engagement, learning, and networking. This conference is
unique in that it is student-led and designed to maximize student benefits in
developments of leadership, communication, and networking skills. Nanoscience
and nanotechnology are rapidly growing fields that are highly interdisciplinary
in nature. Nano-enabled technologies are penetrating the marketplace at an
unprecedented rate, directly contributing to a trillion-dollar economy,
benefiting society. To keep up with the rapid advancement of scientific
nanoscale research, there is a strong need to develop the next generation of
nano scientists and engineers . The annual NanoFlorida conference, scheduled for
March 3 - 5, 2023, provides a unique platform for students and nano-
professionals to exchange scientific knowledge through various methods of
interaction, including invited presentations, roundtable discussions, and
networking sessions. The University of Central Florida is hosting the fifteenth
NanoFlorida 2023 conference, an established event that was initiated for the
first time in the state of Florida in 2008 by the PI, thus the conference this
year represents a homecoming event. This conference project provides full
support to student presenters to attend and disseminate their research findings.
To accommodate all student presenters, this conference features several topics
of interests including nanophotonics, nano-optics, nanobiotechnology,
nanochemistry, nanomaterials, agricultural and environmental nanotechnology,
nanoelectronics, nanophysics, theoretical nanotechnology, and computational
nanotechnology. The objective of this project is to support the engagement of
students, faculty, and industry professionals by increasing student
participation and maximizing their networking and presentation skill
development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.