* 2312119
* CAREER: Security and Privacy Foundations of Internet-Scale User-Centered Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Earlence Fernandes, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2027
* USD 206,218.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

The digital and physical resources of people, such as emails, health data, smart
home, and city devices, are now accessible on the Internet. By bringing all
these systems online and making them interoperable, system operators enable new
functionality and drive efficiencies. The enabler of such useful
interconnections is the Internet-scale automation system, whose hallmark is
permitting non-programmers to create automations, thus democratizing the bridge
between digital and physical resources. Unfortunately, these automation systems
are not secure and do not guarantee user privacy— attackers can steal sensitive
user data and manipulate resources, including physical ones, at large scale.
This project pursues an integrated research and education approach to endow
Internet-scale automation with the correct security and privacy foundations. The
project’s novelty is leveraging the unique properties of Internet-scale
automation to develop a framework for securing them that strikes different
trade-offs in functionality, performance, security, and usability. The broader
significance and importance of the project are empowering non-programmers to
securely create automations that improve convenience, safety, and energy
efficiency in a privacy-preserving fashion.

To provide the correct security foundations, the project focuses on building
least-privilege distributed computer systems. Specifically, the unique
properties of Internet-scale automation allow the adaptation of techniques from
the theory of language-based data minimization, computing on encrypted data and
human-centered design. Contributions to applied cryptography and data
minimization include system-level innovations to make practical use of garbled
circuits and program dependency analyses. Contributions to human-centered design
include empirical studies and data-driven interface designs to help users write
better automation programs. Rather than finding the security architecture, the
project develops a framework of security architectures that strikes different
trade-off points in functionality, usability, security, privacy, and
performance. The project also introduces an automation simulator that integrates
research results and makes them available for experimentation to students at
universities and K-12.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.