* 2312436
* Electron Irradiation of Graphene in Air at Atmospheric Pressure: a Method for Hydrogenating Graphene for Hydrogen Storage Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jose Perez, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2026
* USD 121,141.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Hydrogen storage is a topic of significant interest in the current development
of a hydrogen-based energy economy that is green and renewable. After decades of
research, hydrogen has not yet reached widespread commercial applications in
areas such as vehicle fuel cells, mainly because of the problem of storing
hydrogen safely, economically, and efficiently. With this project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Jose Perez and his research group at the University of North
Texas (UNT) will investigate a method for storing hydrogen that is simple, safe,
and commercially viable using electron irradiation of graphene at atmospheric
pressure. Graphene at atmospheric pressure has a lot of water adsorbed on its
surface, and electron irradiation of the adsorbed water may dissociate the water
into hydrogen that then becomes adsorbed on the graphene; the adsorbed hydrogen
desorbs when the temperature of the graphene increases to a relatively low
temperature of about 200 degrees Celsius. The main objectives are to determine
if the adsorbed species is hydrogen and investigate the storage, electrical and
optical properties of this material. If the adsorbed species is hydrogen, this
may bring significant benefits to hydrogen storage. The project will recruit and
train undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups and
organize exhibits and demonstrations at local high schools and a science fair at
UNT on climate change and renewable energy resources.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, aims to investigate the properties of
graphene after irradiation with 1-30 keV electrons in air at near-atmospheric
pressure. Preliminary experiments on mechanically exfoliated suspended graphene
irradiated under such conditions show an extremely high ratio of the Raman D
peak intensity to the Raman G peak intensity of 5.3, indicating a high defect
density. Previous reports on electron irradiation of supported exfoliated
graphene in a vacuum showed evidence that the defects produced are hydrogen
adsorbates. Assuming the defects produced in graphene irradiated at near-
atmospheric pressure are also hydrogen adsorbates, the high defect densities
observed in this case may imply high hydrogen coverages that would meet or
exceed the Department of Energy target of 4.5 wt % hydrogen storage. Such
material may have unique and valuable hydrogen storage, mechanical, electrical,
and optical properties. The primary objectives are to determine the identity and
properties of the defects in the irradiated graphene. The characterization
techniques used in this project are thermal desorption from individual graphene
samples, labeled mass spectroscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy, Raman
spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The
outreach activities for this project include presenting exhibits and
demonstrations at local high schools and organizing a yearly science fair for
high school students in the Metroplex area on climate change and green energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.