* 2312016
* Overcoming combinatoric complexity problems in computational mass spectrometry
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Travis Wheeler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 11/30/2024
* USD 372,562.00

Many biological advances could be made were it possible to better identify and
quantify the molecular contents of biological samples. Mass spectrometers are
one key device used for measuring such samples, and software is used to
translate experimental measurements into understandable information. This
project will develop two new software methods to identify and quantify a wider
range of the molecular contents of biological samples. Each solution aims to
increase both the number of molecular measurements that can be extracted and the
confidence in the accuracy of the measurements, allowing scientists who rely on
mass spectrometry to answer more experimental questions than is possible with
current software tools. This has the potential to enable breakthroughs in basic
biological sciences such a cell biology, as well as applied fields like
medicine, where limitations in the amount of information per assay drives up the
cost of discovery. In addition to facilitating scientific progress, this project
will provide pathways into STEM training for students through industry
internships at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Formal understanding of
the STEM principles will be facilitated through coursework modules at a number
of levels, including some that aim to help high school students transition to
enrollment in undergraduate computer science and computational biology programs.
In particular, high-school students will learn aspects of basic programming
literacy expected in first-year computer science courses.

Mass spectrometers are hardware detectors that observe signal corresponding to
the identities and quantities of molecules in a sample, including those in the
liquid, solid, or gaseous phase. Instrumental output requires signal processing
steps to render results interpretable. The complex nature of biological samples
leads to considerable overlap in the mass spec signals and hence considerable
computational challenges in identifying individual molecular species. Because of
the combinatorial nature of the number and composition of the molecules in
samples, current algorithms for mass spectrometry interpretation do not scale
well, so they generally sub-select and analyze only a few of the measurements.
This limits the effectiveness of the method when samples include multiple types
of molecules, when molecules having similar chemical characteristics are
present, and when molecules are low in abundance. New algorithms have the
potential to overcome these data processing limitations. This project will
develop two novel computational approaches for identifying the complete set of
possible biomolecules that could produce a given spectrum from a sample in
tractable time. The first approach will focus on leveraging data patterns to
extract latent information from mass spectrometry tandem mass spectra. The
second approach will use novel data representations to shrink the search space
for potential pattern matches in protein sequences. These algorithms will
increase coverage, accuracy, and sensitivity of proteomics results from mass
spectrometry measurements, for both modified and unmodified proteins, enabling
testing of numerous biological hypotheses precluded by the limitations of
current methods. The successful completion of the research will provide expanded
access to the currently unused information in mass spectrometry experiments for
scientists by creating publicly available advanced algorithms for data
processing. Additionally, the project includes two explicit outreach programs to
enable broader participation in bioinformatics through curriculum for students
new to computer science and computational biology and research experience
opportunities at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The results of this
project will be posted at ms.cs.umt.edu.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.