* 2312141
* Conference: 2023 NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Principal Investigators/Project Directors (PIs/PDs) Meeting
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Christopher Botanga, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2024
* USD 518,894.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (Blacks and African Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders)
to successfully complete high-quality degree programs in STEM.

Chicago State University (CSU) will organize and convene a meeting of the LSAMP
grantee community which will occur in-person in Washington, DC over 3.5 days at
the beginning of June 2023. The event will provide a forum for updates on NSF
funding opportunities, policies and procedures. Additionally, participants will
share successful practices in STEM broadening participation post-pandemic.
Activities will include recognition of the 20th Anniversary of the Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) Activity, established in 2003. A career fair and the launch of
the BD Mentorship Program, in conjunction with the Louis Stokes Midwest Regional
Center of Excellence, a collaboration with CSU and Indiana University Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI), is planned.

All LSAMP program grantees, selected BD participants, and representatives from
federal laboratories and the corporate sector will participate. Proceedings from
the meeting will be disseminated broadly via the organizer's websites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.