* 2312706
* Collaborative Research: NSFDEB-NERC: Warming's silver lining? Thermal compensation at multiple levels of organization may promote stream ecosystem stability in response to drought
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Wyatt Cross, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2026
* USD 929,372.00

Human activities and associated greenhouse gas emissions are causing a rise in
global temperatures and an increase in extreme climatic events such as droughts.
This collaborative USA-UK project is focused on understanding how continued
warming and increasing drought will combine to influence the composition and
activity of stream and river organisms (i.e., bacteria, algae, and animals). At
present, the prevailing view is that warming temperatures and drought will
together produce more extreme ecological consequences than would result from
either of these stressors alone. However, this project examines a contrary
hypothesis that organisms and communities may ‘adjust’ to warming over long
periods of time, making them much less susceptible to extreme drought events in
the future. In essence, this project tests the hypothesis that stream
communities compensate for continued warming and thus will be better able to
persist and function in the face of increasing future drought. This research is
critical for predicting and mitigating how warming and drought will influence
freshwater biodiversity, as well the many important ecological processes in
streams, such as nutrient removal and food production, that benefit humanity.
This project will provide training, education and professional development
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students.

This project takes advantage of two unique research settings: (1) a natural
stream thermal gradient in Iceland; and (2) a state-of-the-art experimental
stream facility at the University of Birmingham, UK to test the degree to which
long-term warming enhances stream ecosystem stability (both resistance and
resilience) in response to drought events. The first objective, focused at the
individual level, investigates whether physiological adaptations to warming can
compensate for reduced invertebrate carbon use efficiencies at high
temperatures, thus accelerating growth and energy transfer (i.e., resilience)
following drought. The second objective quantifies resistance and resilience of
entire invertebrate communities and their biomass production to drought across
natural and experimental thermal gradients. The final objective explores the
potential for ecosystem-level compensatory responses by examining how warming-
induced shifts in primary producer communities and nutrient supply influence
stability of ecosystem metabolism and nitrogen uptake in response to drought.
Together, these objectives will provide a broader understanding of compensatory
responses to warming across multiple levels of biological organization (i.e.,
individuals to ecosystems), and will help to inform management of freshwater
ecosystems.

This project is jointly funded by the Population and Community Ecology Cluster
in the Division of Environmental Biology and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The UK collaborators on this project
will be funded through the UK-NERC program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.