* 2312889
* Collaborative Research: How different forms of competition shape trait evolution and coexistence: A tale of two castes in the turtle ants
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Scott Powell, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2027
* USD 524,549.00

The diverse array of life on earth, or “biodiversity”, is critical for the
healthy functioning of the natural systems that humans depend on. Yet there is
much to learn about the mechanisms that produce biodiversity through time and
then maintain it in present-day systems. This research seeks a new level of
integrative understanding of the mechanistic role of competition in this
“production and maintenance” of biodiversity. Competition is a ubiquitous
species interaction, often apparent as overt fighting over resources. It has
long been implicated in shaping the evolution of functionally differentiated
groups of species and in determining which assortment of species can live
together in the same place. Yet integrated studies of how competition shapes the
production and maintenance of biodiversity have been elusive. This project will
integrate a series of comparative evolutionary, ecological, and experimental
studies to determine how competition, in its various forms, shapes both
elaborate morphological diversity within a group of organisms and which of these
species can coexist in the same habitat. This research then offers potentially
transformative understanding of key mechanisms shaping earth’s biodiversity,
which is both critical for human wellbeing and increasingly threatened. The main
scientific findings from this work will be used in a science-art collaboration
to bring a visual guide to biodiversity production and maintenance to broad
audiences in the classroom and online. Additionally, the project will provide
extensive training and mentoring for young scientists from diverse backgrounds
and make comprehensive specimen contributions to physical and digital
collections.

The goals of this project will be addressed using the turtle ants (Cephalotes),
a diverse New World lineage with iconic phenotypic diversity among ants and high
local species richness in the habitats they occupy. Critically, different turtle
ant traits are known to engage with different forms of competition: high
intensity “targeted” competition with a small number of specialized competitors,
versus low intensity but pervasive “diffuse” competition within multi-species
assemblages. The proposed work will integrate: 1) species-level phylogenetic
comparative analyses of traits that engage with contrasting targeted versus
diffuse competition; 2) analyses of species coexistence and trait diversity for
contrasting forms of competition in species-rich communities; and 3) field-based
experimental studies of trait-mediated competitive intensity and outcome
severity, contrasted across scenarios defined by different forms of competition.
The overarching hypothesis being tested is that targeted forms of competition
drive both more divergent trait diversity and more predictable trait-mediated
mechanisms of coexistence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.