* 2312297
* Collaborative Research: AF: SaTC: Medium: Theoretical Foundations of Lattice-Based Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Huxley Bennett, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2027
* USD 290,995.00

Lattices are geometric objects that have many applications in computer science,
and especially to the design of secure cryptography. Such lattice-based
cryptography has many attractive properties including its apparent security even
against adversaries equipped with quantum computers (being "post-quantum") and
its usefulness in constructing advanced primitives, including Fully Homomorphic
Encryption (FHE), which allows for "computing on encrypted data." Based on this,
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) recently selected
several lattice-based cryptosystems for standardization as part of their years-
long post-quantum cryptography standardization process. As lattice-based
cryptosystems will be in widespread use in the near future, it is especially
urgent to understand the complexity (security) of the problems that underlie
them.

This project has three primary research goals. First, the project seeks to
better understand the fine-grained complexity of lattice problems, i.e., the
precise running time necessary to solve the computational problems underlying
lattice-based cryptosystems. This work will ideally lead to a better
understanding of the practical security of these cryptosystems. Second, this
project will study connections between lattices and error-correcting codes,
which have many similarities to lattices and are important and well-studied
objects in their own right. Third, this project will study the complexity of
problems on algebraically structured lattices. Cryptosystems based on these
lattices---which include most practical cryptosystems, including those recently
selected for standardization by NIST---are generally much more efficient, but
much less is known about the complexity of the problems that underlie them. In
addition to these main research goals, the investigators will write a
comprehensive, freely available textbook about lattices in computer science. In
particular, this book will cover algorithmic, complexity-theoretic,
cryptographic, and geometric aspects of lattices in detail.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.