* 2312676
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium: Towards High-Performing LoRa with Embedded Intelligence on the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Shigang Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2027
* USD 282,245.00

LoRa (short for Long Range), a spread-spectrum modulation technique, has emerged
in recent years as a promising mechanism to connect billions of low-cost
Internet of Things (IoT) devices for wide-area applications such as smart
metering, environment monitoring, and logistic tracking. However, current LoRa
networks have been observed to have shorter coverage range, lower energy
efficiency, and higher deployment cost than originally promised. The fundamental
problem is that current LoRa receivers perform poorly when there is complex
environmental noise. This project uses the feature extraction capability of
modern deep neural networks (DNN) and the computational resources now available
on edge devices to create better performing LoRa networks. The success of this
project will reduce the cost of deploying and maintaining real-world LoRa
networks, and thus will accelerate adoption of wide-area IoT applications which
will enhance efficiency of smart cities and other verticals. The project also
develops curricular materials for applying machine learning to wireless
networking in both undergraduate and graduate programs. This project offers
research training opportunities to underrepresented students from diverse groups
and age levels.

This project designs a new LoRa physical layer to enhance long-distance and low-
power LoRa communication. The project includes three parts. (1) Design of a
multi-dimension multi-resolution neural-enhanced LoRa decoder that can be used
with standard LoRa transmissions in a single-gateway setting. The new decoder
improves performance by capturing and processing multi-dimensional features of
standard LoRa signals even when the signal strength is far below the noise
floor; (2) Co-design of a neural-enhanced encoder-decoder pair for use in a
single-gateway setting. The encoder creates a non-standard LoRa transmission
that provides a much richer feature space for neural-enhanced decoding and thus
further enhances performance in high-noise situations. (3) Co-design a neural-
enhanced multi-gateway symbol decoder and a frequency-aware encoder for use in a
multi-gateway setting. The design uses the spatial diversity of multiple
gateways to enhance the SNR (signal to noise ratio) of the received signals even
further. To evaluate the proposed techniques, this project uses hardware-
software co-design to develop an end-to-end DNN-empowered LoRa prototype. The
code and data generated in the project are available to the research community
for further investigation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.