* 2312618
* RUI: Post-synthetic transformations of anions in metal chalcogenide nanoparticles: Uncovering synthetic design rules and the effect on subsequent transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Katherine Plass, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 470,879.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Applications of nanotechnology to problems like solar energy capture and storage
and sustainable electronic devices rely on the ability to design nanoparticles
with specific properties and chemical make-ups. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
the principal investigator’s group at Franklin and Marshal College seek to
develop new ways to design complex nanoparticles by starting with simple
particles that we can make reproducibly that have only two components–the
elements copper and sulfur and then swapping-out the sulfur component with the
related elements selenium and tellurium. This represents a new chemical approach
to making many-component nanoparticles. It is expected that by targeting the
sulfur component, the PI’s team will be able to create nanoscale patterns that
would not be achievable otherwise. Peer-mentored undergraduate student teams
will carry out experimental work, receiving excellent training for careers in
materials and other STEM fields. Through the nanobots Early College Research
Experience, first- and second-year students will perform computational modeling
of these processes. The Early College Research Experience is an inclusive and
supportive research cohort intended to create a welcoming entry to STEM that
will encourage a diverse set of students to continue with research and STEM
coursework. TECHNICAL SUMMARY Post-synthetic transformations of nanoparticles
can create complex multi-component nanoheterostructures. Cu2-xS nanoparticles
are common starting materials for cation exchanges, forming the basis for whole
libraries of nanoparticles through repeated partial cation exchanges. Despite
the success of cation exchange in nanoheterostructure design, anion exchange has
been much less implemented. The PI’s group has recently developed selenide and
telluride anion exchange transformations of Cu2-xS nanorods. This project, with
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division
of Materials Research, will seek to better understand how these anionic
transformations affect Cu2-xS nanoparticles, how broadly applicable these
transformations are, and how they affect plasmonic properties, regioselectivity
of new components, and defect formation. Addtionally, molecular dynamics
simulations will be used to gain mechanistic insight into the post-synthetic
transformation processes. Finally, anionic transformations will be coupled with
secondary transformations to uncover the interplay of the design rules guiding
post-synthetic transformations. This fundamental work will advance knowledge of
how to design nanoparticle heterostructures a priori, affording new routes to
materials for optoelectronic applications. The metal chalcogenide particles
investigated have the potential to act as catalysts, solar energy absorbers in
PV or solar water evaporation, NIR absorbers in photothermal cancer treatment,
sensors, or thermoelectrics. Activities are proposed that strengthen training in
materials chemistry through undergraduate research with close student-faculty
interaction and innovative partnerships between PUI and R1 laboratories, all of
which improve student training and sense of belonging through peer- and near-
peer mentoring structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.