* 2312634
* Collaborative Research: Engineering the Chemistry at Solid-Solid Interfaces of Li-O2 Battery Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Eranda Nikolla, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2023
* USD 251,731.00

Lithium-oxygen batteries potentially could have energy storage capacities that
rival gasoline fuel, but there remains much fundamental scientific knowledge to
learn about these batteries before the technology can be commercialized. In
particular, some of the chemical products formed during the operation of the
batteries can slowly degrade and poison the materials, leading to performance
losses over extended periods of operation. This research project seeks to
overcome these problems by exploring a class of inexpensive, mixed metal oxide
electrocatalysts that may alter the chemistry of lithium-oxygen batteries. This
project aims to develop a framework to engineer the chemistry of lithium-oxygen
batteries, which are a potential next-generation energy storage device, and to
improve their performance. The studies combine advanced characterization methods
and theoretical calculations to determine how the properties of the oxide
surfaces influence the products that are produced on lithium-oxygen electrodes.
These insights will be leveraged to develop design principles that will aide in
identifying oxide electrocatalysts that improve battery cell performance. The
researchers involved in this project will partner with local K-12 schools to
involve economically disadvantaged students with the proposed research through
summer internships and student exchanges. They aim to inspire the students to
pursue careers in science and engineering.

A fundamental understanding of the reactions occurring at solid-solid interfaces
is critical for the development of next-generation energy storage devices, such
as lithium-oxygen batteries. Lithium-oxygen batteries have attracted significant
interest in recent years due to their exceptionally high theoretical energy
density. If even 15% of this energy density is achieved, then it would equal the
value of gasoline, making lithium-oxygen batteries with driving ranges of up to
500 miles per charge commercially viable. While this technology is very
attractive, numerous technical challenges need to be overcome before its
widespread adoption is possible. Some of these challenges include: (i)
insolubility of the solid discharge reaction products, leading to clogging of
the cathode and eventually resulting battery cell death; (ii) low roundtrip
(discharge-charge cycle) efficiency due to high charge overpotentials to
dissociate the main discharge reaction product, lithium peroxide; and (iii)
instability of electrolytes at high overpotentials. This research project seeks
to alleviate these issues by designing solid-solid interfaces at the cathode of
lithium-oxygen batteries that selectively stabilize lithium-deficient discharge
products that are not insulating and can be dissociated at reasonable
overpotentials. The researchers will apply a combined experimental and
theoretical approach to study the chemistry at these solid-solid interfaces with
the aim of designing materials that can selectivity tune the discharge product
distribution such that it leads to improved battery performance. In particular,
the work will involve a combination of advanced characterization studies and
theoretical calculations to determine how the elemental composition, electronic
properties, and symmetry of the oxide surface influence the discharge product
distribution in lithium-oxygen cathodes. The studies will elucidate the effect
of the global oxide crystal structure on the discharge product formation and
lead to the development of design principles for identifying oxide
electrocatalysts that are highly selective towards the formation of lithium-
deficient oxide discharge products and therefore exhibit low charge
overpotentials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.