* 2312716
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium: Scalable Metasurface Array for mmWave Communication and Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2027
* USD 300,000.00

Millimeter-wave (mmWave) technologies are demonstrating exciting prospects in
both 5G communications and radar sensing applications. However, the limited
coverage of mmWave remains a major challenge to its usability in practice. The
objective of this project is to harness synergistic innovations in mmWave
communication/sensing systems and printable materials/electronics to overcome
the intrinsic limitations of mmWave signals. The PI team explores the design of
an ultra-large and ultra-wideband metasurface array to expand mmWave coverage
and optimize the associated performance tradeoffs. The project outcome will
likely inform the design of mmWave networks, influence the beyond-5G (B5G)
standardization, and advance many B5G applications, especially in the
challenging mmWave vehicular networking and automotive sensing domains. The
project can also generate substantial economic impacts by boosting the 5G mmWave
coverage and reliability at signifcantly low cost. The project impact will be
further extended by engaging a diverse group of student researchers and
industrial partners, and by disseminating open-source experimental hardware and
low-cost fabrication workflows for advanced mmWave devices.

The proposed research incorporates novel printable materials/electronics to
advance the field of mmWave metasurface reflectors. Although active and passive
metasurfaces have been extensively explored in electromagnetic research, they
are limited in size, bandwidth, and mostly employed for a single link. Active
metasurfaces bear a high cost and complexity as they need power sources, high-
frequency components, high-precision substrate and fabrication processes, and a
separate control channel to coordinate with existing devices. On the other hand,
passive metasurface reflectors are often deemed inferior and suitable only for
static scenarios due to lack of reconfigurability. In addition, state-of-the-art
active/passive metasurfaces are limited to centimeter-scale, yet practical
deployment entails meter-level (hundreds of wavelengths) in dimension, which
induces non-trivial challenges such as severe beam distortion due to near-field
effects and frequency-selectivity. To address these challenges, the PI team
proposes 3 research thrusts: (1) Designing new beam synthesis models to enable
ultra-large metasurfaces, and new techniques to incrementally reconfigure a
passive metasurface array (PMA), so as to expand the angular coverage,
beamforming gain, support mobility, and to avoid interference between nearby
base stations; (2) Designing new mechanisms that leverage the PMA as a passive
"encoder" to address the coverage-resolution-dimension tradeoff in mmWave
sensing; (3) Exploring graphene-based metasurface structures to scale mmWave
joint communication and sensing beyond the bandwidth limit of traditional RF
hardware. The proposed research will lead to various community toolsets and
reproducible fabrication workflows for creating low-cost mmWave metasurfaces
through 3D printing or mold imprinting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.