* 2312378
* BRC-BIO: Evolutionary Patterns of Ice-Binding Proteins in North Pacific Intertidal Invertebrates
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jessica Glass, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 498,522.00

Animals living in polar regions must survive freezing conditions for several
months of the year. Freezing water, specifically ice crystals, can damage soft
tissues and kill organisms that are not adapted to freezing conditions. Several
species – from fish to beetles to bacteria – have developed physiological
mechanisms to withstand freezing conditions, most notably by producing proteins
that bind to ice, some of which are called ‘antifreeze’ proteins. Just as
antifreeze solution in a car lowers the freezing point of water, antifreeze
proteins protect organisms’ tissues from damaging ice crystals. Little is known
about these proteins in marine invertebrates such as sea stars, which are
important predators in intertidal habitats. Recent genetic evidence suggests sea
stars may produce new forms of these proteins. This study will investigate the
genetic mechanisms behind intertidal sea stars’ ability to produce proteins to
survive in sub-freezing water in Alaska and how protein production varies by
season and temperature. Understanding the function of these proteins and the
environmental conditions that trigger their production will allow researchers to
make predictions on how sea stars will adapt to extreme climatic events. The
results from this work may aid the growing mariculture industry for
invertebrates such as sea cucumbers and urchins, which are close relatives of
sea stars. Furthermore, if sea stars produce novel proteins, their discovery may
lead to innovations in biomedical cryopreservation and commercial agriculture.
This project will create opportunities for undergraduates, particularly Alaska
Natives, to learn professional skills in STEM through mentoring, research,
workshops and professional development.

Intertidal invertebrates in polar regions overcome unique environmental
challenges compared to their pelagic (open water) and benthic (deep sea)
counterparts, including large daily winter temperature fluctuations. Freezing
conditions can lead to lethal cellular damage through the formation of ice
crystals on soft tissues. Many cold-adapted ectothermic organisms have evolved
mechanisms to prevent damage from cold by producing ice-binding proteins (IBPs).
IBPs bind to ice crystal planes and have a variety of functions, from ice
recrystallization and growth inhibition (antifreeze) to the controlled formation
(nucleation) of ice. Recent evidence offers potential for discovering novel IBPs
in marine invertebrates. The objective of this project is to describe the extent
to which IBP production exists and is environmentally correlated across select
lineages of intertidal invertebrates that primarily inhabit the Arctic and
subarctic. The project will combine freezing assays with genome and
transcriptome sequencing to characterize the evolution of IBPs in several
lineages of intertidal invertebrates to determine ice-binding activity in one
clade of intertidal invertebrates (Echinodermata) inhabiting the North Pacific,
identify the class of IBPs and functional gene regions in two lineages of
echinoderm sea stars predicted to exhibit ice-binding activity and cold
tolerance, and quantify IBP production (gene expression) in sea stars across
seasons and temperature gradients. The research will address a major gap in the
field of cold-water adaptation by quantifying ice-binding activity in dozens of
intertidal species.

This project is jointly funded by the Directorate for the Biological Sciences
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.