* 2312181
* TRTech-PGR: Establishing a one-stop-shop for plant metabolism annotations and launching a plant enzyme function consortium
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Philipp Zerbe, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,999,526.00

Surging human population and climate change have placed unprecedented stress on
agriculture. Meeting the world’s evolving food needs necessitates the
development of resilient, nutritious, and bountiful crops. Collaborative and
innovative approaches to plant science, combined with outreach initiatives for
STEM education and recruitment, are needed to meet these challenges. This
project will expand the Plant Metabolic Network (PMN), a collection of databases
used to study the metabolism of plants and how their genomes relate to
metabolism. This expansion will grow the databases in the PMN from 126 to over
1000 species. An expanded PMN will provide researchers access to a rich,
evolving suite of tools to rapidly accelerate fundamental and translational
plant science research and applications to meet real-world demands. The
expansion of the PMN will also create a valuable educational tool for those in
secondary- and post-secondary education. Educational resources about plant
genetics, biochemistry, and metabolism will be produced and distributed,
including video tutorials for PMN and lesson plans demonstrating how plants
produce various chemicals useful to humans. In universities, a pilot Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) will be established to provide
undergraduate students with cutting-edge, experiential opportunities in genome
and metabolism research. An advisory board of schoolteachers will guide
engagement efforts in middle- and high-school audiences, focusing on student
bodies predominantly composed of underrepresented minorities. This project
offers ample opportunities for increased collaboration and advancement across
the plant sciences, as well as initiatives to inspire and guide students who
identify with underrepresented groups to pursue STEM education.

To expand the PMN databases, this project will retool the existing PMN pipeline
to operate at scale, packaging it into a containerized app and automating much
of the process of running it. The retooled pipeline will be used to rapidly
create new PMN databases from 1000 plant genomes taken from GenBank, 10KP, and
other sources. This project aims to expand the contents and improve the accuracy
of the databases by experimentally determining and integrating enzyme
biochemical data to enhance computational prediction of plant metabolism. As a
project component, an enzyme consortium will be established to conduct
prediction-guided enzyme function studies at scale, targeting enzyme classes
that perform poorly in computational annotations, and integrate the biochemical
data into PMN. We will focus on terpene synthases, cytochrome P450s, and
aminoacyltransferases in this initial consortium. To effectively incorporate
these data in PMN, improvements will be made to the PMN enzyme prediction
software to better identify differentiating features among enzyme family
members, including enzyme classes with few existing members. The scope of
information available in PMN will be expanded to include new cell-type and
tissue-specific databases. Workshops will be organized at major plant biology
conferences to introduce users to PMN’s capabilities. Workshops at
phytochemistry and plant metabolism conferences will focus on distributing the
data generated by the consortium. These conferences are poised to recruit
scientists to expand the consortium beyond the enzyme families targeted in this
proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.