* 2312396
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: MemDrive: Memory-Driven Full-Stack Collaboration for Autonomous Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tongping Liu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 475,253.00

Embedded systems, relying on embedded hardware with stringent size, weight, and
power constraints, play a crucial role in the modern world. The resource-
constrained nature of such systems has the well-known memory wall problem,
impacting both capacity and latency. To address this challenge, this project
aims to establish a comprehensive memory management ecosystem, called MemDrive,
to optimize memory usage throughout the application and system stack and explore
opportunities for cross-stack optimization. MemDrive encompasses three key
innovations: (i) At the application stack, cross-task optimization techniques
will be designed to share intermediate results across different tasks without
compromising performance. (ii) At the system stack, memory and resource
management schemes will be implemented that could embrace the hardware trend of
integrated physical memory and further reduce memory redundancy across multiple
processes. (iii) Cross-stack collaboration will be explored to further improve
memory usage efficiency and latency by leveraging application-stack properties,
such as shared intermediate results among tasks and predictable memory usage
patterns. Extensive experiments for running real-world applications on top of a
set of robotic testbeds will be conducted.

This research has the potential to open new possibilities for the development of
novel applications that were previously limited by memory constraints. As
embedded systems play an increasingly significant role in various domains, such
as robotics and the Internet of Things, the project's outcomes will lead to
improved user experiences and have a large social impact by making low-cost
embedded systems products more accessible. Moreover, this project aims to
cultivate a pipeline of skilled engineers and computer scientists with
interdisciplinary expertise in embedded systems. Graduate and undergraduate
course modules will be developed, benefiting students in all engineering
disciplines in Massachusetts and California. Efforts will be made to recruit
underrepresented students through diversity programs and outreach initiatives to
K-12 students. This inclusiveness will contribute to a diverse and dynamic
community of researchers and innovators in the field of embedded systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.