* 2312367
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Memory-efficient Algorithm and Hardware Co-Design for Spike-based Edge Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jae-sun Seo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

In today's rapidly advancing world of Artificial Intelligence (AI), energy
efficiency has emerged as a crucial factor to facilitate the ubiquitous
development of intelligent systems. The efficient deployment of AI holds the key
to overcoming limitations posed by power-constrained devices and contributes to
sustainable technological progress. Neuromorphic computing offers a brain-
inspired paradigm of AI, called Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), that represents
a promising step forward in sustainable AI development. Inspired by the brain's
neural architecture, SNNs process information in sparse, asynchronous, and
event-driven patterns, resulting in reduced power consumption. This project aims
to integrate SNNs with modern integrated circuits propelling energy efficiency
across various AI domains, such as object detection, autonomous driving and
image classification. The project team aims to devise novel algorithms and
hardware design with prototype chips to accelerate the performance of SNNs in
low-power and memory-efficient systems. These spiking neural chips will enable
the practical and immediate application of neuromorphic systems in areas like
drones, autonomous robots, portable medical devices, and wearable smart
assistants. Furthermore, the project embraces an algorithm-to-system approach,
providing opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to
explore research in the field of neuromorphic computing. An essential focus of
this project also lies in training the next generation of scientists and
engineers, fostering diversity, and promoting inclusivity within the AI and
semiconductor fields.

This project tackles the crucial task of enabling deep learning and AI
algorithms on edge computing devices that have strict memory and power
constraints. The key innovation lies in leveraging a brain-inspired spiking
neural network (SNN) approach for edge computing. The team addresses the memory
overhead issue of spiking neurons and takes a foundational approach, optimizing
algorithms and hardware design for SNN deployment on edge devices. The project
proposes algorithmic solutions, including novel architectures with shared
computations and compression strategies, such as quantization and early exit.
These optimizations aim to enhance the efficiency of SNNs on resource-
constrained edge devices. On the hardware front, the project plans to
demonstrate these ideas through prototype chip tapeouts with SNN-specific
dataflow, event-addressable computations, and configurable support for proposed
algorithm features. The goal is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the
power, performance, and accuracy tradeoffs of SNNs for edge computing
applications that will pave the way for sustainable AI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.