* 2312785
* CSR:Medium: A Cross-stack Approach to Reduce Memory Carbon in Cloud Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ali Butt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 693,175.00

The scaling of memory capacity (i.e., bits per memory chip) increasingly lags
behind the density scaling of other system components (e.g., cores per area in a
CPU chip). As a result, a typical cloud server today contains 100s of memory
chips, which may increase to 1000s under the current scaling trend;
manufacturing and powering so many memory chips per server will be
environmentally unsustainable. This project will explore how to co-design
hardware and software to store values more densely in memory and reduce how much
memory to manufacture and power to reduce the carbon footprint of future cloud
data centers. While prior art has explored memory compression in hardware, they
have only explored how to do so in the most rudimentary software scenarios -
natively running a single program that accesses little to nothing beyond memory.
The software stack in cloud is much more complex; user applications run in
virtual machines, concurrently with collocated workloads, and often heavily
exercise the operating system (OS) file cache and other in-memory caches. This
project – CloudComp- will co-design hardware memory compression with different
layers of the cloud system software (e.g., hypervisor, storage stack, in-memory
databases, job scheduler) to enable practical deployment that can satisfy the
diverse requirements and application scenarios in cloud.   CloudComp will bring
together researchers in computer architecture, cloud computing, OS, storage
systems, and databases. To facilitate real world impact, this project will build
and release real-system prototypes of hardware memory compression and partner
closely with industry. By enabling an alternative path to scale up the effective
size of the memory size for future cloud data centers, CloudComp will help
reduce the impact of cloud computing on climate change over the brute-force
approach of making more memory chips. Densely storing more data into the
available amount of memory can also benefit climate in other ways such as
enabling bigger-scale and/or finer-resolution climate modeling and simulation.
CloudComp includes educational and engagement activities to broaden
participation in research and attract new students, especially seeking out
students from underrepresented groups. CloudComp will actively involve
undergraduate students in building real-system prototypes to cultivate their
curiosity for research. Lastly, the cross-layer insights gained through
CloudComp will help guide the research of other complementary memory system
techniques to combat the slowing physical scaling of memory. CloudComp is funded
in part by the National Discovery Cloud for Climate (NDC-C) program as a core
purpose of the project is to reduce the carbon emissions of cloud systems
through this research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.