* 2312278
* Search for the Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with the LEGEND Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Karol Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 635,033.00

Neutrinos, elementary particles that have no charge and were long believed to
have zero mass, permeate the universe. They are notoriously difficult to detect,
as they interact extremely weakly with any other known elementary particles.
Three types of neutrino have been identified, presumably independent of each
other. Yet a remarkable discovery of neutrino oscillations between these types
in 1998 demonstrated that neutrinos have mass. This discovery motivated further
investigations of properties of neutrinos more than ever before. Unraveling the
nature of neutrinos can have far-reaching implications for better understanding
of elementary particles and their fundamental interactions. Some natural
conjectures suggest that deeper understanding of neutrinos may provide a glimpse
onto phenomena at extremely high energies that existed in the early Universe,
could broaden our knowledge of the fundamental interactions, may shed light onto
the dominance of matter over antimatter, and can help to better understand the
early evolution of the Universe. This award supports the PI and his group in
conducting research in experimental neutrino physics and participating in the
LEGEND experiment, which is designed to search for an extremely rare nuclear
transition - neutrinoless double beta decay. The LEGEND Experiment will not only
advance our knowledge about some of the rarest phenomena in Nature but it will
also develop a unique low background counting technique that may be applied
outside of physics and be of general benefit to society. Applications may
include measurements of anthropogenic radiation in the environment or ultra-
sensitive detection of radioactivity. These activities educate and train young
researchers in building a state-of-the-art science project.

The LEGEND Experiment will employ high-purity germanium crystals grown out of
enriched germanium-76. There will be about 300 detectors of a total mass of one
ton. In a five-year exposure the experiment will reach the half-life sensitivity
of about 10^{28} years. To achieve this goal many sources of natural and
cosmogenic radioactivity that may mimic a signal must be eliminated. LEGEND has
adopted a multi-layered experimental setup composed of a water tank that houses
a cryogenic dewar with both underground-mined argon, which is depleted in
argon-39, and atmospheric liquid argon surrounding the crystals. Detector
strings will be further actively shielded by light-collecting fibers or thin
plates to tag and suppress background radioactivity in the vicinity of the
crystals. Ultra-high radio-purity and ultra-low radon emanation of all detector
components are necessary to reach experimental objectives. The experiment is
currently testing critical strategies by collecting data with about 200 kg of
crystals and using a setup developed previously. This preliminary phase will
clear a way for the new and better optimized detector configuration currently
being designed. The PI and his team will collaborate with institutions to
simulate and construct prototypes of various configurations involving radio-pure
plastics for detecting light-yielding events in liquid argon around germanium
crystals. Achieving the objectives requires engaging industrial partners with
which the group has had a long-standing cooperation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.