* 2312751
* Harnessing unconventional structural degrees of freedom to design new hybrid layered perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Nicole Benedek, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2027
* USD 212,340.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education that
aims to use computers to predict and understand the properties of a class of
hybrid organic-inorganic oxide materials. Advanced materials shape many of the
aspects of modern life, from smart electronics to high-speed communications and
renewable energy sources. Despite this, the discovery of materials with
technologically useful properties is a slow and difficult process. The
development of advanced computational techniques, based on the fundamental laws
of physics, together with vast increases in computer power, have transformed the
way scientists investigate, discover and design materials for particular
applications. For example, the properties of as-yet unsynthesized materials can
be predicted and studied using computer simulations, such that experimentalists
can focus their efforts on the most promising materials families or
compositions. In this project, the PI will investigate the relationship between
the chemical composition of a class of hybrid organic-inorganic oxide materials
and their lowest-energy structure and physical properties, such as their ability
to develop spontaneous polarization that is switchable by applying external
electric fields. The aim is to develop a chemically intuitive theory that
experimentalists can use to quickly filter promising materials out of the vast
number of candidate materials. The results of computer simulations will be
validated through close collaboration with experimentalists.

This award will also support (i) the PI's scientific workforce development
efforts by establishing an exchange program between the PI's group and the
Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory at the University of Oxford, UK, with an aim to
promote collaboration and knowledge/skills exchange between
theoretical/computational groups and experimental groups, and (ii) curricular
development efforts at the PI’s institution by introducing and further
developing evidence-based techniques into classroom instruction and class design
to assist students in formulating effective learning strategies.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research with an aim to
elucidate the fundamental physical and chemical factors underlying the
structural basis of ferroelectricity and magnetoelectricity in a series of
hybrid organic-inorganic Dion-Jacobson oxides. Hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites can exhibit unique structural degrees of freedom; they are
unconventional in the sense that they are not observed, and may even be
forbidden, in their fully inorganic counterparts. However, in contrast with
hybrid halide perovskites, hybrid oxide perovskites have not been explored in
detail. In addition, in comparison with inorganic perovskites, the development
of a chemically intuitive, microscopic theory that connects the physical
mechanisms of particular structural distortions in hybrid organic-inorganic
layered perovskite oxides to bonding and crystal chemistry is almost non-
existent. In this project, using symmetry principles, first-principles density
functional theory calculations and crystal chemical models, the PI will uncover
the fundamental knowledge of crystal chemistry and physical mechanisms of
ferroelectricity that will enable rational design of hybrid organic-inorganic
layered perovskite oxides. The successful completion of this research program is
expected to result in the establishment of a new materials platform for
designing and discovering novel hybrid organic-inorganic layered perovskites.

This award will also support (i) the PI's scientific workforce development
efforts by establishing an exchange program between the PI's group and the
Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory at the University of Oxford, UK, with an aim to
promote collaboration and knowledge/skills exchange between
theoretical/computational groups and experimental groups, and (ii) curricular
development efforts at the PI’s institution by introducing and further
developing evidence-based techniques into classroom instruction and class design
to assist students in formulating effective learning strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.