* 2312737
* IUCRC Phase I Albany: Weather Innovation and Smart Energy Resilience (WISER)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Richard Perez, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2028
* USD 150,000.00

This Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Weather
Innovation, Smart Energy, and Resilience is a collaboration between the State
University of New York at Albany and the University of Connecticut. Using the
innovation that comes from Center university faculty, students, and postdocs,
this IUCRC will advance basic research and cutting-edge technologies to improve
the energy industryâ€™s power grid efficiency and reliability in the face of the
intensification of weather extremes in a changing climate and the nation's
transition to clean energy. The Center's research thrusts are: (1) renewable
energy generation and power grid integration, (2) weather-caused outage
forecasting, management, and restoration, (3) electric grid resilience
assessment and economic analysis of resilience improvements, and (4) climate
change effects on the current generation and the future distribution of
renewable energy resources. The dues paying members of the Center include
private sector companies, energy utilities, government entities, and other
interested parties. Their membership fees are pooled and used to fund faculty-
proposed projects that the Center's industrial advisory board recommends as of
highest priority to their sector. Broader impacts of the Center include
breakthroughs in weather prediction and precision, grid modernization and the
integration of renewable energy into the electrical grid, and workforce
development. Through the Center, students and postdocs will be trained to work
on high-priority projects of industry importance and learn how to work with non-
academic parties to deliver much needed innovation in the weather-impacted
electrical delivery/grid resilience space. Additional impacts include broadening
participation in their research projects. Other impacts include using remote
sensing and predictive models to derive supply and demand analytics for the
renewable energy industry (Solar, Hydro, etc.) to support decarbonization
initiatives across various regions in the US. The coming together of SUNY Albany
and the University of Connecticut into an industry-university cooperative
research center and its combined involved faculty, instrumentation, and
facilities will create an engine to solve problems facing the electricity
distribution industry due to the impact of hazards posed by changing weather
patterns and climate. Research at the University at Albany will produce state-
of-the-art predictive modeling tools that leverage numerical weather prediction
and artificial intelligence-based impact modeling for managing renewable energy
and predicting storm outages from various kinds of weather events. The Center
goal will be the integration of total system resilience modeling with dynamic
economic and policy analysis and forecasting tools based on electric utility
infrastructure systems. The University of Connecticut Site brings both expertise
on electrical grid operations and resilience as well as novel, experimentally-
derived knowledge about the effects of roadside forest management approaches and
disturbance agents on tree biomechanics and stability, given that trees are one
of the biggest factors in inclement weather-generated electrical outages. The
basic knowledge generated by this Center is essential to dramatically improving
approaches required for the integration of renewables into the present
electrical grid. It will also use geospatial data on infrastructure and
vegetation risk/health as well as socioeconomic and ethnographic data to
identify and address barriers to the uptake of new management strategies. The
Center will provide significant new insights into state-of-the-art renewable
energy management that considers the economic and technological constraints to
maintaining the desirable power grid reliability and resilience to extreme
weather events and climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.