* 2312755
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Design and Implementation of Quantum Databases
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Liang Jiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum systems can in principle store and process data faster than conventional
digital systems. Achieving such speedup in practice, however, is often hindered
by the difficulties in: (i) quickly accessing data in quantum superposition, and
(ii) reliably manipulating quantum data in the presence of high error rates
inherent in quantum devices. Current technologies designed for quantum
processing units (QPUs) lack this interface to access data at scale, also known
as the quantum I/O bottleneck. This effort develops the systems architecture for
quantum databases (QDBs) that provide crucial data input for QPUs to process
efficiently and reliably. Building on recent significant progress in quantum
random access memory (QRAM) technologies, the program identifies the key
software and hardware advances needed to translate proof-of-principle
demonstrations into viable, scalable platforms.

At the core of the envisioned quantum database (QDB) systems is the development
of QRAM architectures that allow low-latency and high-fidelity queries. The
investigators of this program study the hardware and software requirements for
functional, fault-tolerant QRAM architectures, develop simulation and
benchmarking tools, and present new algorithms enabled by QDBs. An extensive set
of education and outreach activities is included in the program to foster the
growth of future quantum computing workforce and promote a deeper understanding
of the potential and limitations of quantum memory and databases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.