* 2312033
* 2023 Foundational Research in Robotics (FRR) - National Robotics Initiative (NRI) Principal Investigators’ (PI) Meeting; Arlington, Virginia; 1-3 May 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Dylan Shell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 01/31/2024
* USD 513,675.00

The purpose of this project is to plan, organize, and execute the 2023 National
Science Foundation (NSF) Foundational Research in Robotics-National Robotics
Initiative (NRI) and the Foundational Research in Robotics (FRR) Principal
Investigator (PI) Meeting. This meeting will convene all PIs of active awards of
the NSF FRR and NRI Programs for the eighth time since the NRI Program began in
2011. The PI Meeting is scheduled for the Spring of 2023 in Arlington, Virginia.
The program agenda is community-driven and features project talks, poster
sessions, and “live” demonstrations from researchers, reports of past year
program activities, special topic workshops, panel discussions, keynote talks,
and Federal agency program updates from leaders in the research community. This
two-day meeting will be the first full in-person PI meeting since the 2020
Covid-19 pandemic.

The annual PI Meeting will be a major national event for the NSF FRR and NRI
research communities and serves as an annual forum where Principal Investigators
will have opportunities to meet and share their research and best practices;
discuss new research opportunities, successes, and challenges; and explore new
ideas and partnerships; and to interact with Federal agency representatives,
industry, and other stakeholders with vested interests in NSF robotics research
and development. NSF Robotics PI Meetings have played a major role in community-
building across a broad range of robotics topics, sectors, and technologies and
with promoting best practices in education, technology transfer, and outreach to
others who have interest in learning about the program and participating as
future proposers, transition partners, or sponsors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.