* 2312689
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: Fortuna: Characterizing and Harnessing Performance Variability in Accelerator-rich Clusters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zhao Zhang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 221,316.00

Large computing clusters, including data centers and supercomputers, are used
for a variety of applications including scientific computations and machine
learning. Modern compute clusters typically use specialized accelerator hardware
to speed up computations. Operators of accelerator-rich clusters aim to have
high resource utilization across all users of the cluster. However, these
systems are often under-utilized due to performance variability across
accelerators; that is, application performance varies across accelerators even
when the same application is run on the same type of accelerator. This proposal
will develop Fortuna, a set of tools that can be used by cluster operators and
researchers to characterize and harness variability across accelerators. First,
Fortuna will use new methodologies to characterize how much performance
variability exists across a wide range of accelerator hardware. Second, Fortuna
will identify which applications are more likely to suffer from performance
variability. Finally, Fortuna will include new scheduling mechanisms that can
use variability measurements and knowledge about applications to improve
utilization.

Broader impacts of the proposed research include open-source implementations of
algorithms and tools, which will be applicable to many large-scale clusters and
lay the groundwork for wider industry adoption. The project will also create
course modules on system design principles with heterogeneous hardware and
software, based on the tools developed as a part of the proposal. This will
teach the next generation of students how to design hardware and software to
improve utilization of future systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.