* 2312984
* BRC-BIO: Establishing a new model system to study the relationship between gut microbiome and host niche specialization
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Lily Khadempour, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 08/31/2026
* USD 497,916.00

Most animals house a community of microorganisms in their guts. These microbes
can allow the host animal to consume a particular diet or have a particular
lifestyle, which the host would not be able to do otherwise. This research will
examine the gut microbiome of charismatic insects called honeypot ants. Some of
the honeypot ant colony members are highly specialized so that their guts can
expand to be many times larger than a typical ant. They do this to store food
when food is plentiful, so that they can feed the colony when food is limited.
This research will answer questions about how the gut microbiome may help with
food preservation over many months of storage, how it may supplement the diet of
the ants with nutrients they may not get directly from their food, and how it
may help to detoxify some of the food material that the ants consume. This
research into the gut microbiomes of honeypot ants can inform, more generally,
on how microorganisms can help their hosts to have specialized diets and
lifestyles and can help us to understand how microbes can be used for long-term
food storage. The honeypot ants will also be included in an Ant Visitor Center
that will educate the public and get children excited about these animals and
how scientists study them.

Honeypot ants are an ideal system to study the relationship between gut
microbiome and convergent evolution, having at least 16 independently evolved
genera in three different subfamilies found in different locations around the
world. This research provides the starting point into the microbiome of honeypot
ants with one genus, Myrmecocystus, found in the semi-arid habitats of North
America. The PI and their team will use field collections, community amplicon
sequencing, proteomics, metabolomics, pH measurements and HPLC to characterize
the microbial community and chemical environment in the guts of six species of
Myrmecocystus. This work will be followed by experiments with microbial cultures
and live ant colonies to determine whether microbiota detoxify plant defense
compounds, provide supplemental nutrients, or prevent food spoilage. Data from
these experiments, chemical analyses, amplicon sequencing, isolate genome
sequencing and metatranscriptomics will be used to determine how food
deprivation and plant toxins impact microbiomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.