* 2312105
* Modeling X-ray Transient Spectroscopies with Advanced Multireference Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Francesco Evangelista, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 501,728.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Francesco Evangelista of Emory University
is developing computational approaches to simulate highly reactive molecules
interacting with X-ray radiation. New experimental techniques use X-rays to
track the dynamics of electrons and nuclei during chemical reactions at
extremely short time scales. These experiments can also reveal how molecules
interact with their environment. It is difficult to extract the atomistic
mechanism of reactions from X-ray experiments alone. Quantum mechanical
calculations play an important role in interpreting X-ray experiments.
Scientists cannot accurately perform these calculations for many interesting
molecules due to the challenges created by the correlated motion of electrons.
Evangelista and his research group are developing methods that will enable
simulations of state-of-the-art experiments that can be used to track reactions
in complex chemical environments. This project will create new open-source
computer codes that implement the theories developed by Evangelista and that are
freely available. The Evangelista group also plans to engage undergraduates in
summer research as part of the team to help build the future STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce.

Under this award, Francesco Evangelista and his team will develop methods to
compute core-excited states for molecules in regimes where many-body
correlations contribute significantly to the wave function. The approach will
employ the driven similarity renormalization group (DSRG) formalism to account
for dynamical correlation effects to produce an effective Hamiltonian for a
manifold of electronic states. The project seeks to develop a new technique to
target specific valence- and core-excited diabatic states and will apply these
methods to simulate state-of-the-art experiments that track bond-dissociation
processes. The group also seeks to extend their computations to molecules
adsorbed on semiconductors and solid-state defect qubits by combining the GAS
(general activation space)-DSRG approach with multi-reference quantum embedding
methods. These techniques are intended to address the problem of computing full
X-ray absorption spectra for transient species as their molecular geometry and
electronic state evolve over time. The proposed methods will be general in that
they will apply to both ground and valence-excited starting states. More
broadly, these developments are expected contribute to the advancement of multi-
reference theories with potential impact on the related areas of photochemistry
and chemical reactivity. These methods are potentially deployable for the
simulation of diamond defects with relevance to quantum information science
(QIS) as, for example, in the use of X-ray spectroscopy for the characterization
of solid-state qubits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.