* 2312196
* Performance Guarantees for Electric Vehicle Fast Charging Station Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Venkat Krovi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 698,978.00

This grant will fund research that enables the development of effective
solutions for the management of electric vehicle charging stations that reduce
operating costs, shorten queuing time, and lessen battery degradation, thereby
promoting the progress of science and advancing national prosperity. Existing
fast charging station management solutions are based on conservatively
forecasted charging demand and do not leverage power control optimization for
vehicle charging. Given typical constraints on the availability of grid-supplied
power, conventional charging solutions may result in undesirable performance,
including longer charging/queuing times and faster battery degradation. Such
outcomes are expected to be exacerbated as projected increases in the charging
needs of battery and hybrid electric vehicles, in terms of both number and
diversity, significant spatial and temporal variability at geographically
distributed charging stations, and intermittency of renewable power resources
impose significant stresses on the electric power grid. This project will
address these challenges by applying dynamic systems, control, and optimization
techniques to derive new charging station management solutions that guarantee
performance in terms of reduced charging time under limited power supplies,
increased battery life and user satisfaction, and improved grid support for a
secure power supply. Industry outreach will be conducted to present outcomes,
refine research directions, and seek commercialization of new technology. Summer
workshops on electric vehicle charging for high school and undergraduate
students will be used to promote engagement with STEM, including of individuals
from currently underrepresented groups.

This research aims to develop the foundations of a compartmentalization approach
to charging power management at electric vehicle fast charging stations under
maximum power restrictions and grid integration constraints. It accomplishes
this outcome by modeling fast charging station management as a multi-objective
optimization problem in terms of charging protocols, charging power allocation,
charging pricing, and power grid interactions, constrained by the dynamics of
electrochemical battery degradation, electricity market pricing, local
photovoltaic power generation, vehicle to grid service, and demand response. A
critical challenge is the construction of a Lyapunov function that enables a
decomposition of the long-period optimization horizon into temporally queued,
short-term and small-scale subproblems with guaranteed asymptotic convergence to
the optimal solution of the original problem. A systematic verification and
validation framework for virtual prototyping and hardware-in-the-loop testing
will be implemented to investigate the performance of fast charging station
management solutions under real-world conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.