* 2312886
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium:Compact and Energy-Efficient Compute-in-Memory Accelerator for Deep Learning Leveraging Ferroelectric Vertical NAND Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Vijaykrishnan Narayanan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2027
* USD 266,000.00

The field of artificial intelligence (AI) has recently made significant strides,
with notable advancements such as large language models like ChatGPT taking the
world by storm. However, these breakthroughs would not have been possible
without the availability of powerful computing hardware, such as graphics
processing units (GPUs). Such hardware has benefited from several decades of
technology scaling following Moore's law. As technology approaches its physical
limits and AI models require exponentially increasing hardware resources,
including computation and storage, alternative computing paradigms with superior
energy efficiency and performance are necessary for a sustainable future.
Compute-in-memory is one promising approach where computations are directly
performed in memory units, eliminating most data movements, a key bottleneck in
conventional computers. However, to best exploit the compute-in-memory for
acceleration of AI models on the scale of giga-byte to tera-byte levels, it is
critical to have high capacity, energy-efficient, and high performance memory
technology to fit the models. NAND memory is a form of erasable programmable
read-only memory that takes its name from the not-and (NAND) logic gate. The
proposed research aims to develop ferroelectric vertical NAND memory to meet
these demands and at the same time train students for developing a future
workforce for the semiconductor industry.

Vertical NAND memory offers the highest density by increasing the number of
stacked layers vertically. However, conventional vertical NAND memory based on
floating gate or charge trap flash suffers from poor performance, including high
write voltage, low speed, and poor endurance, despite their large capacity. To
address these issues, this research proposes the development of a vertical NAND
flash alternative: the vertical NAND ferroelectric field-effect transistor
(FeFET), which achieves high density and high performance simultaneously. By
leveraging the recently discovered ferroelectric HfO2, superior performance can
be achieved as ferroelectric programming is driven by an applied electric field,
which can be energy-efficient and fast. The project aims to design and evaluate
vertical NAND FeFET-based compute-in-memory accelerators from devices to
architectures, with innovations such as novel cell designs to achieve multi-
level cell and variation suppression, vertical NAND array disturb mitigation
with a novel array structure, and mapping and benchmarking of various important
information processing tasks to the vertical NAND FeFET array. Additionally,
this research includes workforce training activities such as lectures and hands-
on experience offered to K-12 students and teachers to promote excitement and
attract them to the talent pipeline for the semiconductor industry. The proposed
research will recruit graduate and undergraduate students via the Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program from underrepresented groups, and
the knowledge acquired in this project will be distributed through curriculum
development and online sharing repositories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.