* 2312758
* SHF: Medium: Cross-Stack Algorithm-Hardware-Systems Optimization Towards Ubiquitous On-Device 3D Intelligence
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Greg Eisenhauer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 06/30/2027
* USD 900,777.00

Deep neural network (DNN)-boosted three dimensional (3D) reconstruction promises
to become the next tech disruptor and revolutionize many aspects of human life
and means of production. It is expected to reach a value of $1575.64 billion by
2028. This is because 3D-reconstructed data is rich in scale and geometric
information, thus enabling 3D intelligent systems to achieve much better
machine-environment understanding and perform newly possible functionalities. In
parallel with the growing need for 3D reconstruction, the number of daily-life
devices has been booming and is estimated to reach 500 billion by 2030.
Therefore, there has been a monumental demand for bringing 3D reconstruction-
enabled intelligent functionalities into numerous (heterogeneous) devices,
ranging from drones to self-driving cars, augmented reality (AR) and virtual
reality (VR) devices, and many more, for enabling ubiquitous 3D intelligence.
Despite the big promise of ubiquitous on-device 3D intelligence, a vast and
increasing gap still exists between the prohibitive complexity of powerful 3D
reconstruction algorithms and the constrained resources in commonly used
devices. This is because the increased data-, model-, and training-level
complexity required in 3D reconstruction-enabled intelligent
functionalities/models exponentially aggravates their computational cost as
compared to 2D intelligent ones. Furthermore, 3D reconstruction models feature
very unique computational and data access patterns compared to those of 2D
image-based DNN models. This project aims to close the aforementioned gap and
foster a systematic breakthrough for enabling on-device 3D reconstruction-
enabled intelligent functionalities through a holistic exploration of a joint
optimization and harmonization of algorithm-, hardware-, and system-level
innovations. The results of this project will culminate in the creation of
innovative course materials and open educational resources designed to engage a
diverse student body, fostering an inclusive learning environment and serving as
a springboard for creativity and innovation.

The project will advance knowledge and produce scientific principles and tools
for enabling on-device 3D intelligence. First, Thrusts 1 and 2 will develop the
fundamental underpinnings of dedicated algorithm-hardware co-design solutions
for enabling instant training and real-time inference of on-device 3D
reconstruction. In particular, Thrust 1 focuses on per-scene optimization
scenarios and Thrust 2 concentrates on cross-scene scenarios considering that a
sufficient number of captured views of the target scene is not always available.
Second, Thrusts 3 and 4 will develop algorithm-system co-optimization solutions
for enabling resource-adaptive on-device 3D intelligence. Specifically, Thrust 3
deals with privacy-sensitive/proprietary on-device training data by extending to
distributed learning of cross-scene 3D reconstruction models over heterogeneous
edge devices, while Thrust 4 explores resource adaptive inference scheduling
methods by leveraging algorithm-system co-design. Finally, an integration effort
is conducted to evaluate the innovations of the four thrusts and demonstrate
their benefits in realistic systems. Overall, this project is geared towards
significantly advancing the state-of-the-art of on-device 3D reconstruction by
improving model accuracy, efficiency and enabling real-time inference and
learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.