* 2312086
* CPS: Small: Infusing Quantum Computing, Decomposition, and Learning for Addressing Cyber-Physical Systems Optimization Challenges
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ramachandran Vaidyanathan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2026
* USD 449,922.00

This NSF project aims to develop quantum computing-inspired algorithms for
optimization problems that appear in various critical infrastructure systems,
including power systems. The primary focus will be on computationally expensive
mixed-integer optimization problems, which are hard to solve by classical
computing machines. The project will bring transformative change in the ways
that electric power system optimization problems are solved. This will be
achieved by integrating machine learning and distributed computing with quantum
computing techniques. The intellectual merits of the project include advancing
the understanding of quantum computing optimization algorithms and harnessing
their potential for solving complex problems. The broader impacts of the project
include facilitating quantum computing applications for solving a variety of
optimization problems, particularly for power systems operation and planning. In
addition, multiple educational and outreach activities are envisioned to broaden
the participation of under-resourced and underrepresented groups in computing
and engineering, contribute to diverse workforce development, raise awareness of
quantum technology among diverse audiences and children, and benefit local
communities and the nation.

This project will contribute to the field of cyber-physical systems
optimization. Several existing technical and algorithmic challenges for solving
optimization problems with quantum computing will be addressed. The project
proposes the development of decomposition and distributed approaches, combined
with quantum computing and machine learning, to create trainable quantum-
classical algorithms for various mixed-binary optimization problems. The
proposed strategies will enable the conversion of deterministic and stochastic
mixed-binary problems in the power grid domain into multiple subproblems. These
subproblems will be solvable by quantum computers in collaboration with
classical computing machines. To achieve this, trainable variational quantum
algorithms will be developed and integrated into intelligent quantum Lagrangian
and Benders techniques. This integration will coordinate the computing
operations performed by both quantum and classical machines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.