* 2312360
* Planning: BRAID-CMC Alliance Workshop
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Lauren Mullineaux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2025
* USD 141,142.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will lead a planning effort that is
specifically designed to foster new research and educational partnerships
between eight US minority-serving institutions (MSIs) that have programs in
marine and climate science and a cluster of six marine and climate science
research institutions located in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. These fourteen
institutions, along with a Racial Equity Research team whose members come from
the University of South Carolina, Salem State University, George Mason
University, and Temple University, and with facilitators, affiliates, and
evaluators from addition institutions, will form the BRAIDC-MC Alliance
(BRinging together Allies In Diversifying Climate and Marine Careers). The long-
term goal of this Alliance is to develop an evolving ecosystem for US MSIs and
research institutions in climate and marine science that can collaborate on
proposals to be submitted to the Directorate of Geosciences’ GeoPATHS and/or
GOLD-EN programs and the NSF INCLUDES Program. The focus of these proposals will
be to co-create strategies for broadening participation and success of the
faculty, students, and workforces who remain underrepresented in the marine and
climate science disciplines.

The planning project will bring together representatives from a wide range of
institutions to focus on creating a network and collaboration for US MSIs and
other research institutions in climate and marine science. The planning effort
will concrete partnerships within the BRAID-CMC Alliance, which will in turn
initiate specific efforts to develop NSF proposals to increase MSI faculty and
student access to national marine and climate science research resources. A
Steering Committee has been identified and is assembled from BRAID members who
expressed interest in leading the planning process and who are knowledgeable
about best practices in institutional collaborations and the social science
behind racial inequity. The planning activities include a “Toolbox” session to
build trust and relationships, boundary spanning and network development
activities, and cross-institution collaboration and grant writing activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.