* 2312311
* Visualizing Novel Electronic Orders in Bilayer Graphene Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Ali Yazdani, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2027
* USD 437,500.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum materials play a key role in establishing the
future of technology. The discovery of and research advances based on single-
atom-thick materials, such as graphene, and their stacks is creating a new arena
for exploration of electronic phenomena in which interaction between electrons
can be controlled and analyzed with modern techniques such as the scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM). This research project is focused on visualization of
quantum phenomena in materials with density of electrons controlled by
application of a magnetic field or twisting of layers relative to each other. By
bringing the power of imaging electronic states to study these exciting
materials, this project reveals the microscopic mechanism by which these quantum
states are formed and their properties. The graduate and undergraduate students
trained in this project will constitute the future workforce for quantum science
and technology in academia and industry. This research is supplemented with an
educational agenda, the continued improvement of a Princeton undergraduate
course “Physics for Future Leaders”, that introduces physics (from basics to
quantum phenomena) to non-science majors who are interested in pursuing
leadership roles in government and policy arenas.

Technical Abstract: This project is focused on electronic phases in novel two
dimensional materials in which electronic correlation is induced by electrons
occupying a flat band. The research team explores a wide range of quantum
phenomena for electrons in flat bands in unique ways using atomic scale imaging
and spectroscopy with the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The information
obtained from these experiments is nearly impossible to obtain from other types
of macroscopically averaged methods and hence will add an important new
perspective to the study of interacting phases of electrons. New quantum phases
with complex broken symmetry and ordering are being created in ultra clean
devices and the complex correlations underlying their formation is being
explored. Exotic electronic phases with fractionalized charges that may host
non-abelian anyons are the focus of investigation. In particular, the project
supports examination of fractional quantum Hall phases (FQH) in bilayer
graphene, examining ways in which such states can be probed locally with the
STM. This system also provides a unique setting to visualize field-induced
Wigner crystals, bubble and stripe phases of electrons and their competition
with FQH phases. Another flat band system being explored is that of magic-angle
twisted bilayer graphene in which STM measurements are used to understand the
nature of broken symmetry states that give rise to correlated and topological
insulators found in this system. Local STM imaging and its analysis are being
used to characterize broken symmetries and to study the influence of strain,
twist angle, and alignment with subtracted boron-nitride. Several new
experimental techniques based on scanning tunneling microscopy is also being
developed in this program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.