* 2312718
* BRC-BIO: Looking beyond the calorie: Nutritional ecology in a generalist predator
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Allison Cornell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2026
* USD 486,171.00

Calories are often treated as the primary unit of nutrition, but a growing body
of evidence suggests that the specific nutrient composition of food may be a
more important driver of foraging behavior in wildlife. Because nutrient
composition varies with environmental conditions, climate change is likely to
affect nutrient content of food. For predators, this means that a changing
climate could alter the nutrition of their prey, and therefore, what prey they
select. However, without baseline knowledge of how nutrients shift in response
to changing environmental conditions, it is difficult to make predictions about
predator behavior. Songbirds are common predators in many ecosystems that prey
on a variety of insects and can easily be captured and observed for behavioral
studies. This project will 1) assess macronutrients (protein, carbohydrate,
lipid) in prey and identify specific ratios of macronutrients that maximize
nestling growth, 2) examine how the nutritional value of prey changes when
reared in experimentally manipulated environmental conditions, and 3) examine
whether changes in nutrition affect birds’ preference for prey. Because insects
are consumed by many animals outside of birds, this work will have conservation
implications for a wide range of taxa. The research team will include
undergraduate students enrolled in relevant biology courses and paid
undergraduate assistants. Students will develop independent projects related to
the broader theme and travel to national conferences to present their work. This
research experience will equip participants with skills in laboratory and field
work and build students’ confidence to persist in STEM careers.

Using a combination of manipulative laboratory experiments and an existing
network of 100 Eastern bluebird nest-boxes, the researchers will examine how
environmental conditions affect prey nutrient composition and whether these
changes impact predator preference. This work will test the use of the
nutritional geometric framework: a tool for assessing nutrition by utilizing
ratios of nutrients to model how foods are combined to reach multidimensional
nutritional targets that maximize organism performance. This framework is useful
in modeling how diet changes as different food items change in availability or
quality. By measuring the impact of prey macronutrients on nestling development
in Objective 1, the researchers will identify multidimensional nutritional
targets that maximize growth in nestlings. In Objective 2, these data will be
used to test whether the environmental conditions of prey meaningfully impact
their nutrient content. Although some studies investigate how nutrients change
in response to temperature or diet shifts, very few examine these in
combination, even though climate change is predicted to simultaneously affect
both. Experiments in Objective 2 manipulating diet and rearing temperature will
advance our understanding of how multiple environmental changes interact to
determine nutritional value. Finally in Objective 3, researchers will examine
bluebird nutritional preferences using field-based choice assays with
nutritionally altered insect prey. The experiments in this project will advance
basic science of nutritional ecology by examining hypotheses from the
nutritional geometric framework and life history theory, the outcomes of which
will inform conservation applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.