* 2312942
* Bond Strengthening and Grain Size Refinement in Superhard Metal Borides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Richard Kaner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2026
* USD 429,594.00

Non-technical Summary The continuous creation and development of tools through
the tuning of materials’ properties has been a cornerstone of much of the
development seen in human societies. High mechanical hardness is a very
desirable property for materials used in industrial settings for machining and
cutting as it dramatically reduces wear and therefore turnover rate of machining
tools. The industry standard superhard material is diamond, the hardest material
currently known. The issue that arises with diamond, however, is that not only
does it have an expensive high pressure, high temperate synthesis, but it is
limited in its applications. This is because it is thermally unstable in air and
when used to cut iron containing materials, diamond breaks down to form iron
carbides. These both result in a high turnover rate for diamond tools, and an
inability to be used with common iron containing materials, like steel. Cheaper
alternatives such as tungsten carbide (WC) have an easier, low-cost synthesis,
but lack the extremely high hardness values of diamond and therefore have high
turnover rates and are less effective. With this project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program and the Ceramics program, both in NSF’s
Division of Materials Research, the principal investigators design and create
superhard materials that approach the high hardness seen in diamond, while
replicating the low cost, ambient pressure synthesis found in WC. These
superhard materials made from boron not only lower the cost of synthesis, but
they improve the lifetime of the tools that can be created and therefore, lower
the amount of waste generated in industrial machining. Additionally, the
metallic nature of these transition metal borides enables the use of high
precision cutting and shaping instruments like plasma cutting, which is
currently not usable with electrically insulating materials like diamond, which
additionally reduces cost and waste in the formation of these tools. Beyond this
research, the principal investigators undertake educational outreach in the
greater Los Angeles area. This includes developing lessons and experiments for
K-12 schools and presenting them to teachers, along with speaking to students in
grade school about not just science, but higher education as a whole. Graduate
students who work on this project also gain valuable skills through both the
research they conduct as well as through the mentorship and outreach programs
they participate in alongside their mentors.

Technical Summary Hardness is a mechanical property that is defined by a
material’s ability to resist irreversible shape change, known as plastic
deformation. The hardness of a given material is dependent on several different
materials’ properties, but they can overall be grouped into two categories:
intrinsic bonding effects and grain boundary effects. These two contributors to
hardness are not mutually exclusive and therefore can be optimized separately
and combined to dramatically improve the hardness of a material. This project,
with support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the
Ceramics program, both in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, uses the
described two-pronged approach towards superhard materials design and combines
the synthesis of transition metal boride systems with high-pressure studies to
obtain information about the internal deformation mechanisms of bulk and
nanocrystalline materials. The research groups at UC Los Angeles study how small
element doping into the boron sites of the metal borides affects the bonding.
Using systems of di- and tetra- borides with varying amounts of carbon in them,
the principal investigators investigate the different carbon bonding regimes,
and their impact on hardness. Additionally, synthetic routes for the formation
of nanostructured metal borides are explored. The principal investigators
utilize new synthetic routes to create nanocrystalline forms of known superhard
metal borides such as ReB2, WB2 and WB4 to further increase the hardness of
these materials by maximizing the number of grain boundaries which can impede
plastic deformation. These nanocrystalline materials also allow for new
analytical techniques which are not possible for bulk materials such as Rietveld
texture analysis. These two approaches to hardening metal borides can then be
combined to create nanocrystalline solid solutions which benefit from both the
improved bonding effects and grain boundary effects. The broader impacts of the
project are multifaceted and include extensive outreach conducted by the
principal investigators aimed at grade school children, the training of both
graduate and undergraduate students in their Ph.D. studies and undergraduate
research opportunities, respectively, and the development of novel superhard
materials which have the potential to improve the quality of industrial
manufacturing and machining tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.