* 2312398
* FET: Medium: Programming multi-cellular systems with spatially-defined computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Georg Seelig, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2027
* USD 887,592.00

Many biological systems, most prominently networks of neurons, control the flow
of information by physically organizing component connectivity and spatial
organization. However, although recent technological advancements make it
possible to comprehensively map the layout of biological networks (e.g., the
connectome), researchers are still far from understanding how spatial
architecture enables and relates to information processing. Investigators of
this project propose to take an engineering approach to understanding how
complex information processing can be achieved with a very limited set of
molecular and cellular components simply by controlling the spatial organization
of these components. The presented approach will result in novel insights into
the biophysics of computation. Rather than asking how information processing
occurs in a specific, existing biological system, investigators ask what the
minimal requirements are for complex computation and information processing in a
synthetic multicellular, spatially organized system. Using this principle, they
argue that almost arbitrarily complex computation can be achieved with a very
small set of engineered cells. Importantly, and unlike prior work, investigators
do not need to engineer new molecular components or cell types to increase
circuit complexity but can expand the circuit footprint in space to accommodate
additional building blocks.

Investigators will develop technological innovations to scale up cellular
computing and memory systems using a minimal set of molecular parts. They will
achieve this goal by overcoming limitations in multiple domains, including
orthogonal circuit components, cell-to-cell communication and cell storage
capacities. A key innovation is the use of spatial organization to enable
systematic reuse of molecular signaling and computation units. The result will
be systems that enable on-demand programming of arbitrary circuit architectures
into multicellular yeast biofilms. To accomplish these goals, the biofilms will
be composed of two different yeast strains, each containing a different circuit
component. The two types of components are for logic integration and signal
propagation. In this system, a dual rail logic encoding will be used in which
the logical '0' will be represented by the presence of the chemical signaling
molecule alpha-factor, and the logical '1' will be encoded by the presence of
the small molecule auxin. Logic integration will be carried out by ``gate"
cells, which will contain an intracellular transcriptional NOR logic gate. For
signal propagation, a single strain of ``wire" cells will be used to transmit
the Boolean outputs (alpha-factor or auxin) via active signaling along
spatially-defined paths that connect regions of gate cells, and gate cell
outputs to downstream gate cells and/or circuit output cells. Circuit input
cells will have the potential to be programmed with any arbitrary set of
biosensors (e.g., electrogenetic redox-based sensors), while the output cells
can be programmed with molecular memory systems that can record and permanently
store transient circuit outputs directly in cellular DNA (e.g., using CRISPR-
based molecular recorders).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.