* 2312001
* Collaborative Research: Rational Design of Ionene + Ionic Liquid Membranes Based on Understanding Gas Transport on Different Length Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 219,996.00

Membranes offer improved energy and operational efficiency compared to
traditional chemical separation processes such as distillation and absorption.
However, membrane technology is less mature than distillation and absorption
technologies. Developing new membrane materials to make membrane-based
separations competitive with these traditional technologies remains a
significant need. Chemical separations are of vital importance as they underpin
the production of energy and materials that allow the modern world to function.
Improvements to separation processes are key to reducing energy consumption,
costs of products and services, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. This project
will utilize synthetic chemistry, polymer science, and state-of-the-art
transport measurement and spectroscopic techniques to develop new fundamental
knowledge of membrane structures and performance, which can lead to
breakthroughs in membrane performance. The lessons learned through the membrane
design process and the development of structure-transport relationships for
these membranes can also be translated to other applications, such as utilizing
plastic wastes to obtain key starting materials in the generation of new high-
performance polymer materials with unique properties that can be 3D printed.
This project creates opportunities for training undergraduate and graduate
students in a variety of synthetic and characterization techniques and leverages
existing programs established by the investigators to facilitate undergraduate
student participation.

Gas diffusion plays a key role in the separation performance of polymer
membranes. Yet, quantification and fundamental understanding of gas diffusion on
microscopic, viz. sub-micrometer and micrometer, length scales comparable with
sizes of structural inhomogeneities (domains) have not been demonstrated for
ionenes. This project will address this knowledge gap, allowing for rational
polymer membrane design based on a detailed understanding of microscopic
diffusion and its relationship with the macroscopic transport through an entire
membrane as well as membrane structural properties. The key objective of the
synergistic experimental research plan is to develop a fundamental understanding
of gas transport in a new type of polymer named “doubly segmented ionenes” (DS
ionenes). The study of DS ionenes will create a new paradigm for the design of
polymers for gas separation membranes and generate a significant body of
knowledge that will also be of broad interest to the separation science and
polymer science communities. The systematic variation of DS ionene structures
will provide deep knowledge of how the composition, length, and volume fraction
of major membrane constituents influence gas permeability and diffusion on all
relevant length scales. The overall goal is to develop an understanding of the
structure-transport relationship that allows for tailoring membrane composition
to maximize performance for any target gas separation application. Carbon
dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and carbon monoxide (CO) gases will be examined in
microscopic diffusion NMR experiments. Additional gases related to energy
production and consumption, including nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen, will be
considered in the macroscopic membrane experiments. The success of this project
will translate into major intellectual advancements in the ability to build
high-permeability and high-selectivity polymer membranes for gas separations,
which will be required to meet the energy challenges of the 21st Century.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.