* 2312875
* NeTS: Medium: Resilient-by-Design Data-Driven NextG Open Radio Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Society increasingly depends on cellular networks, making it critical to assure
that the networks are secure against cyber attacks. Next-generation cellular
networks are expected to rely on machine learning (ML) algorithms to achieve
real-time resource optimization across space, time, frequency and devices. This
project studies security threats to those ML algorithms and develops solutions
to protect them, focusing on the Open Radio Access Networks (Open RAN)
architecture which is rapidly becoming widespread. All project outputs
(algorithms, hardware/software designs, and datasets) will be made publicly
available through the NSF RFDataFactory website, helping to address the current
lack of large-scale datasets for data-driven wireless research. As part of the
project, several graduate students will develop unique expertise at the
crossroads of ML, security, embedded systems and wireless networks. The
project’s key findings will be integrated into new graduate courses in wireless
ML security, and will enrich ongoing initiatives at Northeastern University for
undergraduate and K-12 students coming from underrepresented minority groups.

Novel optimization frameworks are investigated to model adversarial ML attacks
in Open RANs. These findings are used to design ML architecture search
algorithms to find ML models for Open RANs that are resilient to attack while
still satisfying constraints such as end-to-end latency and energy consumption.
The project designs anomaly detection techniques to enhance resilience in
dynamic settings, and dynamic defense strategies against real-time dataset
poisoning attacks. The proposed techniques are evaluated using one or more of
the following testbeds: the Colosseum network emulator, the OpenRANGym
framework, and the NSF PAWR POWDER platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.