* 2312537
* AF: Medium: Concurrency and Adaptive Self-Organization in Anonymous Dynamic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Joshua Daymude, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 813,331.00

In computer science, a distributed system comprises many computational entities
(e.g., routers, cell phones, swarm robots, etc.) that each independently run
their own algorithms to cooperatively perform large-scale tasks. A key theme
across modern applications of distributed computing is the impact of dynamics,
or frequent changes in the system's members or the connections among them. From
disease contact tracing based on smartphones coming in and out of range to
understanding the collective intelligence of social insects behaving as a
superorganism, distributed algorithms for these "dynamic networks" enable
innovations both within and beyond computer science. This project addresses two
major limitations of current algorithms for dynamic networks: assuming that
dynamics can never happen at the same time as individuals' actions, and assuming
the dynamic network can only perform one task at a time. Designing distributed
systems that can adapt their behavior based on their changing environment, even
in spite of concurrent dynamics, will tie this rich theory more directly to
computational, biological, and social applications. Furthermore, the project
will have impact in (a) broadening diverse participation in computer science at
both the student and faculty levels, (b) undergraduate research, continuing the
researchers' strong mentorship record, and (c) education and outreach through
advanced courses and research talks.

This project investigates the algorithmic theory of dynamic networks, i.e.,
distributed systems with frequent (or adversarial) changes in the system's
members or their connections. Motivated by domains where individuals have
limited or no explicit computational power, this project specifically focuses on
a setting where nodes are anonymous (lacking unique identifiers), have
sublogarithmic memory (insufficient for computing identifiers), and communicate
via message passing. This project's core problems have two main foci:
asynchronous concurrency and adaptive self-organization. The first thrust aims
to achieve concurrency control for dynamic networks, bridging the generality of
asynchronous concurrency with the ease of algorithm design and analysis in
simpler versions of concurrency. The second thrust focuses on adaptive self-
organization, initiating the study of time-varying system tasks controlled by
environmental signals. This family of problems abstracts self-stabilizing task
allocation, extending established research on core distributed computing
problems for dynamic networks to the anonymous and adaptive setting suitable
even for modeling systems without explicit computational capabilities (e.g.,
granular active matter). Together, these aims will advance fundamental knowledge
of dynamic networks theory and contribute downstream to interdisciplinary
efforts in programming and characterizing collective behavior in biological and
social systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.