* 2312139
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Small: Digital Network Twins: Mapping Next Generation Wireless into Digital Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mingzhe Chen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Next-generation (NextG) wireless networks provide users with customized, instant
services, especially for bandwidth-hungry and latency-sensitive applications.
Despite the significant advantages of NextG wireless networks (e.g., 5G/6G and
millimeter-wave / Tera Hertz), realizing them faces several key deployment and
evaluation challenges: 1) how to speed up the deployment of novel yet complex
NextG network technologies; and 2) how to provide flexible testbed facilities
with high availability. In this regard, there is an urgent need for a virtual
solution that could create a digital model to replicate as accurately as
possible the NextG network ecosystem and help tackle the above obstacles before
the full realization of a real system. To this end, this project explores
methodologies to run faithful digital network twins that replicate the physical
NextG networks, and then to build and optimize the twins over the actual
networks while considering communication, computing, and networking resource
constraints. The built network twins provide an overarching architecture
involving the whole life cycle of physical networks, serving the critical
application of innovative technologies such as network planning, construction,
optimization, and predictive evaluation, and improving the automation and
intelligence level of the wireless networks. This transformative research
provides a holistic framework for the implementation and optimization of digital
network twins, thus catalyzing the deployment and operation of future network
systems with major societal impact.

This proposed research lays the foundations of digital network twins by
developing a novel framework that merges tools from machine learning,
communication theory, and distributed optimization to advance the networking
technologies in: 1) novel mapping approaches that integrate data-driven
modeling, ray-tracing analysis, wireless channel derivation, and regression-
based predictions to map NextG wireless networks into digital network twins and
then to evolve the mapped twins adaptively; 2) new digital network twin
management and optimization framework that combines graph neural networks,
distributed learning, and reinforcement learning, to allow distributed devices
in a physical network to first independently determine their mapping methods and
resource utilization, and then collaboratively maximize the digital network twin
performance over actual network environments; 3) design of the twinning platform
and evaluation methodology based on simulation and experiments to demonstrate
the fidelity, efficacy, and optimality of the built network twins. The project
provides a rich environment and virtualized platform that facilitate educating
and training students at multiple levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.