* 2312282
* Controlled Whistler Mode Wave Injection Experiments with the High Altitude Auroral Research Program (HAARP) Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Golkowski, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 378,011.00

Space weather processes, driven in complicated ways by activity on the sun, can
adversely affect our infrastructure in space and on the ground. This project
funds the use of the HAARP facility in Alaska for space science experiments that
can help us understand space weather dynamics. Specifically, the project seeks
to understand how some radio waves launched into space come back stronger after
they are amplified by energetic particles. The HAARP facility in Alaska is a
unique research facility and the only one worldwide to perform such experiments.
This project will support undergraduate and graduate students learning about
space sciences and traveling to Alaska to perform pioneering experiments. High
school students will also be involved in building hardware to conduct field
experiments. The project promotes the progress of science in key areas of
national interest and supports education and diversity in science and
engineering fields.

The project seeks to quantify and understand the process of whistler mode waves
generating additional waves in nonlinear interactions. Since whistler mode waves
of all types are a critical driver of radiation belt dynamics in the
magnetosphere, knowing when, where, and how new waves are generated is necessary
for assuring that models of radiation belt fluxes and space weather phenomena
are accurate. The project involves ELF/VLF magnetospheric wave injection
experiments to be performed at the NSF-supported High Altitude Auroral Research
Program (HAARP) facility in Gakona, Alaska. The HAARP HF heater is currently the
only available source of controlled ELF/VLF waves available to scientists for
magnetospheric wave injection. Ground observations in the ELF/VLF band within
100 km of the HAARP facility will be used to rigorously investigate nonlinear
whistler mode phenomena in the inner magnetosphere, and valuable D-region
diagnostic data will also be obtained. The principal investigator (PI) has
direct experience with these types of experiments going back to his doctoral
thesis and has participated in previous HAARP facility campaigns. The
experiments leverage the unique capabilities of the HAARP facility and knowledge
gained from past experiments to test and expand recent theories on nonlinear
whistler mode wave interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.