* 2312005
* State-Resolved Vibrational Spectra of Fluxional Protonated Water Clusters via Tensor Network States
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Henrik Larsson, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 514,668.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE), Henrik R. Larsson of the University
of California, Merced is developing new theoretical methods that will be applied
to unravel quantum effects in protonated water clusters. These clusters are key
to understanding the fundamental properties of water, such as its acidity, which
depend on many complex quantum interactions. Henrik R. Larsson and his research
group will be developing methods that are designed to enable an efficient and
accurate simulation of protonated water clusters with nearly an order of
magnitude increase in complexity relative to previous work. The methods
developed in this research are expected to be generally applicable to a broad
class of quantum systems in a wide range of fields including energy sciences,
and astro- and photochemistry. Dr. Larsson plans to co-organize an
interdisciplinary workshop within the Quantum Dynamics Network about developing
new methods for simulating quantum systems to bring scientific communities from
different fields together. Plans are in place for Dr. Larsson to engage early
career scientists in the exciting field of molecular quantum dynamics by
lecturing at a summer school. The principal investigator also aims to involve
economically disadvantaged high school students, through ACS Project Seed, and
first generation undergraduate students in research activities that are directly
linked to this project.

Dr. Henrik R. Larsson and his research group at the University of California,
Merced will develop methods for full-dimensional vibrational quantum dynamics
simulations. The methods they will develop are based on tensor network states,
leveraging the power of the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) and of
the multilayer multi-configurational time-dependent Hartree (ML-MCTDH) method.
They will apply these new methods to understanding the effects of finite
temperature, isotope substitution and microsolvation on the proton transfer
motion and the infrared spectrum of protonated water clusters. They will
optimize and analyze highly excited wavefunctions that lead to poorly understood
experimental spectra. Differences and similarities between the clusters will be
analyzed by means of explicit wavefunction comparisons and by reduced-
dimensional simulations. The methods developed in this program are expected to
be broadly applicable beyond the study of vibrational fluxional states and, for
example, will likely be useful for simulating nonadiabatic dynamics and for
computing excited electronic states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.