* 2312880
* IUCRC Phase I Grant University of Connecticut: Center for Weather Innovation, Smart Energy and Resilience (WISER)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Emmanouil Anagnostou, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2028
* USD 150,000.00

This Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Weather
Innovation, Smart Energy, and Resilience is a collaboration between the
University of Connecticut and the State University of New York at Albany. Using
the innovation that comes from Center university faculty, students, and
postdocs, this IUCRC will advance basic research and cutting-edge technologies
to improve the energy industryâ€™s power grid efficiency and reliability in the
face of the intensification of weather extremes in a changing climate and the
nation's transition to clean energy. The Center's research thrusts are: (1)
renewable energy generation and power grid integration, (2) weather-caused
outage forecasting, management, and restoration, (3) electric grid resilience
assessment and economic analysis of resilience improvements, and (4) climate
change effects on the current generation and the future distribution of
renewable energy resources. The dues paying members of the Center include
private sector companies, energy utilities, government entities, and other
interested parties. Their membership fees are pooled and used to fund faculty-
proposed projects that the Center's industrial advisory board recommends as of
highest priority to their sector. Broader impacts of the Center include
breakthroughs in weather prediction, grid modernization, integration of
renewable energy into the electrical grid, and workforce development. Through
the Center, students and postdocs will be trained to work on high-priority
projects of industry importance and learn how to work with non-academic parties
to deliver much needed innovation in the weather-impacted electrical
delivery/grid resilience space. Additional impacts include broadening
participation in their research projects. Other impacts include using remote
sensing and predictive models to derive supply and demand analytics for the
renewable energy industry (Solar, Hydro, etc.) to support decarbonization
initiatives across various regions in the US.

The coming together of the University of Connecticut and SUNY Albany into an
industry-university cooperative research center and its combined involved
faculty, instrumentation, and facilities will create an engine to solve problems
facing the electricity distribution industry due to the impact of hazards posed
by changing weather patterns and climate. Research at the University of
Connecticut will produce state-of-the-art electrical grid integration and
resilience methodologies and provide much needed information, analysis, and
approaches for better vegetation management close to powerlines. The University
of Connecticut will also help determine economic impacts and better means of
managing and preparing for grid outages. The Center goal will be the integration
of total system resilience modeling with dynamic economic and policy analysis
and forecasting tools based on electric utility infrastructure systems. The
University of Connecticut Site brings both expertise to the table on electrical
grid operations and resilience as well as novel, experimentally-derived
knowledge about the effects of roadside forest management approaches and
disturbance agents on tree biomechanics and stability, given that trees are one
of the biggest factors in inclement weather-generated electrical outages. The
basic knowledge generated by this Center is essential to dramatically improving
approaches required for the integration of renewables into the present
electrical grid. It will also use geospatial data on infrastructure and
vegetation risk/health as well as socioeconomic and ethnographic data to
identify and address barriers to the uptake of new management strategies. The
Center will provide significant new insights into state-of-the-art renewable
energy management that considers the economic and technological constraints to
maintaining the desirable power grid reliability and resilience to extreme
weather events and climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.