* 2312190
* Conference: Genomic Consequences of Meiotic Drive Workshop
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Robert Unckless, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 03/31/2024
* USD 46,833.00

The “Genomic Consequences of Meiotic Drive” Workshop will be held in Arolla,
Switzerland in June 2023 and involve 20-30 attendees. Meiotic drive is a
phenomenon that occurs across most eukaryotic groups of organisms (mammals,
plants, insects, fungi, nematodes). Instead of gametogenesis resulting in equal
representation in the gametes, gametogenesis in a meiotic drive system results
in mostly one of the two homologous chromosomes. Thus, meiotic drive loci cheat
normal Mendelian segregation which aids their spread through populations.
Meiotic drive has several potential evolutionary consequences, but it also
leaves a profound signature on the genomes of species with drivers. The enormous
amount of genomic data now available for meiotic drive system will facilitate a
synthetic review of the genomic consequences of meiotic drive.

Our approach is to bring researchers together to present their work on genomic
consequences of meiotic drive, then brainstorm and draft a review article that
synthesizes the field. This model follows two prior reviews on different aspects
of meiotic drive published in 2016 and 2020. Our work will provide a
comprehensive overview of the field for both specialists in meiotic drive and
those who need to consider meiotic drive as a tangent to their own research
questions. This work will be impactful to the genetics/genomics community as a
whole. The workshop is also designed to elevate the research of newcomers to
this field. Our attendee list is purposefully enriched for early career
researchers and researchers from diverse backgrounds. The format of the workshop
allows for easy interaction between researchers from all levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.