* 2312158
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Small: Expediting Continual Online Learning on Edge Platforms through Software-Hardware Co-designs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yanzhi Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gained significant popularity in emerging
application domains such as robot-assisted eldercare, mobile diagnosis, and
wildlife surveillance. These applications commonly (i) employ continual online
learning that fine-tunes the DNN model based using streaming-in training data to
serve overtime inference requests and (ii) deploy the DNN models on energy-
constrained edge devices. As such, both model adaptiveness and device energy
efficiency are critical for user satisfaction. This research uncovers redundancy
in fine-tuning and enhances the computation efficiency to achieve practical,
efficient, and adaptive continual online learning on edge devices. This
project's educational and outreach components include (i) curriculum and course
project expansion on deep learning and edge computing. (ii) Engaging
undergraduate students in research activities through senior course projects and
outreach programs at PIs’ institute. (iii) Increasing the participation and
visibility of female and minority students in computer science and engineering.

This research aims to simultaneously achieve adaptiveness and energy efficiency
for continual online learning on edge devices. (i) It develops an attention-
guided smart layer freezing to reduce computation costs by automatically and
dynamically freezing converged layers. (ii) It designs an efficient in-situation
learning framework for edge devices. The framework selectively delays and merges
fine-tuning iterations to reduce the fine-tuning frequency and handles scenario
changes. (iii) It designs hardware-support memorization to reduce the amount of
fine-tuning computation and memory accesses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.