* 2312955
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Superhuman Imitation Learning from Heterogeneous Demonstrations
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xinhua Zhang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 799,368.00

Learning from demonstrated behavior (i.e., imitation) is an effective means of
knowledge transfer in animals and humans. Existing imitation learning methods
for artificial intelligence (AI) systems typically assume the capabilities of
the imitator match those of the demonstrator. This can lead to undesirable
behavior when the imitatorâ€™s capabilities significantly exceed those of the
demonstrator. This project reformulates imitation learning for AI systems that
are more capable than (human) demonstrators in some aspects by seeking to make
the AI system unambiguously better than human demonstrators. The project will
train graduate students and undergraduates to develop artificial intelligence
systems that are better aligned with safety and utility requirements in a broad
range of highly impactful future applications.

The project approaches its reformulated imitation learning objective using a
maximum margin optimization for guiding (deep) reinforcement learning of
control/decision policies. It focuses on learning from heterogeneous
demonstrations and tasks that differ in quality, difficulty, and structure.
Initially, multiple metrics for assessing and comparing different behaviors are
assumed to be available. Later in the project, these metrics will be learned
from demonstrations and supplemental annotations using deep representation
learning methods. The policies produced by the approach of this project will be
evaluated on a diverse set of applications: open source simulators (e.g., Atari
games), manipulation and mobility tasks for robotics platforms, and cancer
treatment decisions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.