* 2312006
* CRII: CNS: Integrating Security Tasks into Multicore Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Monowar Hasan, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Many critical systems of modern society (e.g., engine control units in
automobiles, logic controllers in manufacturing and power plants, aircraft
control and navigation systems, industrial control systems, sensing and
perception systems in robot-aided healthcare) have "real-time" (i.e., strict
timing and safety) requirements. Emerging Internet-of-things-specific
applications (e.g., connected autonomous cars, unmanned aerial vehicles), the
trending use of off-the-shelf components, and widespread Internet/network
connectivity expand the possibility of security breaches in those critical
systems, as revealed by recent real-world attacks. The key innovation of this
research is the development of a unified framework to integrate monitoring and
detection mechanisms as first-class elements within the design of real-time
systems, especially those built with multicore chips. This project will (a)
devise novel algorithms, scheduling models, and frameworks to integrate security
into multicore platforms that are cognizant of real-time requirements, (b) build
design-time tools and system-level plugins to incorporate the proposed
techniques into off-the-shelf systems, and (c) develop metrics to carefully
trade-off two contending requirements: timeliness and security. The ideas will
be validated through experimentation and testing on two off-the-shelf platforms:
a multi-terrain rover and a six-degree-of-freedom robotic arm.

This research will advance the field by enabling system designers to better
understand how to integrate security concerns, with a focus on revealing
security trade-offs to ensure minimal (or no) perturbations on real-time
properties. Techniques developed as part of this project will make safety-
critical, real-time systems more secure and applicable to various domains (e.g.,
automobiles, avionics, drones, space rovers, power grids, manufacturing plants,
medical devices, industrial control systems). The proposed research and
educational plans will enhance the knowledge of the next-generation
technological workforce in cyber-physical systems and cyber-security. This award
supports the training of graduate and undergraduate students, the development of
a new security course at Wichita State University, and the integration of
research findings into educational materials. All hardware, software, and system
implementations (including documentation and tutorials) will be freely available
in a public repository (https://github.com/CPS2RL) for educators, scientists,
industry personnel, and hobbyists to access and use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.