* 2312517
* CPS: Small: Brain-Inspired Memorization and Attention for Intelligent Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mohsen Imani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,793.00

Cyber-physical applications often analyze collected sensor data using machine
learning algorithms. Many existing sensing systems lack intelligence about the
target and naively generate large-scale data, making communication and
computation significantly costly. In many cases, however, the data generated by
sensors only contain useful information for a small portion of the sensor
activity. For example, machine learning algorithms continuously process the
visual sensors used for environmental/security monitoring to detect sensitive
activities. Still, these sensors only carry out useful information for a short
time. On the other hand, biological sensors intelligently generate orders of
magnitude less amount of data. This project develops machine learning algorithms
that provide real-time feedback to sensors to ensure they only generate data
needed for learning purposes. The approach is expected to provide up to four
orders of magnitude data reduction from sensors. The results from this research
will broadly impact many sensors used in internet-of-things applications,
including infrastructure, mobile devices, autonomous systems, robotics, and
healthcare. The project will also support underrepresented minority students
through synergistic outreach plans and educational activities, including
programs for K-12 students, undergraduate research opportunities, and new course
development.

The research approaches introduced in this project aim to make fundamental
changes to sensing systems in order to make future sensors intelligent for a
wide range of cyber-physical applications. First, this project will develop
novel brain-inspired learning algorithms that can provide fast and real-time
feedback to the sensing module to intelligently control the rate of data
generation from sensors. This feedback also makes sensors aware of the target
task, enabling situational awareness. Second, the project will develop a novel
framework that tightly integrates with a sensing circuit and brain-inspired
algorithms to dynamically control the sensor functionality in a close-loop
manner. The proposed hardware platform exploits the robustness of learning
algorithms to design near-sensor computing platforms that are highly
approximate, parallel, and efficient. Finally, this project aims to evaluate the
effectiveness of the framework on multiple large-scale systems. The prototype
will be fully released under an established open-source library for public
dissemination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.