* 2312007
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Modeling and Preview-Based Control for Cyber-Physical System Safety
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Sze Zheng Yong, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 161,841.00

This project will develop the theory and algorithmic tools for the design of
provably-safe controllers that can leverage preview information from different
sources. Many autonomous or semi-autonomous cyber-physical systems (CPS) are
equipped with mechanisms that provide a window of projecting into the future.
These mechanisms can be forward looking sensors like cameras (and corresponding
perception algorithms), map information, forecast information, or more
complicated predictive models of external agents learned from data. Through
these mechanisms, at run-time, the systems have a preview of what lies ahead.
Leveraging this information to improve performance of CPS while keeping strong
guarantees on their safety, therefore, holds great promise for multiple
technologies of national interest. We will use driver-assist systems in
connected vehicles as the main application. Education and outreach activities
will involve undergraduate and graduate students along with stakeholders from
local automotive companies. ^ To develop the theory for learning- and
prediction-enabled safety for CPS we will: (i) develop a modeling formalism,
namely preview automata, for systems with preview information and correct-by-
construction control algorithms that consider structured inaccuracies in the
predictions for resilience; (ii) investigate how cooperation can assist in
enriching the preview information; (iii) learn, via finite-sample data analysis,
trustworthy dynamical models of the behaviors of non-cooperative agents with
provable uncertainty bounds; and (iv) design methods for selecting compatible
models from the learned dynamical models and for deriving safe controllers in
the presence of cooperative and non-cooperative agents. Our innovations will
enable safety-critical CPS to take full advantage of emerging technologies on
sensing, perception, communication, and learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.