* 2312391
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: A3EM: Animal-borne Adaptive Acoustic Environmental Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 07/31/2026
* USD 749,976.00

The application of acoustic monitoring in ecological sciences has grown
exponentially in the last two decades. It has been used to answer many
questions, including detecting the presence or absence of animal species in an
environment, evaluating animal behavior, and identifying ecological stressors
and illegal activities. However, current uses are limited to the coverage of
relatively small geographic areas with a fixed number of sensors. Animal-borne
GPS-based location trackers paired with other sensors are another widely used
tool in aiding wildlife conservation and ecosystem monitoring. Since capturing
and collaring wild animals is a traumatic event for them, as well as being
expensive and resource-intensive, multiyear deployments are required. There are
severely limited opportunities to recharge batteries making relatively power-
hungry sensing, such as acoustic monitoring, out of reach for existing tracking
collars. The aim of the A3EM project is to devise an animal-borne adaptive
acoustic monitoring system to enable long-term, real-time observation of the
environment and behavior of wildlife. Animal-borne acoustic monitoring will be a
novel tool that may provide new insights into biodiversity loss, a severe but
underappreciated problem of our time. Combining acoustic monitoring with
location tracking collars will enable entirely new applications that will
facilitate census gathering and monitoring of threatened and endangered species,
detecting poachers of elephants in Africa or caribou in Alaska, and evaluating
the effects of mining and logging on wildlife, among many others. All data,
hardware designs, and software source code will be released to the public
domain, enabling tracking collar manufacturers to include the technology within
their products.

A3EM constitutes a complex cyber-physical architecture involving humans,
animals, distributed sensing devices, intelligent environmental monitoring
agents, and limited power and network connectivity. This intermittently
connected CPS, with a power budget an order of magnitude lower than typical,
calls for novel approaches with a high level of autonomy and adaptation to the
physical environment. A3EM will employ a unique combination of supervised and
semi-supervised embedded machine learning to identify new and unexplored event
classes in a given environment, dynamically control and adjust parameters
related to data acquisition and storage, opportunistically share knowledge and
data between distributed sensing devices, and optimize the management of storage
and communication to minimize resource needs. These methods will be evaluated
through the creation of a wearable acoustic monitoring system used to support
ecological applications such as enhanced wildlife protection, rare species
identification, and human impact studies on animal behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.