* 2312045
* Processes of Hispanic Ethnogenesis in New Mexico: Archaeological Investigations of an 18th-Century Spanish Ranch
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Heather Trigg, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 185,270.00

This project explores the processes of early modern colonization and the
development of colonial societies. Changes in colonizing societies often follow
a common trajectory: an early period of colonial experimentation is often
followed by a later period of more regularized practices brought about by the
distance from the cores of empires. Early colonies were often vulnerable, going
through episodes of privation and upheaval as they attempted to establish
themselves in unknown environments. Often colonists required time to learn and
adjust in order to develop social and ecological relationships in novel lands,
and in doing so they typically engaged and imposed on local Indigenous people.
These relationships were key to colonial successes, and the practices colonists
developed were frequently hybrid in nature, borrowing from Indigenous people.
During later stages in some colonies, as colonizers became more settled and
knowledgeable, they were able to exert more power and become hegemonic, while
the hybrid nature of their society was acknowledged less. It was also during
this period that more local identities, separate from the imperial core,
developed. The creation of US Hispanic society is one such example. The research
takes place on the grounds of and in collaboration with the living history
museum, El Rancho de las Golondrinas, located near Santa Fe, New Mexico. The
excavation, sampling, and results of the work will directly contribute to the
educational mission of the museum, affording the public a view of archaeological
inquiry and access to the results of this research.

The processes of learning, refinement, and local identity formation unfolded as
Spanish colonizers ultimately became Hispanic peoples. Using a diachronic
perspective, this project builds on previous research into the establishment of
households during the earliest Spanish colonization. The current project
investigates a nearby Late Colonial Hispanic ranch site. Using archaeological
excavation and environmental sampling (for example, pollen), the researchers
define the nature, complexity, ecological relationships, and Indigenous
contributions to the ranch. The archaeological and environmental investigations
used by the researchers are particularly well suited to investigate the dynamic
ecological relationships and social interactions with Indigenous peoples, which
often went unrecorded in documents. Placed in comparison with data from earlier
sites, this investigation provides an understanding of the long term trajectory
and processes associated with the creation of Hispanic society. This project’s
focus on Indigenous contributions within Hispanic contexts provides a more
refined picture to history and adds to a broader understanding of the depth and
complexity of Hispanic society within the boundaries of today’s United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.