* 2312514
* LTREB: Quantifying the recovery of central Appalachian forests during the final chapter of society's inadvertent nitrogen fertilization experiment.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Edward Brzostek, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 08/31/2028
* USD 474,037.00

Since the start of the industrial revolution, the burning of fossil fuels has
led to nitrogen pollution of Eastern US forests. This created an inadvertent
experiment by society that had two opposing consequences. Forests retained only
a fraction of this added nitrogen. The rest washed downstream and reduced water
quality. Nitrogen pollution also acted as a fertilizer which enhanced the
ability of trees and soils to store carbon and slow climate change. However, it
remains unknown whether these consequences will persist as nitrogen pollution
declines due to the success of the Clean Air Act. Notably, there is a lack of
long-term records that can be used to investigate how Eastern US forests recover
from nitrogen pollution during the final chapter of society’s inadvertent
experiment. The research addresses whether these consequences will persist,
recover, or reach a new normal, through long-term records of forest responses to
nitrogen pollution at the Fernow Experimental Forest in West Virginia. The
project broadens participation in science by engaging local 8th grade students
in rural Tucker County, WV through field trips and in-class activities.

This research couples one of the country’s longest stream water datasets with
the cessation of one of its longest watershed nitrogen addition experiments at
the Fernow Experimental Forest. Reductions in nitrogen are hypothesized to
trigger ecosystem recovery, wherein trees will send more carbon below ground to
roots and symbiotic fungi for nitrogen acquisition ultimately leading to
reductions in ecosystem nitrogen losses and carbon storage. This hypothesis was
tested by tracking the recovery of four watersheds experiencing declines in
ambient nitrogen pollution as well as in an experimental watershed where
nitrogen fertilization ceased in 2020. Across these watersheds, long-term
records of stream water nitrogen and forest carbon storage are maintained and
enhanced by new measurements of tree and microbial species composition as well
as assessments of carbon investment by trees in roots and symbiotic fungi to
reveal the mechanisms of ecosystem responses. The research refines and informs
processes in an ecosystem model to improve our predictive understanding of
forest recovery to declines in nitrogen pollution.

This project is jointly funded by Ecosystem Science and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.