* 2312015
* Capacity: FSML: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer with liquid chromatography and elemental analyzer interfaces at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Natalie Cohen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 404,297.00

This award provides funds to purchase a Stable Isotope Ratio Mass spectrometer
system at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography (SkIO). Such instruments are
workhorse devices in the Marine science and Ecology fields, as they provide data
crucial to understanding such subjects as food webs, nutrient and carbon
sources, and carbon cycling. This new instrumentation has significantly lower
sample size requirements than the equipment it is replacing, and allows for new
measurements of sulfur isotopes at our facility. Together these improvements
will allow scientists and students at SkIO to conduct research at finer spatial
and temporal resolutions. The new instrument is also ideal for training
students, both undergraduate and graduate, in stable isotope analyses by
conducting hands on experiments and analyzing their data in rapid fashion.
SkIOâ€™s stable isotope facility is a regional hub for such analyses, and while
normal practice is to charge users to recover costs for expendables, 10% of the
funds accrued in this manner will be used to provide no-cost analyses and data
interpretation to undergraduate institutions and regional groups. In this manner
a broader range of students will gain direct experience in this field and in
ecological marine science studies in general.

This project provides funds to purchase a Thermo Delta Q Light Stable isotope
Mass Spectrometer capable of Carbon, Nitrogen, Oxygen and Sulfur Isotope
measurements. Two sample processing interfaces, a LC-Isolink II and an elemental
analyzer (EA) with Nano-EA modifications, replace older and non-supported
interfaces. The new LC interface will be used to support ongoing and future
studies in dissolved organic matter cycling and composition as well as oceanic
carbon cycling. The new EA will provide for new research directions, including
food web studies using individual micro-zooplankton measurements and compound-
specific analyses on HPLC isolates. The facility provides rapid-response
measurements to a user base primarily conducting research along the Georgia
coast and has also provided services to scientists and students from South
America and Europe. The semi-automated nature of the new instruments allows for
excellent opportunities for student training and research, therefore funds and
instrument time have been set aside for access by underserved groups and
institutions. This award by the Division of Biological Infrastructure is
supported by the Directorate for Geosciences, Division of Ocean Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.