* 2312402
* HCC: Medium: Multisensory maps for inclusive indoor navigation by people with visual impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hari Prasath Palani, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,126,197.00

This project addresses one of the most basic, yet most critical behaviors of
daily life: safe navigation in complex indoor environments. Such navigation is
one of the most challenging problems faced by the blind and visually impaired
(BVI) community, and one that is not adequately addressed by current assistive
technology. The goal of this project is to combine accessible route and map
information into a first-of-its-kind unified multisensory route-map navigation
system to improve the accuracy, confidence, efficiency, and safety of indoor
navigation for BVI travelers. The project addresses two longstanding limitations
of current assistive navigation technologies: (1) insufficient access to
navigation-critical information caused by reliance on unimodal interfaces using
speech or touch in isolation (rather than employing multimodal channels of
environmental information to maximize learnability and redundancy) and (2) a
focus on supporting outdoor travel rather than indoor navigation (people spend
almost 90% of their time inside, yet indoor spaces have a dearth of accessible
navigation tools). The proposed system focusing on indoor environments will have
a significant and immediate societal impact as it can be implemented to support
learning and navigation of complex buildings related to work, education
(university campuses), medical facilities, or any indoor environments that must
be safely and efficiently navigated as part of daily life. This outcome is
important given that BVI individuals have significantly lower educational and
vocational attainment and increased social isolation compared to their sighted
peers. The new route-map tool and disseminated guidelines will usher in a new
era of multi-use, multisensory accessible navigation system development,
inclusive design that is currently lacking in accessible navigation technology.

The accessible navigation tool designed and evaluated in this project will
combine new theories of multisensory human information processing and innovative
multimodal interface design in an inclusive and multi-use system. The project is
guided by three principal objectives (1) to identify the best information-access
requirements needed to support indoor navigation for BVI individuals and to
optimize the information delivery via new bio-inspired, multisensory smartphone
interfaces, (2) to use these basic results to develop a prototype route-map tool
for conveying combined turn-by-turn route information and map overviews, and (3)
to evaluate the prototype tool for supporting spatial learning, navigation, and
usability through rigorous, inclusive user studies. Research findings will
provide new insight about theories of multisensory spatial information
processing in both blind and sighted humans. Project outcomes will also
contribute to development of much-needed multisensory design guidelines
specifying the best information/modality pairings supporting information-access,
spatial learning, and navigation for BVI people across the spectrum of visual
status. Technical advancements from the project will lead to development of a
new software framework for implementing these guidelines in optimized
multisensory interfaces that will simplify future design of accessible BVI
navigation technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.