* 2312572
* BRC-BIO: Environmental variation and the disruption of biotic local adaptation: Predicting consequences of changing microbial interactions for plant populations
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Marie-Anne de Graaff, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2026
* USD 495,978.00

This project will measure how climate change may disrupt the species
interactions that shape local adaptation. Local adaptation occurs when
populations evolve to become more successful in their home environments. Harmful
and beneficial interactions among species may create "biotic" patterns of local
adaptation. Yet, variation in the strength of biotic adaptation across large
landscapes remains poorly understood. Addressing this knowledge gap is urgent
because climate change is expected to disrupt species interactions. Such shifts
may challenge species' abilities to persist in changing communities. This work
will generate crucial data about big sagebrush, a declining plant of restoration
concern, and how its relationships with soil microbes may shift with climate
change. The results of this research will be applicable to the selection of
suitable seeds for restoration efforts. In addition, this project will create
hands-on research and mentorship experiences for undergraduate students across
disciplines. This work also aims to improve student retention in a large biology
course, using active learning inspired by this imperiled native plant.

Local adaptation is foundational to understanding populations’ current and
future persistence; however, experiments examining local adaptation rarely
isolate abiotic and biotic mechanisms. This research gap is urgent, as climate
change may disrupt both abiotic and biotic fitness drivers simultaneously,
potentially outpacing the adaptive capacities of long-lived species. The
proposed work will integrate field- and lab-based reciprocal transplant
experiments, sequencing of soil bacterial and fungal communities, and modeling
approaches for species-rich communities to isolate the adaptive importance of
plant-microbe interactions in big sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) across
environmental gradients. These results will be incorporated into population
models to assess whether populations from contrasting abiotic environments
differ in their susceptibility to disruption of biotic adaptation under changing
climatic conditions. The project team will collect additional field data to
measure the population models’ predictive accuracy in quantifying the relevance
of plant-microbe interactions to ongoing restoration efforts in big sagebrush.
This work will advance our understanding of how the adaptive importance of
biotic interactions varies across heterogenous landscapes and which abiotic
drivers may shape these gradients.

This project is jointly funded by the Building Research Capacity of New Faculty
in Biology program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.