* 2312359
* Single-particle electrochemistry to identify fundamental barriers to magnesium ion intercalation in transition metal oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 699,146.00

Li-ion batteries have seen a steady growth in achievable energy storage capacity
and durability over the last several years, rendering them the dominant market
player. However, accelerating the transition to a society based on renewable
energy still requires new alternative battery chemistries. One possible solution
is to replace lithium ions as the primary carriers of electronic charges by
multivalent carriers like magnesium. The theoretical gains with the use of
magnesium are hampered by the inefficient transport of magnesium within the
battery at relevant temperatures of operation, especially in the solid oxide
cathodes needed for transformational gains in energy density. In this project,
novel approaches of electron microscopy are combined to examine the intrinsic
reactivity of model transition metal oxides as cathodes in Mg-ion batteries.
These approaches will isolate the behavior of individual electrode particles
from the effect of the complex architectures used in conventional electrodes and
reveal the balance between productive and competing processes at the atomic
scale. This project will quantify critical bottlenecks in the development of
high-energy batteries based on magnesium to unlock the next generation of
rechargeable devices. The projectâ€™s activities center around education and
training providing the diverse student body at University of Illinois - Chicago
(UIC), a Research-1 Hispanic-serving institution with opportunities for hands-on
research and learning experiences in cutting-edge electrochemistry, materials
science, and characterization research. The integration of research and
education through the training of undergraduate and graduate students in state-
of-the-art in-situ scanning transmission electron microscopy and
electrochemistry is an integral feature of this project.

This research project seeks to identify and overcome the fundamental barriers of
efficient Mg-ion intercalation in transition metal oxide cathodes using a
combination of cathode synthesis, electrochemistry, and state-of-the-art
electron microscopy. Several oxides have now been shown to be active toward Mg
intercalation, yet the process demands high temperature and is accompanied by an
unacceptably high hysteresis, a fatal flaw for practical application. This
project focuses on MgV2O4 as a model system to unravel the fundamental barriers
to efficient Mg2+ intercalation by conducting measurements on single particle
cathodes, revealing the intrinsic behavior of the material, rather than the
convolution of cell design and transport across a complex electrode
architecture. Novel in-situ holders, thin-film model system cathodes and
scanning transmission electron microscopy provide an atomic-scale description of
bulk and interfacial transformations of single particles during electrochemical
cycling, separating changes due to reversible intercalation from irreversible
competing reactions. The evaluation of reactivity at multiple temperatures will
provide unique insight into the kinetic limitations of the structural
transitions, charting a path for Mg-based cathodes towards a battery at, or
near, room temperature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.