* 2312317
* Collaborative Research: Mesoscale Predictability Across Climate Regimes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kristen Rasmussen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 381,865.00

The prediction of severe weather such as tornadoes, large hail, and flooding
continues to improve, allowing weather forecasts to better help society prepare
for dangerous and damaging storms. Much of this improvement has come through
understanding the causes of severe thunderstorms using models that simulate
large portions of the atmosphere in detail, a procedure that requires the speed
and performance of modern-day computers. Such computational capability allows
the creation of multiple forecasts instead of just one for a given storm
situation, highlighting the features in the atmosphere – like the degree of
moisture or the wind profile – that lead to storms of different severity. These
simultaneous forecasts also reveal how likely it is that upcoming storms may be
severe, based on whether the different forecasts all agree on severe conditions
(high likelihood of a severe event) or if forecasts show storms with a wide
range of magnitudes (lower likelihood of a severe event). While these research
methods have focused on understanding and improving severe storm prediction on a
day-to-day basis, the predictability of high-impact weather events in a changing
climate is unclear. The research aims to understand whether severe storms and
their associated hazards can be better predicted as Earth's climate warms. This
research is unique in that it goes beyond other studies that seek to uncover
whether severe storms will become more or less frequent, instead determining if
they are more or less predictable, a characteristic linked to the general
atmospheric conditions that different climates support. The work will be
performed by creating and analyzing big datasets of numerical weather model
forecasts of severe storms in both recent (end of 20th century) and future (end
of 21st century) climates. Specifically, how and why forecasts for severe storm
situations evolve differently in different centuries will be assessed to
understand the role climate change plays in atmospheric prediction.

There are numerous expected impacts of this work on the scientific community and
society. Understanding if probabilistic forecasts of severe storms will have
increased or decreased uncertainty could show whether such forecasts could be
used effectively in societal applications. One such example includes water
reservoir operations, which rely on accurate predictions of flood risk to
efficiently manage water resources. If flooding were to become more predictable,
applications like this that benefit from forecast certainty could become more
common, substantially helping regional water supply and mitigating the negative
consequences of climate change in areas that become drier. The research will
also involve the creation of a large dataset of severe storm-resolving
simulations, allowing scientists who wish to analyze the data to investigate
other aspects of severe storm-climate relationships beyond that suggested here.
Several graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research in
several ways: graduate and undergraduate research and dissemination through
journal articles, academic coursework, and presentations at university symposia
and professional scientific conferences. The general public and K-12 students in
communities surrounding the participating universities will also benefit from
planned outreach events including weekend events at university museums,
university-sanctioned summer camps, and open house events that promote 1-on-1
interaction in casual environments with project scientists.

This project is jointly funded by the Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics and
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology programs in the Division of Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences as well as the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences
to support projects that increase research capabilities, capacity and
infrastructure at a wide variety of institution types, as outlined in the GEO
EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.