* 2312353
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Designing Social Companion Robots for Long-term Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Joseph Michaelis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 09/30/2027
* USD 434,999.00

Social robots have the potential to improve the everyday lives of many people.
They may serve as tutors for children. They could provide help for older adults
with daily living tasks. Social robots may also provide companionship for those
who feel lonely and isolated. Despite the promise of social robots, they are not
currently capable of sustaining positive long-term interactions in the home or
in research settings. There is a need for research to better understand and
design social robots for long-term use lasting months or years. This project
seeks to overcome barriers and improve long-term human-robot interactions. The
research team will design robots that help to build and maintain relationships
with people. The project will focus on the development of a social robot reading
companion for children aged 8 to 10. The robot will build connections with
children and their families. It will take part in a variety of family
activities. These activities may include robot-guided reading, robot caretaking,
and robot-facilitated family recreation. A diverse set of families will co-
design a social robot for long-term home use. This activity will give a voice to
families and communities in the robot design process. This research will advance
the knowledge of social robot design for long-term interactions. These
advancements will enable social robots to provide valuable help to people in
their daily lives.

Researchers and companies who develop social robots face many challenges. A
primary challenge is sustaining long-term interactions with social robots. These
robots have great potential to improve learning, service interactions, and help
people. Users become disappointed after the novelty wears off with the
capabilities of robots and often stop using the robots. The research team will
co-design, develop, and test an autonomous social robot for home use. The focus
of the social robot is on building and maintaining inter-personal relationships.
The primary goal is on long-term interactions that move beyond initial
excitement around the use of novel technology. As a first step, the research
team will perform a series of studies. The studies will help to understand the
family ecosystem and disruptions to family routines. These co-design studies
will provide a "robot-family integration plan." This plan will provide the
needed structure for robot integration into family routines. By understanding
these routines, the research team will design and develop family-robot
activities. These activities may include robot-guided reading, robot caretaking,
and robot-facilitated family recreation. The social robot design will leverage
social affordances that allow for a successful robot integration into existing
family routines. After individual activity testing, integration will occur into
a single autonomous robot. The final phase of this research will test an
autonomous social robot companion in homes. The focus will be on family-robot
inter-personal connections for long-term use and acceptance. The in-home field
deployments of the robot will be up to six months in duration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.