* 2312175
* A Universal Framework for Geometric Information in Product Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,500.00

This award supports research which aims to establish a universal theoretical and
computational framework aimed at breaking down key barriers that negatively
affect the flow of 3D geometric information from engineering design into
analysis and manufacturing, while supporting modern machine learning algorithms.
The expected results will pave the way for long-term societal impacts by
eliminating specific inefficiencies in 3D shape modeling and processing
throughout the engineering product development cycle of complex engineered
systems. The research developed through this project will also directly impact
diversity initiatives for incoming underrepresented and minority engineering
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Connecticut. Through
its integrated educational plan, this project will lead to the creation of new
educational content for engineering curricula, and its targeted outreach will
focus on K-12 students, teachers, and the local school district, serving groups
that have traditionally been underrepresented in the engineering disciplines.

The project framework uses the observation that any and all valid geometric
models must be based on a valid notion of distance and must therefore fully
support distance computations and queries. The new framework is based on a novel
spherical decomposition of the 3D domain of interest in terms of maximal and
mutually tangent spheres. The uniquely defined decomposition, denoted as the
Maximal Disjoint Ball Decomposition (MDBD), has several key theoretical and
computational attributes, including: (1) the ability to describe the geometry in
a hierarchical manner and with a level of detail that can be adjusted on demand;
and (2) its intrinsic support for modern geometric machine learning algorithms.
Moreover, the framework naturally interfaces with all existing valid geometric
representations without requiring representation conversions and integrates with
recent powerful advances in CAD that represent shapes as implicitly and
hierarchically defined 3D signals. Consequently, the framework has the potential
to have a broad impact throughout the computational design and manufacturing
process and is an ideal candidate for wide industry adoption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.