* 2312775
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Machine Learning Markets: Dynamics, Competition, and Interventions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Maryam Fazel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2026
* USD 449,932.00

Nearly every aspect of modern life involves predictions of machine learning (ML)
models: e.g., where we choose to shop, live, or apply for jobs. ML models are
built and maintained by service providers, who use predictions to offer services
to individuals. Based on prediction quality, individuals choose amongst
services, or may choose to use none. This interaction gives rise to an ML-
enabled market wherein the decisions made by providers and individuals are
highly consequential. As individuals choose amongst services, such services gain
or lose not only customers, but also access to data that allows them to refine
their predictions. The dynamics of interactions between providers and users with
varied motivations are more complex than traditional market models. This project
aims to develop the theoretical and algorithmic foundations for characterizing
and shaping ML-enabled market conditions and algorithmic tools for achieving
improved social outcomes. Beyond the theoretical contributions, products of this
project will support the development of policy for governing ML-enabled markets
in a fair and equitable manner. The project's educational goals include
mentoring researchers at the undergraduate and graduate levels, developing new
course materials, and promoting dialog on equity in ML through talks, reading
groups, and topical workshop activities coordinated with the NSF Institute for
Foundations of Data Science at University of Washington.

Interactions between individuals, represented by data, and providers,
represented by prediction functions in ML-enabled markets, give rise to complex
dynamics, and competitive or cooperative games. The choices of both providers
and individuals may be strategic or myopic, depending on whether agents
anticipate how their choices will affect future market conditions. Providers and
users may act according to a variety of objectives: predictive accuracy (service
quality), market share, privacy, fairness, or even adversarial intent. This
project analyzes the complex interactions between providers and individuals in
ML-enabled markets, with a research agenda comprised of three thrusts: (1)
Characterize the participation game and dynamics that arise when users with a
variety of objectives act strategically, while providers use data myopically to
improve the accuracy of their predictions; (2) Characterize the prediction--
retention game and dynamics that arise between strategic providers (including
the incentives and social costs of strategic behavior), when users choose their
participation level myopically; (3) Combine insights from the first two threads
to design algorithmic interventions that improve metrics of outcomes such as
social welfare and fairness in ML-enabled markets. Carrying out this agenda will
entail developing new theory and algorithms at the intersection of game theory,
statistical learning, dynamical systems, and optimization. Challenges due to
nonlinear dynamics, nonconvex landscapes, and information limitations will be
addressed, and the equilibrium landscape of competitive games with novel
structure will be characterized, contributing to the core fields of game theory
and machine learning, and their social impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.