* 2312057
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: RoCCeM: Bringing Robotics, Cybersecurity and Computer Science to the Middled School Classroom
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 409,997.00

Cybersecurity education is crucial to training, developing skills, and improving
awareness. This is particularly true at a young age, given the increasing
societal relevance of computers and the Internet. There is a great need for
computational thinking to adequately understand key concepts in cybersecurity,
as well as offer a powerful lens on computation as a whole. To address this need
and opportunity, this project will develop a scalable, accessible curriculum
engaging middle school students to improve recruitment and retention in
cybersecurity and computer science. The primarily project-based curriculum will
focus on block-based programming of robots, spanning computing and
cybersecurity. Key cybersecurity principles will be introduced in a social
context involving human-to-human communication challenges, then mapped to
technical skills using a collaborative, virtual robotics platform. Students can
connect computational challenges with interpersonal situations, becoming
familiar with the foundations of cybersecurity and preparing themselves for
responsible social interactions online.

The project will produce sorely-needed K-12 cybersecurity educational materials
that are engaging, rigorous, and relevant to current cybersecurity trends.
Making such trends and corresponding security strategies concrete, accessible,
and relevant for middle school students with little to no background in
programming is a significant challenge. The team will develop a 9-week modular
curriculum spanning computing fundamentals and block-based programming, network
communication, introductory cybersecurity concepts, and cooperative
cybersecurity challenges. The project will ground cybersecurity principles in
human-human interactions so that young learners can understand the key concepts
in cybersecurity that are fundamental to interactions that occur in the outside
the classroom. The project will have broad impact by providing an engaging
environment and rigorous tasks to raise students' interest in cybersecurity,
computing and robotics, and by flattening the learning curve required to engage
with hands-on cybersecurity through an intuitive block-based language. After
pilot testing in multiple schools, the project will provide a clear path to
scale up to state-wide implementation in Tennessee.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.