* 2312857
* BRC-BIO: Deciphering the roles of RNA modifications in regulating responses to abiotic stresses in cereal crops
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Manohar Chakrabarti, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2026
* USD 503,000.00

Global climate change is predicted to increase the incidence of adverse weather
events, including spells of drought and heat stress. Different parts of the
world are already experiencing the negative impacts of climate change. Events of
such abiotic stresses are and will continue to adversely affect global crop
production. Thus, developing and implementing climate-smart agriculture is the
need of the hour, and developing climate-resilient crop plants is by far the
most important component of climate-smart agriculture initiatives. This requires
extensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms that govern responses in
plants. Among various crop species, cereal crops are of paramount importance, as
they are the primary source of food and animal feed. In the current project,
sorghum, a member of the grass family that is an abiotic stress-resilient cereal
and bioenergy crop, will be used as a model system to identify novel mechanisms
of the regulation of responses to abiotic stresses and to unravel interactions
among such mechanisms. Additionally, new targets for improving drought and/or
heat tolerance in cereal crops will be identified. Along with that, the current
project will provide direct hands-on training to underrepresented students from
a predominantly minority-serving institution in the areas of biotechnology and
genomics. The project will also train graduate students and postdoctoral
research scholars in cutting-edge genomics and biotechnology.

In recent years significant progress has been made in deciphering
transcriptional regulation of responses to abiotic stresses in cereal crops.
However, research on other modes of regulation of gene expression, such as
various RNA modifications in responses to abiotic stresses, remains in its
infancy. Recent advancements in sequencing technologies and genomics allow
direct comparison among different modes of mRNA modifications. The current
project will decipher the interplay among different modes of mRNA modifications
in response to abiotic stresses and unravel their effects on mRNA functionality,
including those that are mediated by small RNAs and mRNA stability.
Commonalities and uniqueness among responses to drought and heat stress will be
identified and this will lay the foundation for developing cereal crops adapted
to future climatic changes. Sorghum bicolor, a major cereal crop, which is
extensively used as a food, animal feed, and bioenergy crop, will be used as the
model system. Sorghum is an extremely stress-tolerant species, hence results
obtained from this project can be used to impart stress tolerance in other
stress-susceptible species, including maize, rice, and wheat. The current
project will also help in the capacity building of an early career principal
investigator from a primarily minority-serving institute.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.