* 2312872
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Versatile Data Synchronization: Novel Codes and Algorithms for Practical Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Lara Dolecek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 265,000.00

The total volume of global digital data created or copied is estimated to double
approximately every three years. This rapid growth has led to an increasing need
for reliable and universal access to data in personal, enterprise, and
scientific environments. To meet these requirements, data synchronization, which
refers to the process of maintaining consistency between different versions of
data stored on separate hosts, has become a crucial aspect of managing data.
However, state-of-the-art synchronization tools have significant shortcomings
and inefficiencies, resulting in increased costs and high-latency access. This
project aims to develop data synchronization algorithms with optimal
communication bandwidth based on error-correcting codes and to broaden the
applicability of synchronization to real-world settings where current tools are
inadequate. In addition to scientific and technological advances, the project
has the potential to facilitate access to distributed storage systems for users
with limited access to broadband Internet, such as in rural areas; help reduce
energy consumption associated with data transmission; and provide opportunities
to engage and train undergraduate researchers. The goals of the project will be
achieved through three research thrusts. The first thrust aims to increase the
efficiency of data synchronization by designing low-redundancy systematic edit-
correcting codes, along with efficient encoding and decoding algorithms. The
second thrust focuses on synchronizing compressed data. As conventional
compression typically destroys the similarity between related files, the project
will develop mutually compatible compression and synchronization methods which,
given the prevalence of data compression, have the potential to significantly
expand the use of synchronization for large datasets. Finally, the third thrust
will address often-overlooked real-world constraints on synchronization from
theoretical and practical points of view. In particular, bounds on the
information exchange will be established where one party is under communication
or computational constraints. Furthermore, incremental and adaptive
synchronization protocols will be developed to efficiently synchronize data when
the statistics of the stochastic processes governing data update and
modification are unknown.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.