* 2312166
* Collaborative Research: Resilience, Experimentation, and Collapse in Small-Scale Fisheries
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Carla Hadden, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/28/2027
* USD 205,162.00

This study examines the small-scale coastal fisheries and the resilience of
these fishing systems to global environmental changes, including changes in sea
levels, land use modifications, and fluctuations in the densities of fishing
stocks. This project provides longitudinal insights into the resilience of
fisheries by studying the determinants of fishing behavior and outputs over the
past two millennia in a coastal mangrove wetland. The research leverages diverse
archaeological methods to consider multiple hypotheses for sharp declines in the
productivity of the ancient fishery. More generally, the project reveals the
potentially complex and dynamic relationships between ecological variables,
political factors, and the culture and demography of the human populations. The
archaeological methods are complemented by observations of modern fishing
behavior, which provide holistic insights into the long-term resilience of past
subsistence behavior. Multiple students contribute to the research, and a
central aim of the project is to develop a collaborative museum exhibit that
contextualizes the findings. The project also convenes a workshop to advance
sustainable management of the fishery.

Drawing on perspectives from human ecology, the research examines fluctuations
in the productivity of a mangrove fishery as a function of multiple related
variables, including intrinsic dynamic variation in the ecological structure of
lagoons, the political organization of local communities, and the alternation of
adjacent land for agricultural activities. Complemented by sediment cores,
archaeological excavations yield diverse evidence for studying the productivity
of the fishery. Radiocarbon samples establish the chronology of the site, and
the remains of crustaceans and pollen and other botanical remains help to
characterize ecological changes over time. Zooarchaeological analysis of middens
provide insights into the varying harvests of different fish species over time.
Additional analyses of ceramics and stone tools are used to assess variation in
social and political variation and dynamic patterns of agricultural subsistence.
Collectively, these data provide insights into the causes and consequences of
changes in the productivity of small-scale fisheries. In addition to
contributions to archaeological theory, the findings of this study inform
management strategies of contemporary fisheries. The project also contributes to
the training and educational of diverse early-career scholars.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.