* 2312866
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: Designing AI Systems with Steerable Long-Term Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Douglas Turnbull, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 220,000.00

The feedback that users provide through their choices (e.g., clicks, purchases)
is one of the most common types of data readily available for training
autonomous information retrieval and recommendation systems, and it is widely
used in online platforms. However, naively training systems based on choice data
may only improve short-term engagement, but not the long-term sustainability of
the platform and the long-term benefits to its users, content providers, and
other stakeholders. In this complex space of problems and competing interests,
it is unlikely that there is a single and compact algorithmic solution that is
inherently fair or optimal --- for the same reason that our legal codes and tax
policies fill sizable libraries. Instead, the project develops a new algorithmic
framework to express similarly detailed policies also for AI systems. This
framework provides decision-makers with strategic interventions that predictably
steer the long-term dynamics of a platform so that they not only optimize
engagement in the short term but additionally reflect long-term values set by
whatever system of governance oversees the platform.

To achieve this goal, the project introduces a macroscopic layer of abstraction
for AI platforms under which long-term objectives (e.g., user satisfaction, item
fairness, supplier pool size) can be measured and influenced through macroscopic
interventions (e.g., exposure allocation, promotion policies for new content,
anti-discrimination regulation). Since platforms act at the microscopic level,
the project develops new search and recommendation methods that optimally break
macro-level interventions into a sequence of micro-level interventions (e.g.,
rankings). The crucial technical challenge lies in bridging the mismatch in time
scales between macro-level interventions (e.g., weeks) and micro-level
interventions (e.g., individual requests), which is addressed using machine
learning, causal inference, and control theory. This formulation provides a
technical layer of abstraction that reduces complexity for both human and
automated decision-making at the macro level, enabling strategic reasoning and
action. Finally, since optimal actions at any level rely on unbiased and
accurate estimates, the project develops new estimators that counteract biases
in feedback loops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.