* 2312225
* Travel: 2023 International Microwave Symposium Educational Initiatives for Project Connect
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Thomas Weller, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The project will support student participation in the 2023 IEEE International
Microwave Symposium (IMS), which will be held in San Diego, CA on June 11-16,
2023. Support will be provided for an educational program called Project Connect
which was initiated in 2014. The objective of the program is to increase the
participation of students from underrepresented minority groups in STEM. The
program provides students many exciting opportunities to learn the state-of-the-
art technology advancements and interact with potential mentors in the microwave
and wireless technological areas. The project aims to develop the technical
interests of the student participants, motivating them to be involved in
undergraduate research and interested in further studies in graduate program,
which will help them develop a successful long-term professional career and
contribute to the U.S. STEM workforce.

The IEEE IMS addresses research areas in microwave technologies from MHz to THz
and is the largest conference in the world in this field. The symposium has
played a key role in identifying new directions for research and development.
The 4-day agenda of Project Connect program includes community building and
professional development, in addition to the technical events and industry
exhibition at the symposium. The program’s most impactful benefit is the chance
for participants to develop their professional networks and meet wireless and
microwave experts from across the globe. The program will be described in IEEE
Microwave Magazine, with the aim of encouraging other conferences to develop
similar programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.