* 2312178
* Collaborative Research: Extended Family Support and Housing Stability of Youth Over Time
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brandon Robinson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Antwan Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Family rejection is a well-known cause of youth homelessness. This project
extends a 1-yearlong study in to a 2-yearlong study to understand how support
from extended family members over time shapes pathways of housing stability and
safety before youth end up at shelters or on the streets. The longitudinal study
documents the roles and practices of grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, and
adult siblings in providing long-term shelter and housing stability for youth
whose parents are unsupportive or ambivalent about their children’s identities
and behaviors. The research is innovative in its focus on youth who are
experiencing challenges at home but are not yet homeless and in following the
youth for 2 years as they transition into emerging adults. The study advances
the science on familial social support and homelessness. Researchers draw from
the study’s findings to engage in outreach to youth shelters and programs and
inform practitioners and decision-makers on strategies to prevent youth
homelessness.

To understand the role of non-parental relatives and how their support shapes
the housing stability and safety of youth, this project extends a 1-yearlong
study of 83 youth (originally aged 16-19) who are at risk of homelessness into a
2-year mixed-methods longitudinal study. Participants were recruited from two
states in the southwest United States, including youth in rural communities and
from minority groups. Original data were collected through an initial interview,
12 monthly surveys, and a follow-up interview. This study adds an additional 12
monthly surveys and another follow-up interview, including a life history of
housing instability and family support. Researchers evaluate how the forms and
consistency of instrumental and emotional support that youth receive from
extended family over time influence their sense of safety and housing stability.
A longitudinal approach enables analysis of how family support and housing
stability and safety shift over time and as the youth transition into emerging
adults.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.