* 2312602
* Conference: 2023 Catchment Science: Interactions of Hydrology, Biology and Geochemistry GRC and GRS Challenges and Uncertainty in Predicting Catchment Responses to Stress
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Sarah Godsey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,985.00

Stress impacts our natural world in complex ways. Understanding how those
complexities manifest in water, nutrient, and pollutant movement through the
natural and human landscape requires bringing together scientists with expertise
in a range of topics. This interdisciplinary approach has been referred to as
catchment science, which deliberately seeks to include not only hydrologists,
but also soil scientists, ecologists, chemists and others. Together catchment
scientists can tackle complex environmental problems at a scale that leverages
useful system boundaries. This award supports early-career and diverse
researchers to attend a Gordon Research Conference in Catchment Science in June
2023. This conference and its associated seminar for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers will foster the professional development of the next
generation of researchers in catchment science and the development of a core
foundation of research to tackle the stressors of today and tomorrow.

The confirmed program includes a diverse group of scientists from different
career stages and backgrounds, including multi-scale modeling, pharmaceuticals
and emerging contaminants, microplastics, drought, fire, and emerging tools to
integrate data from these overlapping stressors. Over the coming months, this
conference will provide direction to research on environmental stressors and how
to disentangle and predict their likely effects. Over the coming years, this
conference will support a more diverse and connected international community of
catchment scientists and new tools and conceptual models in catchment science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.