* 2312862
* Collaborative Research: III:  Medium: Knowledge discovery from highly heterogeneous, sparse and private data in biomedical informatics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Brian Layden, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 08/31/2027
* USD 879,498.00

In the United States, millions of people have chronic conditions, including Type
2 Diabetes and Congestive Heart Failure. It is important to screen patients for
these illnesses as soon as possible. This research aims at mining healthcare
data to find patients likely to develop these conditions and to develop a model
for opportunistic screening in situations where the encounter with the patient
may be unrelated to the specific diagnosis. Opportunistic screening is needed
especially for minority and lower socio-economic status patients, who are less
likely to seek regular care from primary care providers. This research will
address many challenges. First, health records include different types of data,
from text to numeric values, from continuous signals to images. Second, records
comprise information collected at different timepoints, and with different
frequencies: some patients may be seen once a year, and others, every few days.
Third, the privacy of patients must be protected. Fourth, automatically derived
models must be fair and unbiased, especially towards underprivileged groups.
Finally, many powerful current Machine Learning (ML) models behave like black
boxes: These models will be adopted in healthcare and other critical areas only
if their conclusions can be explained. From a societal point of view, this
project has the potential to positively impact the health of millions of people,
and in particular, to boost outcomes for minority and lower socio-economic
status patients. This research will recruit underrepresented students at the
University of Illinois Chicago, a federally-designated Minority-Serving
Institution, and support the interdisciplinary development of a diverse cohort
of PhD and undergraduate students.

This project will explore new ML and Natural Language Processing approaches to
uncover the earliest point in temporal sequence data in which a patient can be
screened for a chronic condition. The research will develop novel methods to
integrate heterogeneous data, which often features missing values and noise; de-
identification approaches to protect privacy; new approaches for concept and
temporal relation extraction; algorithms to improve fairness by addressing data
heterogeneity and missing data; exploration of concept-level explainability. A
robust assessment plan is an integral part of the proposed research. First, all
algorithms will be evaluated according to current ML methodology. Additionally,
a human-in-the-loop approach will be employed, in which the clinicians on the
team will provide informal and formal evaluation of the algorithm predictions.
The methods this research will uncover are likely applicable to other domains
where heterogeneous, incomplete, identifiable, or biased temporal sequence data
exist, for example predicting youth at risk, water resource monitoring, and
supporting food safety.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.