* 2312595
* Conference: Functional Logic of Neural circuits: diamonds in the rough (FLNDR)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Gal Haspel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,500.00

Natural behavior is the result of complex interactions between neurons, between
neurons and the body, and between the body and the environment. Understanding
the neural circuits underpinning animal behavior, therefore, involves
unravelling this web of interactions and has captured the imagination and
efforts of biologists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, and artificial
intelligence researchers alike. This award provides funding for researchers in
these various disciplines to come together and find common direction, exchange
ideas and insights, and create new collaborations.

The organizers will produce and lead a workshop on the Functional Logic of
Neural Circuits. The workshop will take place in Puerto Rico in February 2023.
The goal of the workshop is to create a highly interactive environment that
fosters maximum information exchange amongst a diverse set of researchers from
experimental, computational, and theoretical neuroscience, structural and
functional connectomics, genomics, and artificial intelligence. To accomplish
this goal, the workshop includes several planned activities including chalk
talks, panel discussions, and random group breakouts. The workshop will result
in a comprehensive summary that will be widely disseminated for the purpose of
fostering new community efforts around this challenging scientific problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.