* 2312657
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: RUI: Automated Decision Making for Open Multiagent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Prashant Doshi, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2027
* USD 467,141.00

Various types of uncertainties complicate decision making in real-world
contexts. In addition to imperfect sensing, there is added uncertainty in shared
contexts due to the unknown actions of others and the dynamism brought about by
these agents. Open systems are those real-world contexts whose composition
changes over time due to either internal or external events. This research
investigates how decision-makers (i.e., agents) may best act under uncertainty
in open systems. Three forms of openness will be explored. The first is when the
agents enter or leave the system over time. The second occurs when the tasks
that must be completed by agents change over time. The third occurs when the
agents’ capabilities change from learning new roles or skills. All three forms
of openness, though prevalent in the real world and found in examples such as
human organizations, disaster response, and smart transportation, have not been
studied previously with respect to how they complicate decision making and their
important role in enabling applications of artificial intelligence. Researchers
from the Universities of Georgia and Nebraska-Lincoln, and from Oberlin College,
will collaborate on this project. A new evaluation initiative leading into the
creation of a competition involving use-inspired domains exhibiting various
types of openness will be launched to spur broader interest. An innovative
lesson module based on principles of creative thinking that brings the
challenges of openness and how we may address them to undergraduate and graduate
students will allow this project’s outcomes to be integrated into the classroom.

The project takes the approach of investigating frameworks for modeling the
various types of openness and realizing methods for acting optimally in the
context of these frameworks. Specifically, the researchers will continue their
investigations into scaling automated planning and reinforcement learning to
open systems involving many agents with a novel focus on understanding the
impact of task and frame openness. The ultimate goal is to combine
representations of all three forms of openness and study whether this makes the
decision-making problem fundamentally harder. Synergies between the planning and
learning techniques under each type of openness will be identified and
exploited. When combined with the advances of the past couple of decades in
decision making under uncertainty due to sensor noise, these methods will
represent a transformative step in translating principled planning and learning
to the true complexities of real-world contexts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.