* 2312761
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: Adaptive Environmental Awareness for Collaborative Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Carlee Joe-Wong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 177,393.00

Augmented reality (AR) represents an exciting new frontier for mobile
applications, merging the physical and virtual worlds to facilitate real-time
interactions between users and their surrounding physical environments. Next-
generation AR is centered on interactive and environmentally-aware applications,
which sense the state of the real world via computationally heavy perception
algorithms, with results augmented in real-time for multiple users. However,
current environmentally-aware AR applications are well-recognized to lack
sufficient resilience for long-term, large-scale, and safety-critical
deployments. The goal of this project is to exploit the collaborative nature of
next-generation AR applications to provide reliable, real-time environmental
awareness that can adapt to the surrounding environment, user mobility, and
computing resource availability. The core insight of this project is that
instead of simply competing with one another for network and compute resources,
AR devices can collaborate with one another to run and adapt AR applications to
optimize overall utility. The project will involve modeling environmental
awareness and mobility patterns in AR, incorporating these models into an
emulator to facilitate experimentation and training, and designing reinforcement
learning policies that capture environmental awareness and dynamic user
relationships. These policies will be deployed in a set of new collaborative AR
applications, such as AR-based physical rehabilitation, and evaluated via
expansive studies with multiple groups of users in a wide range of conditions.

This project will lay the groundwork for resilient next-generation AR
applications, which can benefit multiple domains, including retail,
manufacturing, and healthcare. The project will develop an example next-
generation AR-supported rehabilitation application, which will be showcased to
clinicians across multiple hospital systems and will be integrated into the PIs’
K-12 and public outreach efforts. The multi-user AR emulator created as part of
this project will be open-sourced to enable the development of a wide range of
other applications and will be designed to be extensible to additional use
cases, such as AR-aided human-robot collaboration. Moreover, the machine
learning techniques for dynamic user collaboration developed as part of this
project will be applicable to other cases in which multiple entities interact
dynamically in a coordinated manner, such as supply chain management. The
project will train several cohorts of undergraduate students, and results will
be presented at multiple events and venues aimed at broadening participation in
computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.