* 2312690
* NSF-BSF: Electrostriction in Ceramic Materials with Dynamic Elastic Dipoles
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Anatoly Frenkel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Electrostrictors convert electrical energy into
mechanical energy but not vice versa. The structural basis for this
electromechanical transduction is fundamentally different from piezoelectric
materials, which enabled electrical to mechanical energy conversion and vice
versa. The NCES effect, recently discovered by the principal investigator (PI),
A. Frenkel (Stony Brook University, USA) and the foreign collaborator (FC), I.
Lubomirsky (Weizmann Institute, Israel) in Zr-doped cerium oxide, results in
much larger (by two or more orders of magnitude) deformation in response to an
applied electric field than that predicted in classical electrostrictors.
Specifically, while current commercially used electrostrictors are lead-based,
the newly discovered compositions are completely nontoxic. In contrast, to the
previously reported cases of NCES, the newly discovered materials do not have
local elastic dipoles which are permanent distortions within the unit cells,
breaking the overall symmetry. Instead, the distortions in the newly discovered
materials are dynamic, clearly indicating that the previously unknown mechanism
of NCES is at work. The team will investigate the origin of the electrostriction
in this class of materials (Zr- and Hf- doped ceria) with advanced time-resolved
techniques based on synchrotron X-ray absorption spectroscopy, performed by the
PI, and electromechanical measurements, performed by the FC who will also
synthesize the samples. This project will leverage the expertise of the US PI,
in using advance atomistic and structural characterization of functional
materials, with the expertise of the Israeli collaborator, in preparation and
mechanical properties of ceramics. The team will perform atomic-level
characterization of the local environment of Zr (Hf) and Ce atoms, with and
without electric field, through time-resolved methods for detecting the dynamic
response of the dipoles to the changing electric field. The project will have
four important outcomes: (1) Obtaining the fundamental descriptors of NCES with
dynamics elastic dipoles, (2) Providing basis for the theoretical modeling of
the NCES effect, (3) Training a new generation of graduate and undergraduate
students specializing in materials science on advanced characterization methods
practiced at large user facilities, and (4) Establishing a framework of
collaborative international projects connecting faculty-student research teams
of Stony Brook University and Weizmann Institute of Science.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY: During the last decade, the collaboration of the principal
investigator (PI), A. Frenkel (Stony Brook University, USA) and the foreign
collaborator (FC), I. Lubomirsky (Weizmann Institute, Israel), has led to the
discovery of the non-classical electrostriction effect (NCES). These materials
show an electrostrictive coefficient two or more orders of magnitude higher than
predicted by the classical scaling law and similar to what previously observed
exclusively in ionic conductors. NCES was originally detected at very low
frequencies, produced very small deformation (few ppm), and was attributed to
the elastic dipoles induced by point defects, oxygen vacancies or proton
interstitials. The team of the PI and FC has recently discovered a material, Zr-
doped cerium oxide, that exhibits NCES rivaling commercially used
electrostrictors in all practical parameters: hundreds of ppm of strain, large
elastic modulus, and kHz-range response. Therefore, such properties, in addition
to the prominent advantage of the new composition to be completely nontoxic,
promise a replacement of the commercial lead-based electrostrictors. This
material does not contain significant concentration of vacancies or
interstitials and, thereby, does not have permanent elastic dipoles, clearly
indicating that a previously unknown mechanism of NCES is at work. This project
will leverage the expertise of the US Principal Investigator in using advance
atomistic and structural characterization of functional materials, with the
expertise of the Israeli collaborator in preparation and mechanical properties
of ceramics. The ultimate goal of the project is atomic-level characterization
of the local ionic environment of the NCES, in presence and absence of an
external applied electric field. Time-resolved methods of synchrotron
characterization are uniquely attractive for this purpose because they capture
the element-specific changes in the chemical bons. The project will have four
important outcomes: (1) Obtaining the fundamental descriptors of NCES with
dynamics elastic dipoles, (2) Providing basis for the theoretical modeling of
the NCES effect, (3) Training a new generation of graduate and undergraduate
students specializing in materials science on advanced characterization methods
practiced at large user facilities, and (4) Establishing a framework of
collaborative international projects connecting faculty-student research teams
of Stony Brook University and Weizmann Institute of Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.