* 2312304
* Manufacturing of Distillation Membranes with Controlled Microstructure Based on Atomistic and Continuum Theories
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jun Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2026
* USD 452,293.00

With access to clean water becoming a global concern, the need for an efficient,
sustainable, and affordable water purification method is now greater than ever.
Desalination is the production of freshwater from saltwater (e.g., seawater).
The investigators have proposed a novel approach to fabricate fibrous membranes
for saltwater desalination via a process called Direct Contact Membrane
Distillation (DCMD). The fabrication method enables the development of
desalination membranes for potential use in individual household systems, where
rooftop sunlight can be used to heat the saltwater and produce purified water
for the negligible cost of pumping a small volume of water to the roof. The
fabricated DCMD membranes can also be used in other existing or potential
applications such as food and beverage production and in the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries. STEM education and outreach activities are planned to
raise public awareness about climate change and the need for sustainable water
purification methods. Many of the investigatorsâ€™ outreach activities will focus
on developing courses and modules for autistic students in collaboration with
the Science House at North Carolina State University (the Catalyst Program).

Boiling is the easiest way to desalinate saltwater. However, boiling water
requires a significant amount of energy. Alternatively, readily available
industrial waste heat or solar energy can heat the saltwater enough to initiate
evaporation. The rate of water evaporation from warm saltwater is limited by the
rate at which vapor travels away from the warm water (heat source) to the cold
surroundings (heat sink). The rate of water evaporation can be increased by
bringing the heat sink as close as possible to the heat source, which shortens
the distance that the vapor needs to travel, i.e., increases the thermal and
concentration gradients. Separating the sink and source with a thin membrane
that is permeable to vapor but impermeable to liquid water is the most practical
way to shorten the distance. This is called Direct Contact Membrane Distillation
(DCMD). The major problem with the current DCMD membranes is that their
porosities are generally very low, resulting in low water-vapor transport across
the membrane. This problem can potentially be addressed by using high-porosity
electrospun fibrous membranes, but the increased porosity is often accompanied
by a higher chance of membrane wetting failure (i.e., liquid water penetrating
the membrane). The investigators have identified the root causes of membrane
wetting failure and have proposed a novel approach to address them. The goal of
this project is to design and produce a DCMD membrane that is very thin and
porous and is simultaneously impermeable to liquid water. These high-efficiency
DCMD membranes have the potential to successfully desalinate saltwater even when
the saltwater is only slightly warmer than the environment. The research
approach will apply first-principles computer simulations (molecular dynamics
and finite element simulations) and neural network modeling coupled with a
unique manufacturing method to engineer the microstructure of electrospun
fibrous membranes against wetting failure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.