* 2312944
* Chiral Strain Engineering of Polar Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 425,174.00

Nontechnical description

Chirality, a concept that describes objects (such as crystals, molecules, or the
relationship between electron spin and momentum) that possess a distinct
configuration from their mirror image, plays a pivotal role in driving many
fundamental phenomena in materials physics. Crystalline chiral solids exhibit a
unique spin-momentum relation and robust chiral-induced spin selectivity, making
them highly promising for energy-efficient spintronic computing at room
temperature. The proposed approach of chiral elastic strain engineering offers a
framework that facilitates the exploration and discovery of new chiral materials
and phases. This approach not only enables the enriching of basic understanding
of chiral electronic properties and their relations with strain, but also has
the potential to accelerate the implementation of chiral materials in future
spintronics and computing technologies. This award also aims to promote science
and engineering education and research training among a diverse range of
students, including those from historically underrepresented groups in the
field, on the topic of chiral electronic materials. The results gained from this
award will contribute to the advancement of future microelectronics, benefiting
the overall societal progress of the United States.

Technical description

Chiral spin-orbit coupling, observed in the surface states of topological
insulators, Weyl semimetals, and Rashba/Dresselhaus crystals/systems, plays a
crucial role in the design of emerging photonic and spintronic devices for
integrated quantum photonics and electronics. Chiral crystals, featuring
Kramers-Weyl chiral spin-orbit coupling, can be either metals or insulators,
providing a larger energy window for topologically non-trivial behavior compared
to topological insulators or Weyl semimetals. Moreover, robust room temperature
chiral-induced spin selectivity has been discovered in chiral materials.
However, the availability of crystalline chiral semiconductors is limited, which
significantly hinders the selection of suitable model systems for studying
Kramers-Weyl physics, chiral electronic transport properties, and the
development of spintronic devices based on chiral materials. In this project,
the principal investigator proposes to utilize elastic strain to transform non-
chiral semiconductors into chiral phases that possess topological chiral
electronic structures. The goal is to uncover the fundamental relationship
between chiral properties and strain fields. The role of electric fields in
switching chiral handedness will also be investigated. This project will advance
the fundamental understanding of chiral electronic structures, electronic
transport, optical and optoelectronic properties, and will expand the materials
database concerning chiral spintronic properties and devices for future
computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.