* 2312125
* CPS: Medium: Smart Harvesting - Enhancing automated apple harvesting through apple harvesting through collaborative
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Matthew Whiting, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,199,998.00

Automating perennial farming operations in tree fruit crops is crucial for
improving farming effectiveness, efficiency, and crop yield. However, current
automation technologies lack full autonomy and are inefficient in complex farm
environments. To address these challenges, our project aims to develop a cyber-
physical system called Smart Harvesting. This system, integrating human
intelligence and machine learning, will enhance decision-making and actuation,
improving picking efficiency and system autonomy. By integrating Smart
Harvesting into the crop production feedback loop, we will enrich the system's
repertoire and reduce uncertainties in crop production. Additionally, the
research outcomes can benefit other labor-intensive orchard operations like
flower thinning and pruning, which also face labor shortage issues. This
multidisciplinary research initiative will provide valuable opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, particularly those from Hispanic and
Native-serving institutions. The final product, a collaborative human-machine
system for apple harvesting, will have a notable impact on rural agricultural
communities. Its widespread adoption will contribute significantly to sustaining
the competitiveness of the US tree fruit industry.

The project consists of three main areas of research. The first area focuses on
creating a virtual reality orchard environment that is updated in real-time.
This environment will use a network of sensors and a system called the Robotic
Operation System that connects humans with machines. This will allow the control
center to receive up-to-date 3D information about the orchard remotely. The
second area aims to develop a collaborative framework where humans and machines
work together effectively to harvest apples. This framework will utilize the
virtual reality environment created in the first area. Human operators or
machine learning techniques will be able to assist the robot system from a
remote location. They can help the robot address challenges in apple picking,
such as finding unidentifiable apples and determining the best way to retrieve
them. The third area involves creating a constantly updating repertoire that
incorporates information from human expertise and its own machine learning
experience. It will record valuable information from human operators and its
machine learning and use it to handle similar cases in the future autonomously.
This repertoire will improve the performance of the apple harvesting robot,
leading to better crop yield and quality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.