* 2312925
* Elucidating multi-scale contractile and morphological mechanisms that empower skeletal muscle to be a better motor
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* David Lin, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,457.00

Daily activities, such as walking or lifting a bag of groceries, rely upon a
complicated set of interactions between the muscle, tendon, and skeletal
systems. There are still many details that scientists do not understand about
the underlying mechanisms that enable movement. One challenge in better
understanding these mechanisms arises from the vast number of inter-connected
processes that contribute to musculoskeletal function. The proposed research
aims to identify and characterize two biological mechanisms of coupling, between
the molecular and tissue levels, within this system. Computer models and
mechanical-feedback experiments will be used to test whether dynamic responses
between muscles and their tendons lead to greater force and power output as
muscles contract. Addressing two specific mechanisms herein will lay the
groundwork to diversify this approach and cross-examine other, complementary
mechanisms that enable movement in future studies. Expected outcomes will
advance knowledge and better define how skeletal muscles generate force and
power output, and how the muscle-tendon interface helps produce movement.
Findings will influence fields ranging from rehabilitation and sports medicine
to the design of robotic systems and comparative biomechanics. Outreach
activities will expand the inclusion of Native American populations in STEM
fields and increase the diversity of the technical workforce. These latter
activities will be guided by the local Tribal Nations and focus on
musculoskeletal health, with events on campus and mentoring undergraduates to
perform research in the lab. Formal assessment plans will help evaluate the
depth of scientific impact, outreach, and engagement with the students.

Many mechanisms may augment the function of skeletal muscle, as a motor, to
produce a rich variety of movements. This includes processes underlying muscle
work and power output, and effects of tendons, musculoskeletal geometry, and
inertia of the body. These mechanisms are intrinsically coupled, where behavior
of one component influences behavior of another component, creating a multi-
scale feedback system. The impacts of these mechanisms on movement are poorly
understood because studying different mechanisms in isolation neglects the
coupling between them. The proposed study aims to elucidate the relative
importance of two coupled mechanisms that likely increase muscle work
production: i) length-dependent cross-bridge kinetics, and ii) variable muscle
gearing. Research will investigate individual and combined effects of these
mechanisms via expanded computational models, and a newly developed hybrid
experimental-simulation feedback system that couples muscle mechanics, muscle
morphology, tendon properties, and inertia. These new approaches will enable
manipulation of biophysical, biochemical, and mechanical mechanisms of muscle
contraction across multiple scales. The findings will advance understanding of
the relative contribution of these two mechanisms on skeletal muscle’s ability
to better generate work and produce organismal movement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.