* 2312229
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Fundamental Limits of Cache-aided Multi-user Private Function Retrieval
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2027
* USD 223,670.00

This project is motivated by the need to efficiently execute complex queries on
massive databases in a way that minimizes the use of communication resources
while preserving the privacy of the entity that initiated the query. Such
queries are functions of the data points that are stored at remote servers; for
example, bi-linear operations are widely used fundamental primitives for
building the complex queries that support on-line big-data analytics and data
mining procedures. In scenarios such as mobile-edge computing, it is too
resource-consuming to download locally all the input variables in order to
compute the desired output value. Instead, it is desirable to directly download
the result of the desired output function, which should also be kept private.
This project develops a principled and holistic framework for the problem of
privately retrieving, at distributed cache-aided nodes, the output of functions
based on both data that is locally computed and data that is received from
multiple servers. This problem is at the intersection of areas that individually
have received significant attention lately, namely, distributed coded caching
and private information retrieval. This project aims to significantly advance
the state-of-the-art of private function retrieval in distributed settings from
both an information theory and an algorithm design perspective, thus
establishing a foundation of private caching, computing and communication. The
project also features a rich educational component. The novel findings from this
project will be incorporated into the education offerings, in both undergraduate
and graduate levels, at the three collaborating institutions.

The project objectives are organized in three main research thrusts: (1) design
optimal coded caching schemes for user-private function retrieval; (2) motivated
by distributed settings in which a user may also be a sender, devise optimal
server-private function retrieval strategies; and (3) overcome complexity
bottlenecks in practical distributed computing systems with server- and/or user-
privacy. The designed codes and algorithms will be implemented on Amazon EC2 and
POWDER (5G platform) to provide a proof-of-concept that the proposed solutions
have a practical impact at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.