* 2312456
* FET: Small: An Integrated Framework for the Optimal Control of Open Quantum Systems --- Theory, Quantum Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xiantao Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Numerous emerging applications in the fields of computer science, material
science, chemical engineering, and quantum biology rely extensively on
harnessing the quantum properties exhibited by underlying physical systems.
These properties can be fine-tuned and optimized through control variables,
typically achieved by manipulating external fields. However, due to the
substantial dimensionality of quantum systems and their continuous interactions
with the environment, determining the optimal control variables through direct
computer simulations has posed a significant and unresolved challenge. The
primary objective of this project is to establish a comprehensive mathematical
framework that effectively characterizes the dynamics of quantum systems in the
presence of environmental noise. By developing this mathematical description,
the investigators aim to pave the way for the construction of efficient quantum
algorithms capable of obtaining the optimal control parameters for such systems.

In addition to conducting rigorous theoretical analyses to ensure model accuracy
and evaluate the complexity of algorithms, this project places a significant
emphasis on the development of efficient quantum algorithms specifically
tailored for simulating open quantum systems in non-Markovian regimes. In such
regimes, the interactions between the quantum system and its environment occur
on comparable time scales, resulting in intricate dynamics that necessitate
novel mathematical descriptions. By focusing on this aspect, the investigators
aim to address the challenges posed by realistic scenarios where the influence
of the environment on the quantum system cannot be treated as a simple Markovian
process. Furthermore, a crucial aspect of this project centers around the design
and implementation of quantum algorithms capable of accurately estimating the
gradient of objective functions. This is achieved by carefully calibrating the
statistics of the measurement noise, which plays a pivotal role in the
complexity of the optimization procedure. The project involves active
undergraduate student mentoring to pursue careers in science and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.