* 2312540
* AF: Small: The Power of Randomness in Decision and Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Dieter van Melkebeek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The ability to make random choices seems to simplify several computational
tasks. For example, in order to decide whether two formulas like x*x-y*y and
(x+y)*(x-y) are equivalent, one can merely plug in random values for x and y and
verify whether the two formulas yield the same value. Even for complicated
formulas, this is a reliable strategy, easier than manipulating the abstract
formulas. A more involved use of randomness consists of a way to spot-check
computations that requires significantly less effort than performing the
computations themselves---a feature of paramount importance in the day and age
of delegating computations to the cloud. This project investigates the potential
of achieving similar efficiency in decision and verification without randomness.
It incorporates graduate and undergraduate training and education, and includes
the development of a textbook that makes computational thinking and the area of
quantum algorithms more accessible to a broader public.

The project explores two new directions in the area of derandomization. In the
setting of polynomial-time decision procedures with bounded error (i.e.,
bounded-error probabilistic polynomial time class, BPP), the investigators
propose a principled approach towards derandomizing Polynomial Identity Testing
(PIT) based on the notion of a vanishing ideal. PIT captures the above formula
equivalence problem and plays a central role in the area of derandomization as
known results suggest that derandomizing PIT may enable derandomizing all of
BPP. The investigators already characterized the vanishing ideal of a widely
used pseudorandom generator for PIT, plan to develop the approach for other
generators, and to research the ramifications. In the setting of polynomial-time
interactive verification processes known as Arthur-Merlin (AM) protocols, the
investigators want to further develop the connections between lower bounds and
derandomization, in particular by adapting to the setting of AM the instance-
wise connection that was recently established for the setting of BPP.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.