* 2312684
* Travel Grant: Joint US-European Workshop "Flexible Electric Grid Critical Infrastructure for Resilient Society"
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Mladen Kezunovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 44,950.00

The electric grid critical infrastructure is undergoing a major transformation
from concentrated carbon-intensive legacy generation options to renewables in
the form of distributed energy resources. The goal of this NSF workshop is to
bring together a wide-spread collaboration among researchers from different
scientific disciplines, such as data analytics, computational sciences,
atmospheric sciences, and social and behavioral sciences â€“ addressing the
engineering of complex systems will enable the convergent science needed to
address these emerging challenges. The objective is to continue the discussion
from the prior NSF-sponsored Workshops held in the USA in 2020 and 2021, and
jointly with the European partners in Europe in 2022, attended by over 100
researchers from well over 50 US/European academic, government and industry
organizations to further grid resilience discoveries and strategies through the
proposed workshop with the participation of a wider scientific community.

The workshop will engage researchers from different scientific disciplines and a
variety of application domains to address scientific, engineering, social, and
economic challenges of interdependencies among critical infrastructures and how
to inform the policy and regulatory process of the needed changes. The
scientific merit is in the convergent scientific discussion among researchers
and practitioners that will explore five scientific areas: (1) Data and physics-
based modeling discovering new fundamentals in deep-learning approaches, (2)
Transformational electric grid distributed control strategies laying the
foundation for a resilient net-zero grid of the future, (3) Synergies between
social and behavioral sciences to assess a human aspect of grid modernization
leading to new models for electricity markets and incentives, and (4)
Scalability of cybersecurity and privacy requirements across millions of
internet-of-things consumers, and (5) Cross-dependency between electric grid
infrastructure and other critical infrastructures. The workshop will also
address how to develop partnerships that will work closely on informing and
engaging the public and enhancing the STEM education and training of K-12
students and early-carrier professionals. The international experience of
interacting with peers from 15 universities from a dozen leading European
countries will be invaluable for the USA participants in forming a broader
social, cultural, and political understanding of grid modernization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.