* 2312480
* Heavy-Atom-Free Sensitizers for NIR-to-Visible Solar Photon Upconversion
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Cody Schlenker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 685,998.00

Non-technical Description

Harvesting solar energy efficiently and inexpensively is a grand challenge to
producing clean, sustainable energy. The spectrum of light emitted by the sun
spans a vast range, from the far infrared to ultraviolet. However only a
fraction of this light can be absorbed by the active layer in a solar cell. If
one can broaden the spectral range of sunlight that a solar panel can capture,
the overall power generated increases. One strategy to increase the fraction of
light absorbed is to combine two low-energy photons and fuse their energy into
one higher-energy photon, a process called upconversion. The upconverted photon
can then be absorbed and used to generate electricity from light that would
otherwise be wasted. The goal of this project is to identify and design new
molecules that can be used for upconversion in more efficient solar cells.
Researchers will combine synthetic chemistry and optical characterization with
theory and machine learning to achieve this goal. Beyond its scientific and
technological impacts, participants will engage local and regional community
college students with authentic and sustained exposure to original research
experiences. One specific avenue the team is pursuing is to attempt to infuse
photon upconversion research concepts into course-based academic laboratory
experiments at a local community college. This approach to engage community
college students with exposure to original research is intended to help overcome
the geographic constraints that may hinder these students from taking part in
more traditional research experience for undergraduate (REU) programs that
require students to travel long distances to the research site.

Technical Description

Photon upconversion could significantly enhance solar cell efficiencies to
routinely meet or exceed the Shockley-Queisser limit. One promising strategy for
deploying photon upconversion to enhance the efficiency of solar photovoltaics
is triplet-triplet annihilation upconversion because it can occur under low-
intensity, non-coherent illumination from solar photons. Historically, the
materials that have been explored for photon upconversion have included
sensitizers based on precious metal complexes, arylhalides, and quantum dots.
The first class is not economically viable due to the high cost of the metal,
the second class is unstable under illumination, and the third class suffers
from parasitic absorption of the upconverted light by the sensitizer. Given
these materials constraints, the PI’s group identifies heavy-atom-free
upconversion sensitizers based on thionated squaraine-based materials, which
they explore as potential candidates for achieving NIR-to-visible photon
upconversion for solar photovoltaic applications. The goal is to clarify elusive
structure-function relationships that have historically made it challenging to
identify NIR-absorbing triplet sensitizers in general, and more specifically,
hitherto intractable to achieve NIR-to-Visible photon UC without using expensive
precious metal centers or arylhalides that readily photodegrade, which are both
unattractive for solar applications. One key goal of this work is to address
specific questions such as, “What molecular descriptors are most prescriptive
for simultaneously achieving NIR absorption and high intersystem crossing
yields?” The team combines experimental and theoretical approaches based on
ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy, ab initio predictions, and reinforcement
learning to identify and evaluate new molecular design strategies for materials
that they synthesize and test in this project. The project also supports new
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) for community college
students to conduct advanced photonic materials research relevant for next-
generation solar energy devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.