* 2312129
* BRC-BIO: Effects of urbanization on the evolutionary dynamics of invasive species range expansion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brenna Levine, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 471,223.00

Humans are rapidly changing the planet by building cities. Populations of
invasive species (i.e., species that have been introduced to an environment
where they do not naturally occur) that live in cities may evolve in response to
urban conditions in ways that may cause them to spread faster, become harder to
control, and cause damage to agriculture and native plants and wildlife.
However, it is not known if invasive species in cities tend to evolve in
particular directions due to higher urban temperature gradients, or if other
factors are more important, like the underlying genetic variability of
populations, regardless of the environmental setting. This research will
generate critical data on how and why cities affect the spread of invasive
species. City planners and wildlife managers will be able to use the data to
help prevent the spread of invasive species that negatively impact agriculture
or other economically important activities. This project will also provide a
variety of biology research experiences for high school and college students,
including those from groups who are underrepresented in the sciences and thereby
enhance diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM.

Two outstanding questions regarding the evolutionary consequences of
urbanization for invasive species range expansion require resolution: (1) How do
evolutionary processes vary across the rural-urban mosaic? (2) How does standing
genetic variation mediate evolutionary responses to urbanization? The researcher
will use genomic sequencing of a rapidly spreading invasive species (spotted
lanternfly, Lycorma delicatula) as well as common garden experiments to build a
mechanistic understanding of relationships between standing genetic variation
and evolutionary responses to urbanization that affect species range expansions.
Specifically, the researcher will use double-digest restriction site associated
sequencing and low coverage whole genome sequencing to identify genome-wide
single nucleotide polymorphisms of spotted lanternflies collected from rural and
urban environments in the native range (China) and two invasive ranges (Japan
and the United States of America). This research will also generate a
chromosome-level genome assembly for the spotted lanternfly which will be
compared with common garden experiments to look for signatures of adaptive
evolution in rural and urban environments. Unprecedented insight into the role
of urban environments in the spread of invasive species will be gained, with
implications for invasive species management and risk assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.