* 2312207
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Medium: Scaling Secure Serverless Computing on Heterogeneous Datacenters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Xipeng Shen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2027
* USD 236,931.00

Future datacenters will have increasingly heterogeneous resources. In addition,
applications in the cloud are increasingly varied in their requirements. Several
large challenges must be addressed to efficiently use a heterogeneous datacenter
with heterogeneous applications. This project will investigate serverless
computing as computing paradigm for heterogeneous datacenter platforms. It will
create novel abstractions that extend serverless computing to better leverage
unique hardware characteristics, and to improve the security of the environment
serverless applications run on.

Current cloud serverless platforms are rising in popularity but limited by their
inability to take advantages of heterogeneity. If this project is successful,
this project will greatly expand the utility of serverless computing to
performance-demanding applications at higher efficiency and scalability, while
also improving their reliability and security. The project will integrate the
research into course curriculum at UCF and NCSU, with a free online open-source
course materials. Industry partners will be involved in research collaboration,
internships, and seminars, to ensure industry impact and relevance. The project
will plug into various BPC activities at both universities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.