* 2312643
* HCC: Medium: Optimizing Interactive Machine Learning Tools to Support Plant Scientists using Human Centered Design
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Felix Fritschi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,199,053.00

Understanding the structure and function of plants, especially roots as they
change over time, is essential to understand how plants adapt to changing
climates and ensure sustainable production. Cutting-edge advances in this
understanding are benefitting from huge increases in the diversity and sheer
amount of data available from sensors. For example, plant science uses sensor
technology called minirhizotron (MR) systems to study root development. These
sensors capture color images of plant roots through cameras placed into the soil
in clear tubes. Preparing these images to be used in scientific research
requires enormous amounts of time, labor, and effort, due to the need for human
interpretation of the data. Machine learning algorithms can automate some of the
preparation, but we do not know how to design a system to help humans and
machine learning algorithms work best together. This project develops methods
and tools to support plant scientists (of varying backgrounds and expertise
levels, including youth and other novices) working in tandem with machine
learning to better utilize MR systems. Outcomes will include advances in both
the interactive machine learning experience for human image labelers, as well as
the relationship between participating in labeling and self-identification as
scientists. The project will have broad implications for sensor-based data
science in plant science and beyond, addressing multiple issues of global
importance. The U.S. continues to experience a shortage of scientists-in-
training, and the project will advance and evaluate efforts to draw more
students into science. Science education programs in this project, which involve
youth in designing the human-machine system, can help youth from marginalized
backgrounds learn how science works and help them see themselves as future
scientists.

This project provides the tools needed to significantly reduce the analysis
bottleneck of the plant root data generated by MR systems and, in the long term,
enable larger-scale MR-based studies that may have significant global
importance. The focus of this project is to develop interactive machine learning
tools targeted to support plant scientists of varying expertise levels using a
human-centered design approach. To accomplish these goals, this project
triangulates findings from mixed methods, including laboratory studies of
experienced labelers, participatory co-design workshops with stakeholders from
diverse backgrounds, and summer participatory science experiences with Florida
4-H partner programs. The laboratory studies contribute new understanding of how
human labeler behavior (such as annotation quantity and quality) affects machine
learning algorithm performance, and vice versa. The participatory co-design
workshops focus on designing interactive machine learning data visualization and
labeling tools based in a human-centered understanding of plant scientists of
varying expertise, including scientists, emerging scientists, and non-
scientists, both youth and adults, as end users. Finally, the summer science
experiences inform on how to scale this approach to broader domains and user
populations beyond those traditionally engaged in STEM as youth. This project
will facilitate higher throughput in the analysis of MR systems data in plant
science, enabling future impacts to productivity, sustainability, and resilience
of agricultural and natural ecosystems. It will also impact the throughput of
human-centered machine learning in science in general. Methods from this project
will also generalize to other similar labeling domains, such as human anatomy
(blood vessels, neurons) or hydrology (river deltas, coastlines). Involving
marginalized youth through partnerships with 4-H also grows the nationâ€™s
prospective STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.