* 2312088
* Conference: AGNES Summer School in Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Eric Larson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

The AGNES Summer School on Intersection Theory on Moduli Spaces will be held at
Brown University July 11-14, 2023. Algebraic curves are one-dimensional sets of
points that can be described by polynomial equations. For example, the unit
circle in the plane x^2 + y^2 = 1 defines an algebraic curve. A ubiquitous
problem in the theory of algebraic curves is to understand how many algebraic
curves there are satisfying a given list of conditions. This information
corresponds to the so-called "intersection theory of their moduli space": a
moduli space of curves is a space whose points correspond to algebraic curves,
and its intersection theory describes how various loci in this space can meet
(which corresponds to various conditions on the algebraic curve being satisfied
simultaneously). The Chow ring of the moduli space packages this information of
intersection theory into an algebraic structure. This summer school will
introduce graduate students and postdocs to recent developments in computing
Chow rings through four mini-courses, afternoon exercise sessions, and research
groups. Students will participate in exercise sessions to reinforce the material
from the mini-courses. They will also work in research groups to apply these
techniques to compute new examples of Chow rings (both integral and rational) of
moduli spaces of curves.

More specifically, the four mini-courses will be on the following topics: (1)
Equivariant intersection theory: this describes how intersection theory behaves
in the presence of a group action; (2) Higher Chow groups: these invariants
capture the failure of exactness of excision sequences of Chow rings; (3) The
tautological ring of the moduli space of stable pointed curves: this describes a
well-behaved subring of the Chow ring; and (4) Patching techniques and the
integral Chow ring of the moduli of 2-pointed genus 1 curves: often enlarging
moduli spaces to include curves with worse singularities can enable patching
togetherinformation about Chow rings of strata to the Chow ring of the entire
moduli space. https://sites.google.com/site/agneshomepage/brown-2023-agnes-
summer-school

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.