* 2312949
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Multilingual Long-form QA with Retrieval-Augmented Language Models
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Mohit Iyyer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 07/31/2027
* USD 554,150.00

This project aims to enable automatic question answering systems to produce
paragraph-level answers. Prior work on question answering has focused on simpler
questions that can be answered with short phrases. Building systems to produce
paragraph-level answers opens up exciting opportunities to answer complicated
questions, and to offer more nuanced and comprehensive answers to simpler
questions. This project will create comprehensive and reliable evaluation
protocols for long form question answering (LFQA), pioneer multilingual studies
to broaden information access to a wider population, and develop new algorithms
that integrate web search with LFQA systems to provide verifiable long form
answers paired with human-written evidence documents.

This project focuses on three core dimensions of LFQA – datasets, evaluation,
and modeling. Expanding the scope of prior English-centric LFQA, this research
will investigate multilingual capabilities of large language models by
constructing multilingual LFQA datasets and studying knowledge transfer across
languages. In terms of modeling, it will propose a new framework that
iteratively weaves together – in a transparent manner—knowledge retrieved from
documents and memorized knowledge from a language model. Finally for evaluation,
the project will engage domain experts who are familiar with the question topic
to provide rationales for their evaluation of model generated answers. Such
feedback will be used to derive a fine-grained annotation framework which
localizes errors and unpack the weaknesses of generated answers. Together, the
proposed work will bring significant progress to LFQA, an emerging topic for
natural language processing and artificial intelligence research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.