* 2312986
* ICBR Capacity: Biological Collections: Infrastructure improvement and data preservation of the Tetrapods Collection at the Ohio State University Museum of Biological Diversity.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Tamaki Yuri, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 346,200.00

Animal populations in North America have been declining over the last 50 years
due to rapid changes in their natural habitat. Natural history museum specimens
have become increasingly valuable to biodiversity and conservation research
because they provide a historical record of species distribution and changes in
genetic and anatomical characteristics. Since its founding as a land-grant
university in 1870, one of the main missions of The Ohio State University has
been preserving natural resources and biodiversity. The Museum of Biological
Diversity Tetrapods (amphibians, reptiles, mammals, and birds) Collection was
established in 1870s and is the oldest and most diverse collection of its kind
in Ohio. This project will provide a much-needed infrastructure upgrade to
protect over 35,000 historically and biologically valuable specimens and to
enhance accessibility to the specimens and their associated data. This increased
accessibility will provide meaningful information to researchers, conservation
managers, and governmental policymakers. Undergraduate and graduate students
from diverse disciplines and backgrounds will play a key role in the
transformation of the OSU Tetrapods Collection, and help to inspire the next
generation of museum and conservation scientists. Students with an interest in
museum-related careers, including Natural History Collection Club members, will
serve vital leadership roles in outreach and engagement with the local media and
community members as well as with museum communities through professional
conferences.

This project will replace all the obsolete metal and wooden cabinets purchased
in the 1900s–1960s with steel cabinets. This rehousing will provide the mammal
and bird collections proper protection from possible damage caused by pests and
other harmful elements and more efficient storage for expansion, and greatly
improve organization and accessibility by staff and visitors. Other objectives
of this project include: (1) rectifying the data quality issues of the current
database by inventorying all cataloged specimens and validating data in the
database with specimen labels, (2) imaging and preserving deteriorating specimen
labels and egg cards and adding un-transcribed data to the database, and (3)
transitioning the current database to a robust platform for long-term
sustainability. All data resulting from this project will be publicly shared
with data aggregators such as GBIF (https://www.gbif.org), VertNet
(http://vertnet.org), and iDigBio (https://www.idigbio.org/). The increased
value of the collection would be promoted by newly trained student advocates and
outreach activities, which further boosts the use of the collection by the
research community and maximizes the future collaborative opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.