* 2312422
* Collaborative Research: Plant-Inspired Growing Robots Operating in Multiple Time Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Suyi Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2027
* USD 501,667.00

This award supports fundamental research to create plant-inspired robots for
long-duration monitoring missions in congested and dynamically evolving
environments. Such environments abound in our world, for example, urban shopping
districts, tropical forests, underwater reefs, and undeveloped islands. These
locations are typically inaccessible and resource-limited for human operations,
and they evolve slowly but substantially over time (e.g., propagating
vegetation). However, “being right there” in these environments and responding
to events at multiple time scales is critical, especially for environmental
protection. Therefore, in this project plant-inspired robots will be designed to
monitor and react to long-term processes like pollution spread, humidity levels,
and seasonal migration of animal groups, as well as randomly occurring real-time
events like pollution outbreaks, forest fires, and sightings of rare animals. To
this end, the research team will abstract different capacities of plants—their
distributed movements from slow to ballistic speed, adaptation according to
ambient conditions, and energy harvesting processes—to establish new approaches
toward robotic structure, motion, and functionality. On the education and
outreach front, the award will support curriculum development in bio-inspired
robotics, participation of undergraduate students in research, and outreach
activities for middle school girls.

The objective of this research is to enable development of plant-inspired robots
capable of long-duration service in complex, dynamic environments by pursuing
significant innovations in structural, energetic, and operational designs of
robots, e.g., robotic hardware that mimics plant-like “growth” and adaptation;
advancement in robotic movements to cover both real-time events
(seconds/minutes) and long-term processes (weeks/months); and energy harvesting
components for long-duration autonomy. The research team will achieve the
objective by: (1) leveraging origami principles to create robotic “trunk”
components capable of discrete and energy efficient growth-like deformations via
folding and self-locking; (2) using principles from continuum robots to devise
“leaf” and “needle” components capable of continuous and short-duration motions
for monitoring and manipulating the ambient environment; (3) laying down the
foundation for energy autonomy by exploring diverse energy harvesting approaches
similar to those that plants employ; and (4) integration to enable multiple
time-scale operations. Finally, this new concept of plant-inspired growing
robots will be validated and evaluated via fully functional prototypes applied
to campus pedestrian traffic and natural habitat monitoring in long-duration
outdoor demonstrations.

This project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in
Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering
(ENG) and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.