* 2312967
* RI: Medium: From Vision to Dynamics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* John Challis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

In the realms of health and sports, detailed analysis of human movement provides
guidance for individualized performance assessment, training, and health
evaluation. Data collection for biomechanical analysis of human motion is
typically performed using expensive, specialized hardware that requires
experiments to be carried out in a constrained lab setting. Computer vision
algorithms that use video cameras for data collection enable observation in more
natural environments with minimal cost, but current vision-based estimates of
body pose and motion are not biomechanically accurate and lack a quantitative
model of the physical forces underlying human movement. This research effort
will train a modern machine learning system to perform imagery-based estimation
of biomechanically accurate body pose, motion and force, turning informal
computer vision into a scientific measurement tool for human movement and
stability research in unconstrained, everyday settings using readily available
low-cost video cameras. The results will enable novel applications in
personalized training and preventative medicine, and lead to strategies for
improving flexibility and stability among the elderly, reducing fall-induced
mortality and improving quality of life, serving NSF's mission to promote
progress of science to advance the national health. An outreach program covering
topics in human and robot stability will inspire K-12 students with
demonstrations that combine exercise, augmented reality, and humanoid robots.

The project team will collect a unique, multi-modal human motion dataset and use
it to train a novel deep learning system that combines multi-task regression
with a biomechanical human motion model to estimate, from visual data alone,
accurate pose and motion as well as dynamics such as muscle torques and ground
reaction forces. The results will fill an existing gap between visual
observation of kinematics and the inference of body dynamics, greatly improving
the ability of computer vision to make inferences about balance and stability
that require dynamics information. Data-driven discovery of discriminative
features that are causal or correlated to stability will lead to identifying the
most stability-enhancing poses/moves for a movement sequence and new measures
for estimating stability of a person in motion. Guided by the scientific
research, four applications will be explored: 1) Developing a vision-based
stability surveillance system that can quantify and monitor changes in
stability; 2) Developing a vision-based personal trainer for teaching stability-
enhancing exercises; 3) Analyzing historical sports videos to reveal changes in
performance styles and dynamics; and 4) Studying methods for retargeting human
movements to a humanoid robot while maintaining stability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.