* 2312591
* BRC-BIO: Pick your poison: The physiological cost of alkaloid sequestration in dendrobatid poison frogs
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ralph Saporito, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 488,947.00

Organisms typically have physiologies adapted to the environments that they
inhabit. However, many habitats are rapidly changing due to human activities and
climate change. These changes can impact species’ ability to persist in
previously adequate environments. Poison frogs in the family Dendrobatidae are
charismatic because of their bright colors and unique ability to sequester
alkaloid defenses from their natural diet of mites and ants. The frogs use these
alkaloids as a chemical defense against predators and microbes, yet little is
known about the physiological costs associated with developing these defenses.
More specifically, how does alkaloid sequestration influence the energy
requirements for individuals to survive? And in turn, how does this impact how
frogs interact with their environment such as how much time they need to spend
foraging for food or finding a mate? Frogs are poikilothermic, which means
changes to environmental temperature will directly impact their body
temperature. As temperature increases, so does metabolic rate, which will
require frogs to acquire more energy (for example, eat more food) or utilize
different thermal microhabitats. Therefore, increases in temperature due to
climate change have the potential to increase the cost of alkaloid sequestration
for frogs. The current project aims to establish a career study system, rooted
in involving undergraduate students and community members. Undergraduate
students will be trained in cutting edge techniques for studying physiology and
chemical ecology. The charismatic nature of the frogs will also allow for
outreach events, engaging the community to learn about ecophysiology and
conservation.

Amphibians are especially susceptible to climate change as their physiologies,
specifically respiration and other aspects of metabolism, are dependent on
specific temperature and moisture conditions. Neotropical poison frogs in the
family Dendrobatidae also have specialized physiologies that allow them to
sequester dietary alkaloids to be used as chemical defenses. The goal of this
BRC-BIO project is to quantify how alkaloid sequestration by dendrobatid frogs
impacts ecologically relevant physiological processes, such as metabolism. To
accomplish this goal, a breeding colony of 10 species of dendrobatids will be
established at The University of Scranton, which will be used to test three
primary hypotheses: (1) sequestration of alkaloids has a physiological cost that
will result in increased metabolic rate and energy expenditure; (2) changes in
metabolic rate will vary by frog lineage, as alkaloid sequestration has evolved
multiple times within the family; and (3) metabolic rate will increase
proportionally with the quantity of alkaloid sequestered. These hypotheses will
be tested by providing frogs with a control or alkaloid-supplemented diet and
quantifying individual frog’s metabolic rate by measuring and comparing rates of
carbon dioxide production and oxygen consumption. Dendrobatids naturally possess
more than 20 different types of alkaloids, and therefore a diversity of
alkaloids and their effects on physiology will be measured. The data generated
by this BRC-BIO project, in conjunction with the development of a frog breeding
colony, will continue to support additional questions with an emphasis on
student-led independent projects, novel physiology experiments in undergraduate
courses, and outreach with the community and K-12 schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.