* 2312113
* NeTS: Small: Low Latency Uplink Communications in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) Satellite Networks with Chirp Permutation Multiple Access (CPMA)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zhenghao Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

In this project, Chirp Permutation Multiple Access (CPMA) is proposed, which is
a novel wireless communication technology for Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO) satellite
networks aiming at achieving minimum communication latency on the uplink from
the user terminals to the satellite. LEO satellite networks have emerged as a
strong option to complement the existing wireless infrastructure, especially for
providing broadband data services to areas that are traditionally difficult to
reach, such as rural areas and oceans. CPMA addresses one of the key challenges
in LEO satellite networks, namely, the communication latency, and will enable
applications that are highly sensitive to latency, such as automatic driving and
gaming. CPMA minimizes latency by reducing it to the one-way propagation delay
from the user terminal to the satellite, because CPMA allows user terminals to
transmit packets at any time without coordinating with each other or waiting for
decisions on resource allocations. By enabling novel applications, CPMA will
benefit society and improve quality of life. This project will advance the
knowledge and understanding on grant-free communications in wireless networks.
Results from this project will be integrated with education, such as used in
course projects. Undergraduate students and students from underrepresented and
minority groups will be actively recruited.

The key novelty of CPMA is its physical layer, which allows the satellite to
decode overlapping packets from multiple user terminals and enables grant-free
communications over the uplink. The CPMA modulates data by transforming the
chirp waveform, which is a complex vector with constant magnitude and linearly
increasing frequency. The key transformation is the permutation of the chirp,
which can effectively reduce the impact of interference across packets. In this
project, both the physical layer and the link layer of CPMA will be designed,
implemented, and tested. The physical layer will be optimized with permutations
with proven guarantees and multiple types of transformations of the chirp. The
link layer will fully harness the capabilities of the physical layer and solve
problems such as efficient packet retransmission and transmission power control
based on collective feedback from multiple user terminals close to each other.
Theoretical analysis will be conducted to reveal the network capacity and prove
the optimality of the design. CPMA is expected to achieve ultra-low latency,
high data rate, and high network capacity. CPMA will be implemented on USRPs and
demonstrated in open platforms such as POWDER, as well as evaluated with
simulations driven by channel traces and widely accepted channel models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.