* 2312043
* Evolution and Mechanism of a Conserved Regulatory Switch for Mating-Types and Sexes in Volvocine Green Algae
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Umen, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 935,010.00

Sex and recombination are integral to life cycles and reproduction across the
kingdom of eukaryotes that includes animals, plants, fungi, seaweeds and many
single-celled algae and other protists. A hallmark of eukaryotic sex involves
genetic systems such as sex chromosomes or mating type genes to ensure that
matings involve individuals with two distinct mating types or sexes. However,
outside of animals, fungi, and a few other taxa, little is known about how sexes
and mating types are determined or how male and female sexes evolved in
multicellular species from single-celled ancestors with mating types. Volvocine
green algae are a unique group of relatives that include single celled and small
colonial species with mating types, and larger more complex species with sexes
and sex chromosomes; but they all share a common genetic system for controlling
gamete differentiation. Under this proposal volvocine algae will be investigated
to understand how the genetic systems governing mating types were modified in
the evolutionary transition to sexes. Importantly, the genetic machinery that
controls sexes and mating types in volvocine algae is at least partly shared
with other groups of green algae and their land plant cousins. Thus, the
knowledge obtained from this proposal can impact the understanding of sex
determination in a wide range of species in the plant kingdom and may be further
leveraged for breeding and strain improvement in emerging algal crop species
that are used to make high value bioproducts or biofuels.

Ancestral eukaryotes were single cells with isogamous sexual reproduction.
However, in nearly every lineage where complex multicellularity evolved, so did
dimorphic sexes—a transition whose origins and mechanisms remain poorly
understood. Volvocine green algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Volvox carteri,
and relatives) are a uniquely tractable model for investigating the genetic
networks governing sexual differentiation and the evolution of dimorphic sexes.
The conserved transcription factor (TF) MID is a dominant specifier of minus or
male gamete differentiation in volvocine algae; but the factor(s) responsible
for basal sexual differentiation as plus or female have remained unknown. Under
this proposal a newly discovered TF, VSR1, that is essential for differentiation
of both gamete types and sexes in volvocine algae will be investigated. A new
model where competing interactions between VSR1 homodimers and MID-VSR1
heterodimers form a binary switch for sex or mating type determination will be
tested and refined, and the mechanisms underlying expansion and divergence of
the MID/VSR1 gene regulatory networks (GRNs) during the transition to oogamy
will be explored. Specific Aims are designed to 1) Elucidate and compare the
gene expression programs for gametogenesis that are governed by MID and VSR1 in
key isogamous and oogamous volvocine representatives; 2) Determine the bases for
MID-VSR1 physical interactions and how the two TFs co-evolved during
diversification of the volvocine lineage; 3) Identify the DNA binding
specificity and direct targets of VSR1 and MID in key volvocine representatives
to enable modeling of sex-related GRN evolution and testing of hypotheses about
GRN expansion in Volvox.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.