* 2312220
* SHF: Small: Efficient, Deterministic and Formally Certified Methods for Solving Low-dimensional Linear Programs with Floating-point Precision
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mridul Aanjaneya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2026
* USD 540,000.00

Linear programs (LPs) are widely used in numerous domains, such as computer
arithmetic, robotics, machine learning, computer vision and databases. Existing
LP solvers, which have been steadily improved after decades of research, can
solve several tens of thousands of constraints. These solvers focus on linear
programs where the number of constraints is of the same order of magnitude as
the number of variables (i.e., high-dimensional linear programs). However, in
many domains, linear programs with billions of constraints but a small number of
variables are common. Such linear programs are called "low-dimensional linear
programs" (LDLPs). Unfortunately, existing LP solvers cannot solve them. This
project aims to develop efficient and deterministic methods to solve low-
dimensional linear programs that can be formally verified to produce the correct
solution with floating-point precision. In contrast to existing solvers for LP
problems that generate real coefficients using rational arithmetic, this
project's novelty lies in generating solutions with floating-point (FP)
precision using ideas from computational geometry. The project's impacts are in
designing scalable LDLP solvers that can handle both linear programs that are
full-rank (i.e., there exists a single solution that satisfies all constraints)
and those that are not full-rank, with potentially billions of constraints. In
the latter case, this project will generate a solution that satisfies the
maximum number of constraints. This project will rigorously evaluate the
efficacy of the LDLP solver in various domains and has the potential of
expanding the use of formal methods to a wider class of applications. It will
also educate practitioners, graduate and undergraduate students on foundational
abstractions in computing.

This project makes the following foundational advances in designing LDLP
solvers: (a) It will develop an algorithm to solve LDLPs that are full rank
while also identifying the key constraints. A solution that satisfies these key
constraints also satisfies all the other constraints. (b) It will develop a
novel method for identifying the key constraints by constructing the convex hull
in high dimensions using the geometric duality between hyperplanes and points.
(c) It will develop a new LP formulation using the key constraints whose
solution satisfies the maximum number of constraints in the original non-full-
rank LDLP. (d) It will develop an approach to formally verify the construction
of the convex hull in high dimensions, especially to handle the degenerate cases
that may arise in the presence of numerical and rounding errors, and (e) it will
evaluate the LDLP solver in two practical applications: (1) generating correctly
rounded math libraries for elementary functions, and (2) fast training of
support vector machines for machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.