* 2312818
* Using Machine Learning and Animal Models to Reveal Bacterial Subnetworks Essential for Development Within Complex Gut Microbiomes.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Zakee Sabree, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,162,111.00

Multicellular animals emerged into a microbial world and, many animals,
including humans, maintain gut microbiomes that are complex microbial
communities that they require for normal development and growth. The enormous
species and functional diversity comprising these microbiomes confound efforts
to link microbiome composition to specific healthy host phenotypes. The team
will introduce random sub-samples of the total gut microbiome to a germ-free
host and screen for those capable of resolving many of the growth and
developmental deficiencies associated with being germ-free. Next, machine
learning (ML) approaches will identify bacterial species that are consistently
associated with promoting healthy host outcomes. Finally, the team will
construct and introduce synthetic microbiomes comprised of bacterial species
recommended by the ML models to germ-free animals to validate their predictions.
Ultimately, this effort will identify specific bacterial lineages that are
integral to animal growth, development and evolution. This interdisciplinary
project leverages legacy and cutting-edge technologies to address what aspects
of gut microbiome composition are essential for positive host outcomes.
Additionally, this project will demonstrate the power of low-cost/high-replicate
model systems and predictive modeling for rapid hypothesis generation and
testing. Finally, investigators and postdoctoral scientists doing microbiome
sciences will be afforded opportunities to recruit next-gen microbiome
scientists from HBCUs with the goal of building a diverse microbiome science
workforce. Further, these participants will obtain training in mentoring across
different positionalities to enable them to build productive, long-term
professional relationships with their mentees.

Host-associated bacteria are inextricably involved in the life history and
evolution of metazoans. This research project builds on emerging evidence that
suggests composition of gut microbiota (i.e. species/functional diversity) have
large effects on host animal growth and development, and these effects are
realized at several levels of biological organization (i.e. gene network
expression, cellular proliferation and tissue differentiation, organismal body
size and maturation). Many animals, including mammals, harbor species-rich and
functionally complex gut microbiomes and identifying bacterial lineages within
those complex communities that are critical for animal growth and development
presents challenges that can be addressed through interdisciplinary approaches.
Specifically, machine learning approaches will be used to integrate high-
replicate multi-omics data from the gut microbiome and its host as well as host
developmental, physiological and gastric histological data from several well-
defined microbiome perturbations to infer bacterial species sub-networks that
are consistently associated with normal host growth and development. The
research team will test the hypothesis that these networks are host-supportive
by constructing synthetic microbiomes comprised of predicted species in axenic
juvenile hosts and track their development. This interdisciplinary approach
leverages molecular and microbiological approaches, legacy (i.e. random forest)
and cutting edge (i.e. convolution neural networks with triplet loss) machine
learning tools, and an invertebrate animal model that normally harbors a complex
gut microbiome and can easily be reared axenically without the use of
antibiotics (i.e. Periplaneta americana) to shed light on the role of gut
microbiota on host growth and development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.