* 2312079
* 2023 Nanomaterials for Applications in Energy Technology Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Matthew McDowell, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

The Gordon Research Conference on “Nanomaterials for Applications in Energy
Technology” will be held from February 26 – March 3, 2023, in Ventura, CA. This
GRC will showcase advances and challenges in the development, modeling,
characterization, and commercialization of nanoscale materials for energy
conversion and storage, bringing together a diverse array of scientists in this
field, including senior scientists, early career scientists, and
postdocs/students. Understanding and controlling the nanoscale structure and
properties of materials is increasingly important for enabling maximal
performance in energy devices. This meeting will take an in-depth look at energy
and fuel generation (photovoltaics, catalysis, solar fuels) and energy storage
and conversion (batteries and supercapacitors), with specific focus on advanced
functionalities enabled by control over the nanoscale structure and properties
of materials. The meeting will foster interactions among scientists from
different energy disciplines and at different stages in their careers, with a
focus on diversifying participation from underrepresented groups in STEM. With
support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division
of Materials Research, registration fee support will be provided to early-career
participants, including students, postdoctoral associates, and junior
faculty/researchers.

Technical Summary

The specific goals of the proposed conference are to (1) increase domestic
graduate student and postdoc participation, especially those from
underrepresented groups in STEM; (2) place emphasis on the latest understanding
of novel energy materials; and (3) foster intellectually stimulating discussion
and ideas amongst participants of all career stages and backgrounds. The field
of nanomaterials for applications in energy technology is an area of national
priority, and this conference will provide opportunities to discuss various
topics including the interaction of materials with light, synthesis of nanoscale
materials for energy, materials chemistry for energy storage, and
(photo)catalysis. In addition to application-specific sessions, cross-cutting
sessions will include modeling, data analytics, and machine learning for energy
materials. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
within the Division of Materials Research, the GRC will gather leading experts
in the major and emerging areas in nanomaterials and energy materials research.
The associated Gordon Research Seminar will provide a forum for graduate
students, postdocs and other early career scientists to engage in meaningful
research discussion and networking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.