* 2312714
* NeTS: Medium: SLATE: Service Layer Traffic Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Philip Brighten Godfrey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,085,000.00

Most people use online applications -- web sites, maps, videoconferencing,
shopping, messaging, and more -- on their phones and laptops every day. These
applications are hosted in clouds, meaning that important parts of their
application logic, databases, and storage run on servers in large data centers,
typically in multiple sites across the country or world. Such applications
usually involve many distinct components of software performing dozens or
hundreds of small tasks behind the scenes to collectively produce the result the
user wants, like a web page or a high-quality video stream. Because of the
complexity of these cloud-hosted applications and the unpredictable workload
they receive from users, it is difficult to optimize their performance and
resource usage. The typical result today is that applications' resources are
overprovisioned -- meaning, they are allocated much more computing resources
than necessary; 70% waste, or even more, is common. Current methods to deal with
this problem try to plan better long-term resource allocations, but do not help
with short-term workload changes and do not help with network-related costs.

This project will design and develop a system called Service Layer Traffic
Engineering (SLATE). SLATE will help cloud-hosted applications to optimize the
performance of tasks, deal gracefully with short-term workload fluctuations with
less resource waste, and optimize cloud bandwidth and computing costs. At a
technical level, SLATE will provide easily usable optimization for modern cloud-
hosted applications with a new optimization layer beneath the application. SLATE
focuses on applications which are microservice-based: such applications split
each task into many small components which run on different servers. SLATE will
extend existing open-source service meshes, which today provide networking
functionality for microservice-based applications. However, this involves
significant new challenges. First, the project will develop techniques to
prioritize requests automatically across bottlenecks spanning multiple resource
types (computing and network capacity). Second, the project will design methods
to route requests in real time among possible servers, intelligently trading off
latency, cost, bandwidth, and outlier considerations in multi-cluster
environments. Third, the project will develop a theoretically grounded approach
to decompose the service layer traffic engineering problem into a decentralized
design, with local decisions enabling fast reaction, and just enough global
coordination to achieve optimality.

The project will seek to achieve substantial broader impact by benefiting cloud-
hosted applications with significant performance, resource utilization, and cost
improvements. The project will also support activities to broaden participation
in computing, including mentoring Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
students, attracting applicants from underrepresented groups, and participating
in the EECS Rising Stars workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.