* 2312991
* III: Medium: Linear Algebra Operators in Databases to Support Analytic and Machine-Learning Workloads
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Kenneth Ross, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Cushing
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,016,318.00

Machine-learning tools have become ubiquitous in modern information systems. The
data inputs used by these tools often originate from relational databases. The
data outputs generated by those tools are often stored in databases, where they
can be used for subsequent data analysis. Typically, however, the learning
process itself is performed outside the database system. This project
investigates the opportunity for performing more of the machine learning work
within the database itself, avoiding expensive (and often redundant) data export
and import. In partnership with researchers from Relational-AI and Microsoft,
the Columbia University team will design and build two interacting open-source
systems named MARQUE and ZORK. These systems will make data analysis more
efficient and effective for database-resident information. Improved efficiency
will lead to faster, more cost-effective machine learning, and executing ML
within the DBMS will simplify operational complexity and benefit from DBMS
features such as scalability, access control, and data management. Ultimately,
this work will broaden the adoption of machine learning technologies in a wide
range of data-intensive disciplines.

MARQUE will be a database management system that supports machine learning
primitives such as linear algebra operations within the context of a query
processing engine. The system will efficiently compile SQL queries using
embedded machine learning models within the database, combining state-of-the-art
query processing techniques with highly engineered linear algebra algorithms.
MARQUE will allow components of the machine-learning pipeline itself to be
formulated as in-database operations, avoiding unnecessary data copying.
Conventional SQL analytic queries that can be reformulated using extensions of
operators like matrix multiplication can be optimized to use efficient execution
plans involving specialized algorithms for such operators. To further support
in-database machine learning, the project investigators will build ZORK, a
system to support machine learning at scale that will make use of the
infrastructure provided by MARQUE. ZORK will scale to very large datasets by
processing factorized representations of the data rather than explicitly
materializing large joins. This project will develop new and innovative query
processing techniques for queries involving both conventional relational
operators and generalized linear algebra operators. Tight integration will
facilitate query optimization within and between operators. Using this system, a
range of machine learning techniques will be developed that operate entirely
within the database management system, avoiding data export and simplifying
concerns such as data privacy administration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.