* 2312173
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Sparsely Activated Bayesian Neural Networks from Deep Gaussian Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rui Tuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering in Mathematical and
Statistical Sciences (CDS&E-MSS) project aims to develop a systematic approach
for constructing deep Bayesian neural networks that are both computationally
efficient and amenable to model designs. The results of this project are
expected to lead to significant improvements in terms of accuracy, confidence,
and efficiency over the current machine learning and artificial intelligence
models. Open-source software will be developed during the course of this
project, providing accessible tools for researchers and practitioners. This
study is expected to impact a wide range of applications including self-driving
cars, medical diagnostics, and trading and finance. The investigators are also
committed to promoting STEM education and research opportunities for minority
and underrepresented groups, and this project also provides research training
opportunities for graduate students.

The research is expected to advance deep Gaussian process models and relevant
Bayesian neural networks in several key areas, including theory and algorithmic
development, their applications to generative tasks, and software development
and validation. The research and development plan mainly consists of the
following three components: 1) to better understand the properties of deep
tensor Markov Gaussian process models and to construct a broader class of models
that have more complex architectures but can still be approximated by deep
Bayesian neural networks with sparse structure; 2) to explore the stochastic
nature of deep Gaussian process models to create novel conditional generative
models; and 3) to develop software tools and to validate the project outcomes
using real-world datasets from the state-of-the-art wireless communication and
computer vision systems.

This award by the NSF Division of Mathematical Sciences is jointly supported by
the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.