* 2312539
* NeTS: Medium: Foundations and Applications of Modular Verification of Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Aarti Gupta, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 246,614.00

Networks connect us to our online services – our banks, our colleagues and
friends, our work, our school, our travel plans, our government resources, and
so much more. As such, networks are critical infrastructure, and any downtime is
not only costly, but possibly dangerous. In order to function properly, networks
need to be configured to route information between computers. Unfortunately,
these configurations are large and complicated, and it is easy to make mistakes
while maintaining them. The goal of this project is to develop new algorithms
and tools to identify mistakes in network configurations before they cause
serious harm. More specifically, the project will explore ways to divide complex
modern networks into smaller components (i.e., modules) for separate but
accurate analysis. Doing so will allow sophisticated analysis techniques to
scale to the point they may be applied to the world’s largest and most important
networks.

This project will advance the theory and practice of modular verification of
traditional network control planes. Modular reasoning can help network operators
abstract away unnecessary details, localize network bugs, confirm the validity
of configuration updates, and scale verification to arbitrarily-large networks.
The specific goals are: (1) to develop new theoretical foundations, including
models of network behavior, useful abstractions, and expressive specification
languages that support sound and efficient modular reasoning; (2) to design and
implement algorithmic methods for verification and synthesis of modular network
interfaces; and (3) to build a system for reliable modular network management,
with support for migration from traditional infrastructure.

Reliable networks are an essential component of the nation’s critical
infrastructure. If successful, the ideas and products produced by this project
will help keep that infrastructure running and avoid outages resulting from bugs
due to updates in network configurations. To increase access to education in
computer science, the project will follow Princeton’s verified Departmental
Broadening Participation in Computing plan. In particular, the project will
support undergraduate research opportunities. To improve educational outcomes,
the project will develop shared interdisciplinary educational materials on
formal methods to be deployed in classes at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.

Results produced by the project including open source code, data, and reports
will be accessible via https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~dpw/grants/nsf-modular-
networks.html. These products will be maintained for at least a decade.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.