* 2312465
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Harmonious and Safe Coordination of Vehicles with Diverse Human / Machine Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Wenhao Luo, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 363,460.00

Human-driven vehicles (HDVs) and automated vehicles (AVs) of all levels (Level
1-5, AVs1-5) may share the highways in the long and foreseeable future. The
increasing vehicle autonomy heterogeneity and diversity may jeopardize the safe
and harmonious interaction among such vehicles with mixed autonomy on highways
and pose a threat to the safety of all vehicles. This may exacerbate an already
growing and alarming national concern on traffic safety. This project aims to
advance the state of the art in the Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) research areas
of Autonomy, Safety, and Transportation by ushering in a new CPS paradigm of
harmonious and safe integration of highway vehicles with heterogeneous, varying,
and mixed human / machine autonomy. Through collaborative research, the project
may create new methods and tools to enhance the highway driving safety of
heterogeneous vehicles. The outcomes of this work may also be extended to
advance other CPS in manufacturing, warehousing, and healthcare applications
where interaction among humans and heterogeneous autonomous robots is pervasive
and safe coordination among them is critical.

The project seeks to address the emerging challenges associated with vehicles of
heterogeneous autonomy in highway transportation by creating a universal
framework that can augment AVs1-5 systems to enable safe and harmonious
integration of vehicles in highway traffic. The research team will use an
interdisciplinary research approach to understand driving behaviors and assess
individual perceived safety of other HDVs and AVs1-5, as well as to achieve
cooperative, decentralized behavioral coordination and verifiably safe control
in highway traffic scenarios. Human-in-the-loop driving simulation experiments
and scaled vehicle-traffic system experiments will be conducted to investigate
and evaluate the developed methods. Educational activities such as curriculum
development and graduate/undergraduate student research participation will be
conducted. Research dissemination and K-12 outreach activities will also be
pursued to further increase the broader impact of the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.