* 2312243
* Collaborative Research: AF: Medium: Foundations of Anonymous Communication in Large-Scale Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Megumi Ando, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 08/31/2027
* USD 137,541.00

A major challenge in network communication is providing anonymity and privacy
without significant increase in latency and message complexity. While it is
known how to secure the contents of messages via proper encryption techniques,
it is less clear how to ensure that who is communicating with whom remains
private, too. Currently used anonymity technologies such as the Tor network
(used by millions daily) are practical but do not provide provable anonymity
guarantees; in fact, security researchers have demonstrated that Tor is
vulnerable to a type of Internet attack called traffic analysis. How to
guarantee anonymity without rendering current systems too impractical remains an
open question of high relevance to many widely used applications. This project
create and disseminates algorithms that implement rigorous and efficient
solutions to anonymous communication. The project also includes educational
initiatives at the graduate and undergraduate levels to build a bigger workforce
in the crucial area of privacy, security and computer science more generally.

This project addresses the fundamental challenge of guaranteeing anonymity in
network communications. Techniques for obscuring meta-information about who is
communicating with whom, when, and for how long inevitably involve increased
communication (e.g., by rerouting communication through intermediate nodes
and/or adding decoy messages). This in turn may lead to network congestion and
communication delays. Thus, a crucial question of both theoretical and practical
importance is to understand the trade-offs between security and message
complexity in network communications under various privacy measures and
adversarial models. A second challenge is to design provably secure and
efficient anonymous communication schemes in realistic communications scenarios,
such as node churn and iterative two-way communications. The team of researchers
will address these challenges along two facets: (1) Designing routing schemes so
that traffic patterns, possibly altered by malicious nodes, do not reveal any
metadata; and (2) Designing cryptographically secure tools (such as
cryptographic onions) to secure data even when the network participants
responsible for relaying it are potentially adversarial.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.