* 2312555
* BRC-BIO: Establishing Astrangia poculata as a study system to understand how multi-partner symbiotic interactions affect pathogen response in cnidarians
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Katherine Sharp, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2026
* USD 490,280.00

Many animals form complex associations with an assortment of microbial organisms
have significant effects on host health. This project aims to understand how
variability in host-microbe associations affects animal health, focusing
specifically on corals. The project uses Astrangia, a non-threatened relative of
endangered reef-building corals, as a model for understanding how coral-microbe
interactions impact disease response. Tropical corals, and their associated
coral reef ecosystems, are experiencing dramatic declines due to increasing
disease prevalence. The results of the proposed research will advance
understanding of how associations between corals and microbial organisms affect
disease resistance. The knowledge gathered can be applied to help direct coral
restoration efforts. Additionally, this project will provide training
opportunities for the development of students at a Hispanic serving institution.
A new summer research experience for students at Texas State University will be
created, and linked with existing summer programs at Roger Williams University
in Rhode Island. Each summer a cohort of 4-5 undergraduate students will engage
in project related research and reciprocal exchanges across the two
institutions. The program will create a community of undergraduate researchers
and provide support for their career development. The project will also support
two graduate students per year and the career development of an early career
researcher. This project is being cofunded by the BRC-BIO program and Biological
Oceanography (GEO).

Symbiotic associations are ubiquitous throughout nature and have significant
implications for host fitness. Still, understanding of the extent of natural
variation in these associations and the implications of this variation on host
disease resistance is limited. This project leverages a facultatively symbiotic
coral system (Astrangia poculata) to explore natural variation in multi-partner
symbioses (host, photosymbiont, microbiome) and the effects of this variation on
host response to pathogens. Specifically, the proposed project will 1)
investigate natural variation in coral multi-partner associations across
populations, focusing on variability in symbiont characteristics (microbiome
composition; algal symbiont density, genetics, and gene expression) and effects
of this variation on constitutive immunity; and 2) investigate whether this
variation is linked to differences in response to pathogens and disease
susceptibility. When examining natural variation, we will use integrative â€˜omics
techniques to elucidate how variability in each symbiotic partner affects the
others. Then, we will use experimental pathogen challenges to determine whether
observed variation in these associations influences pathogen response. We
predict that significant variation will exist in symbiotic associations across
sampled populations, and that this variation will have effects on pathogen
response and ultimately disease susceptibility. The proposed project will serve
as a significant contribution to the field of ecological immunology by advancing
understanding of how multi-partner symbioses drive health and resilience in
animal hosts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.