* 2312210
* Collaborative Research: Paleozoic echinoderms as model systems for the study of evolutionary modes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeanette Pirlo, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 296,211.00

Collaborative Research: Paleozoic echinoderms as model systems for the study of
evolutionary modes

Unraveling the drivers of evolution in the fossil record is critical for
understanding how organisms occupy new morphologic, ecologic, and geographic
spaces. This information, gleaned from the geologic past across climate
perturbations, is vital for understanding and predicting how evolution will
operate across the biodiversity and climate crises today. The research team will
focus on groups of ancient echinoderms, marine invertebrates (e.g., sea stars)
that were globally widespread through Earth’s history. This group is vastly
understudied and, as such, analyses conducted on the group will provide critical
insight into animal response to Earth systems perturbations. New organismal
forms appear through shifts in developmental timing, called heterochrony. What
is unclear is how shifts in climate, organism biogeography, and ecology affect
heterochronic shifts. This research uses a holistic approach via multiple
analyses, addressing changes in ecology, biogeography, and heterochrony through
extreme climate events that occurred hundreds of millions of years ago, to
explore aspects of organisms’ evolutionary history and long-term consequences.

Database, museum, and literature data will be used jointly within phylogenetic
frameworks to develop understanding of the evolutionary dynamics (i.e., changes
in rates of evolution, heterochrony, biogeography, ecology) of extinct
echinoderms. The chief merit of this research is the integration of multiple
variables within a phylogenetic context to quantitatively understand broader
patterns of evolution through abiotic change on Earth. This project will train
the next generation of museum curators, educators, and researchers, and provide
open-access information about echinoderms. Training will be conducted through
undergraduate summer workshops on museum research techniques. Open access
information about the echinoderm clades studied in this project will be
published on the Digital Atlas of Ancient Life’s paleontology open access
textbook. Echinoderm resources, created through this project and from previous
works, will be collated on a WikiProject into one central hub for current and
future echinoderm paleobiology researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.