* 2312680
* The effect of inorganic trace elements on dentin apatite
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Mohammad Ali Saghiri, RUTGERS, THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW JERSEY
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,930.00

Non-technical Abstract: Our teeth are made of hard tissues, including enamel and
dentin. Dentin is the part under the outer layer of enamel and is responsible
for the mechanical strength of teeth. Dentin is mostly composed of a compound
called hydroxyapatite, which consists of calcium, phosphate, and hydroxide ions.
Under specific conditions, the calcium ions in hydroxyapatite can be substituted
by other ions of similar size. These substitutions may impact hydroxyapatite's
mechanical and structural properties and, consequently, dentin. While similar
studies have been conducted on materials like enamel and bones, this research
focuses on dentin, which has yet to receive much attention thus far. The goal of
this study is to study how dentinal hydroxyapatite behaves in the presence of
different ionic solutions and if they improve its properties. Methods exploring
various structural and mechanical properties of hydroxyapatite will be employed
in this study. In conjunction with their research efforts, the principal
investigator proposes an educational initiative that involves developing a
curriculum on dental materials for undergraduate students and organizing
workshops and seminars for high school students. This foundational study can
have far-reaching broader impacts, as it can eventually lead to new
interventions that improve the strength of dentin, especially as hard tissues
may be compromised due to diseases such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis,
cardiovascular disease, and multiple sclerosis.

Technical Abstract: This research project aims to investigate the influence of
inorganic trace minerals (IoTM) on the structure and mechanical properties of
dentinal hydroxyapatite (HAp) while engaging in multiple education and outreach
activities for students at various education levels. The proposed project aims
to investigate the influence of IoTM, specifically Mn, Cu, and Li, on dentin's
structure and mechanical properties, a vital component of teeth. By employing a
multidisciplinary approach, combining materials science, biology, and
biochemistry, the team seeks to expand the understanding of how trace minerals
impact dentin's material properties. The research objectives of this study are
to answer the following questions: (1) How does IoTM (as measured in the dentin,
either occurring naturally or through extrinsic/intrinsic exposure) affect
dentin structure and, in turn, its mechanical properties? (2) What structural
properties drive the mechanical changes, and how do these changes vary according
to IoTM type (Mn, Cu, or Li) and exposure duration? These objectives will be
accomplished via advanced imaging and spectroscopy techniques using X-Ray
diffractometry, short/wide angle X-Ray scattering, inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry, and scanning electron microscope to study the IoTM
substitution in HAp, crystal properties, and lattice properties. The mechanical
properties, including the plastic parameters and solubility, will also be tested
to determine the IoTM exposure using human models. In addition to the scientific
research, this project incorporates important educational goals. It seeks to
promote interdisciplinary studies in dental material science, foster interest in
STEM fields among undergraduate students, and provide opportunities for
underrepresented minorities and women in STEM. The outcomes of this research can
facilitate the development of improved technologies and biomaterials, leading to
enhanced dental treatments for individuals with conditions impacting trace
mineral regulation. Simultaneously, it will contribute to scientific knowledge
in the field of mineralized tissues and promote STEM education initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.