* 2312573
* CCF: AF: Medium: Towards Optimal Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* David Zuckerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2026
* USD 721,202.00

For many problems, randomized algorithms offer significant speedups over known
algorithms that don’t use randomness. However, randomization introduces
uncertainty in the outcome of the algorithm, as there will be a small
probability of error. The purpose of this project is to explore when uncertainty
can be eliminated while maintaining speed. The project integrates education and
outreach, including mentoring of students, public lectures and popular science
writing.

The investigators will focus on two fundamental primitives in the study of
pseudorandomness: randomness extractors and pseudorandom generators. A
randomness extractor transforms low-quality randomness into high-quality
randomness. A pseudorandom generator converts a short random string into a long
``pseudorandom" string that is good enough for many purposes. These primitives
have had many applications far beyond their original purpose, including to
cryptography, coding theory, hardness of approximation, and data structures.
Previous work in this area mostly focused on polynomial time, without analyzing
the slowdowns more precisely. In this project, the investigators aim to improve
key parameters of randomness extractors and pseudorandom generators that will
enable minimal slowdowns when removing the randomness from algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.