* 2312395
* CSR: Medium: Attention-Driven Software Architecture for Integrated Perception and Planning in Autonomous Agents
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jay Farrell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2027
* USD 582,447.00

While significant progress has been made in developing autonomous systems,
effectively processing and making sense of vast amounts of sensor data in real
time remains a challenge, especially for small robotic agents with limited
computing capabilities. To address this problem, this project will create an
attention-driven software architecture that can identify and prioritize critical
information from sensors, enabling timely decision-making while considering
resource constraints and uncertainties in the environment. This architecture
will holistically optimize computation scheduling, perception, and planning by
adapting to the context and anticipate future actions. Three important advances
to be made in this project are: (1) context adaptive scheduling of autonomous
computation pipelines, (2) learning-based perception to anticipate future
actions in dynamic environments, and (3) motion planning and decision making
based on anticipated actions in the presence of uncertainty. By interrelating
these components through the attention-driven architecture, this project will
tackle fundamental challenges associated with time-sensitive scenarios in
resource-constrained autonomous systems.

This project will have broader impacts across various domains, including smart
agriculture, manufacturing, surveillance, and robotic delivery. The proposed
system-theoretic research will empower resource-constrained robotic agents with
safe, reliable, and real-time autonomous capabilities in rapidly changing
environments. The project plans to establish educational programs and engage
with industry partners to provide undergraduate research opportunities. By
actively involving the broader community and targeting underrepresented
students, this research will cultivate a talented and diverse workforce for the
future of autonomous systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.