* 2312599
* OAC Core: High Performance Computing Algorithms and Software for large-scale Mass Spectrometry based Omics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Fahad Saeed, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

High dimensional Mass Spectrometry (MS) based omics allows systematic analysis
of thousands of proteins with the promise of discovering new biomarkers for
various disease conditions and better understanding of human systems biology.
Meta-proteomics is also fundamental to studies of microorganisms in diverse
environments, and has significant effect on human, agriculture, aquatic,
terrestrial, energy, and atmospheric systems. In addition to advances in mass
spectrometry hardware, effective and scalable analysis of the complex data
produced by these high-throughput mass spectrometers requires increasingly
sophisticated computational tools. This project will design and develop high-
performance computational frameworks which will enable effective analysis of
omics data produced from mass spectrometry machines. The proposed high-
performance computing (HPC) techniques will enable identification of novel
peptides/proteins, and insights into microbiome communities and their effects on
human health, agriculture, and environments. The proposed research and teaching
activities will introduce students to high-performance computing, big data
computational biology, and data-intensive computing. The proposed work will also
train PhD students, including those at a Hispanic Serving Institution.

Millions of spectra generated from mass spectrometry machines are compared with
tera-scale theoretical database for peptide deductions. Currently, the bulk of
this deduction is accomplished using serial algorithms which may take weeks of
computational time for large databases. The overarching technical objective of
this study is to design, develop, and evaluate high performance computing (HPC)
infrastructure for a variety of heterogenous architectures. Such communication-
avoiding HPC algorithms that can run on heterogenous architectures will enable
scalable MS data analysis for non-model tera-scale databases against which MS
data is matched and is currently an insurmountable technical hurdle. The project
will focus on the design and development of: (1) CPU-GPU based method for
processing of large-scale MS-based omics with communication-avoiding parallel
pipelines; (2) methods for exploiting multiple GPUs on single node which is
extended to memory-distributed CPU-GPU nodes on supercomputing machines; (3)
hardware/software co-designs using CPU-FPGA architectures. This computational
infrastructure will allow scientists to use large heterogeneous supercomputers,
and the development of hardware/software designs will enable us to incorporate
semiconductor designs directly on mass spectrometry machines. The development of
such semiconductors designed for end-use application (of MS omics data) will
preserve US global economic competitiveness, and will accelerate urgently needed
personalized nutrition studies, human gut microbiome research, and cancer
therapeutics studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.