* 2312835
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium: Black-box Optimization of White-box Networks: Online Learning for Autonomous Resource Management in NextG Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xingyu Zhou, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Next-generation (NextG) wireless networks are anticipated to revolutionize
various applications, such as interactive real-time applications like Augmented
Reality (AR), while meeting the high Quality-of-Experience (QoE) requirements
expected by users. To achieve these goals, NextG networks are undergoing a
transformation toward a white-box architecture, characterized by openness,
intelligence, and a focus on user needs. Therefore, it is both timely and
important to address autonomous resource management within the NextG paradigm.
This project aims to facilitate the transition from traditional black-box
network designs to a white-box network architecture, which will significantly
reduce costs and enhance QoE performance at its core. The findings of this
project will be integrated into the curricula of all participating institutions.
Furthermore, this project is committed to promoting the engagement of women and
underrepresented minority (URM) students through research opportunities and
outreach activities at their respective institutions. Mechanisms will be
established to foster leadership and participation from URM groups in an annual
high-profile research workshop held at OSU.

O-RAN is an operator-driven alliance dedicated to the advancement of radio
access networks (RAN) toward an open architecture. This research focuses on
harnessing the advanced capabilities of O-RAN, with a specific emphasis on edge-
assisted low-latency AR as a key use case, to address autonomous resource
management in the NextG paradigm. The research employs a data-driven approach
across multiple time scales, using Bayesian optimization (BO) as a sample-
efficient online learning and black-box optimization tool. The research develops
versatile techniques and building blocks to optimize the QoE performance,
structured around three interconnected thrusts: (i) developing a provably
efficient multi-time-scale data-driven BO framework integrated with O-RAN, (ii)
achieving collaborative BO for multi-RAN learning and optimization, and (iii)
applying the developed BO frameworks to edge-assisted low-latency AR
applications. The research establishes the analytical foundations and
algorithmic frameworks that will be integrated with open-source full-stack O-RAN
implementations. The evaluation process involves simulations based on 3GPP
standards in ns-3, as well as collaborations with industry partners including
AT&T, Qualcomm, and Nokia Bell Labs. Real- world trace data and production-grade
O-RAN platforms will be leveraged for evaluation purposes. The outcomes of this
research not only contribute to advancing knowledge in machine-learning-enabled
NextG systems design but also address critical needs within the broader machine
learning and networking research communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.