* 2312305
* CAS-Climate: Workshop on Charting Net-Zero Carbon, Climate Resilient Transitions from Farms to Cities to National Scales: Learnings Across India and USA
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Anu Ramaswami, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,811.00

2312305 (Ramaswami). This two-day workshop, to take place in Delhi, India on
Jan. 17-18, 2023, will explore state-of-the-science and establish strategic
coproduction partnerships between scientists, policymakers, cities, and industry
in India and the US. The workshop will focus on multi- scale integration of
farm- and city-level operations with larger energy systems models for multi-
scale climate-resilient net-zero transition planning. Participants will compare
learnings from US and India and identify strategic collaborations. This workshop
will identify knowledge gaps and generate multi-scale models for climate-
resilient net-zero transitions, linking farm- and urban-level actions with
larger macro energy systems models. Participants will compare and contrast
engineering and technology strategies across India and the US on distributed
energy systems, circular economy transitions leveraging urban- rural
interactions, novel construction materials, and farm-level innovations.

By bringing together scientists from the US and India with policymakers, local
leaders, NGOs, and industry leaders, this workshop will facilitate generation of
partnerships and scientific exchange that can help address key knowledge gaps
and future collaborative work. This workshop is being organized in consultation
and collaboration with the Science & Technology Counsellor of the Indian Embassy
in Washington D.C., and the opening keynote is expected to be given by Dr. Ajay
Sood, who is Principal Science Advisor to the Government of India. Meetings of
scientists with practitioners and policymakers across broad sectors and scales
will contribute to learnings about practical considerations in mapping zero-
carbon transitions and comparing US and India pathways. The workshop is expected
to launch long-term Indo-US research collaboration and knowledge co-production
partnerships that will provide data, modeling, and analysis of strategies to
achieve decarbonization that are sustainable, climate resilient, and equitable.
Creating these successful partnerships will have a large impact because India’s
population represents approximately 20% of the world’s population, and United
States greenhouse gas emissions represent approximately 20% of worldwide
emissions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.