* 2312321
* SHF: Small: Resilient Operations for Deployment Units Used in Container Orchestration
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Akond Ashfaque Rahman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 553,295.00

In Software Engineering, a Container is a self-contained package of software
that includes all of the necessary elements to run in any environment. To deploy
software rapidly to customers, organizations use container orchestration.
Container orchestration is the practice of pragmatically managing containers at
scale, where hundreds of containers, i.e., lightweight computer virtualization
tools, can be automatically provisioned and managed. Container orchestration is
expected to reach USD 1.3 billion worth of market value by 2026. While this
practice has yielded benefits, resiliency for container orchestration remains a
challenge for organizations. Without resilient implementation of container
orchestration, deployed software becomes unreliable, creating large-scale
consequences for organizations and their customers. As certain characteristics
are unique to container orchestration, foundational scientific research
investigations are necessary. Execution of these research investigations will
yield new scientific evidence, generate novel techniques unique to container
orchestration, and advance the state of software engineering research. All
software generated from the project will be publicly available to industry
practitioners, research software engineers, and academics for usage. Datasets
generated from the project will be beneficial to the entire software engineering
community to conduct further research. The project will also foster broadening
of participation in STEM by pro-actively involving students from under-
represented groups. Through dissemination of generated research into graduate
and undergraduate courses, students will gain knowledge on resilient container
orchestration, which will directly contribute to the nation's ongoing efforts in
developing a knowledgeable cyber infrastructure workforce, emphasized by the
U.S. National Strategic Computing Initiative.

This project will conduct research activities to investigate how to integrate
resiliency into the practice of container orchestration. The focus of this
project is to grow the science of resilient operations for deployment units,
which are pivotal to perform container orchestration. This project will execute
two tasks: (i) resilient provisioning of deployment units through detection of
discrepant states and resilient volume management, and (ii) resilient routing of
traffic between deployment units through detection of firewall and zonal
discrepancies. This project will identify root causes of deployment, volume, and
zonal discrepancies that are unique to container orchestration.

This project is jointly funded by CISE Software and Hardware Foundations program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.