* 2312319
* CPS: Medium: Making Every Drop Count: Accounting for Spatiotemporal Variability of Water Needs for Proactive Scheduling of Variable Rate Irrigation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,199,846.00

We all depend on agriculture for sustenance. When compared to seafood and
livestock, cropping systems provide the primary source of nutrition. Yields and
productivity of cropping systems must grow to meet the demands of a growing
population. Once seeds are available, a successful cropping season is determined
by water. There are two sources for this: irrigation and precipitation.
Irrigation water is a major input to agriculture, especially in semi-arid and
arid regions. In a recent appraisal for the Soil and Water Resources
Conservation Act, the USDA identified irrigation water conservation as a
national need. Under-watering induces stresses and adversely impacts both crop
growth and yields. Over-watering, on the other hand, leads to nutrient runoff,
soil erosion, and water waste. Farms are also impacted by the adverse effects of
droughts, variability in precipitation, and lengthening of the growing season.
The proposed effort with its emphasis on water management and conservation
represents an adaptation to the head winds often encountered at farms. The
effort addresses the interrelated aspects of over-watering (soil erosion and
nutrient runoff) and underwatering (adverse crop yields and stress) while
ensuring sustainability and profitability of agricultural systems.

The overarching objective of this project is to develop an end-to-end cyber-
physical intelligence system that forecasts space-time crop water needs in a
given field and implements variable rate irrigation strategies to optimize crop
yield throughout the field. We instrument the field with a limited number of in-
situ soil moisture content sensors; these in situ observations are complemented
with remotely sensed data from radars and satellites. The effort includes design
of novel AI (Artificial Intelligence) methods based on deep neural networks
(DNN) to generate forecasts of water needs. These DNNs operate on multimodal,
high-dimensional data to identify soil moisture deficits and variability in
different parts of the field. The generated forecasts account for crop, soil
type, precipitation events, and the crop growing phase. The project closes the
loop between the sensing environment and actuation within the AI-guided cyber
physical system. These projections are leveraged within a game theory based
algorithm to inform precise actuations of the watering arm with prescription
plans that control watering rates at the nozzle and zone level. The algorithm is
adaptive and responsive to precipitation events, uncertainty in the forecasts,
and the actuation overheads. This multifaceted research advances the science of
cyber-physical systems by innovatively combining sensing environments,
algorithmic game theory, scientific models and domain-science, and AI/DNNs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.