* 2312302
* Collaborative Research: Linking carbon preferences and competition to predict and test patterns of functional diversity in soil microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Rafael D'Andrea, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2025
* USD 199,998.00

This project will develop theory to understand the connections between
biodiversity and competition for limiting resources. Competition is an important
interaction among all living organisms. For example, plants compete with other
plants for light and nutrient resources, while animals compete for food and
territories. Because resources are limited, competition is unavoidable. This
limitation constrains the ability of species to coexist together, so scientists
seeking to understand biodiversity must also understand competition. Competition
theory suggests that competing species can only coexist by specializing on
different resources. However, this cannot explain the existence of diverse
communities where species outnumber the resources. This project will explore the
theoretical possibility that species in diverse communities may successfully
share resources. The project will develop theory to test if coexistence occurs
when communities contain clusters of species with highly similar traits but high
dissimilarity among clusters. The focus will be on soil microbial communities,
which are among the most diverse on Earth. Soil microbes compete for carbon
molecules, which are their main source of energy and biomass. The research will
quantify how these interactions affect those microbes’ ability to coexist. Given
the important role that microbes play in nutrient cycling and the likely impacts
that temperature changes have on competitive relationships, this research will
allow ecologists to predict the consequences of accelerated environmental
change. Additionally, this project will train and mentor graduate and
undergraduate students and produce an interactive online app where students will
learn how competition among individuals creates patterns of biodiversity at the
community scale.

The research builds on existing consumer-resource microbial models to develop a
trait-based multispecies competition model for soil bacteria. The model will
assume that carbon sources have natural inflow and degradation rates while
microbe populations grow from immigration and temperature-dependent resource
uptake and have a fixed mortality rate. Each species will have its own
repertoire of usable carbon sources and, as it uptakes those resources, produces
byproducts which may be part of other species’ repertoires (cross-feeding). The
approaches include computer simulations, statistical inference, and clustering
analysis in high-dimensional spaces. The central hypotheses that will be tested
are a) competitive dynamics coupled with dispersal leads to the spontaneous
emergence of several co-occurring consortia of species, such that species in the
same cluster have high overlap in carbon preferences, whereas species in
different clusters have low overlap in carbon preferences; b) environmental
conditions and dispersal regimes determine the number and species composition of
the clusters. These hypotheses are supported by results showing that competition
is an important process in microbial communities and by the observation of
analogous clustering patterns in competition-driven communities of animals,
plants, and phytoplankton.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.