* 2312502
* Collaborative Research: III: Medium: VirtualLab: Integrating Deep Graph Learning and Causal Inference for Multi-Agent Dynamical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Carl Yang, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Many real-world domains, spanning physical systems, social systems, brain
networks, and epidemic networks, can be conceptualized as multi-agent dynamic
systems, wherein different agents interact with each other and progress
according to specific dynamics. Understanding and modeling these systems can
enhance our comprehension of their underlying mechanisms, allowing us to make
more accurate long-term predictions and better-informed decisions, with or
without interventions. Despite extensive study of multi-agent dynamical systems
in specific domains, there is currently no general solution available, and even
the most knowledgeable experts may struggle to describe them mathematically. The
proposed VIRTUALLAB framework aims to create a virtual lab capable of learning
system dynamics from observed data, predicting future agent trajectories, and
accurately forecasting potential system outcomes under a range of interventions.
This project will facilitate the rapid adoption of AI techniques in different
domains, promoting the digital revolution and the use of AI for healthcare,
science, and public policy. The investigators plan to incorporate educational
activities into the research, offering students exciting opportunities to apply
AI and ML in various domains such as biomedical research, material science, and
public health. They will also widely disseminate their findings through
publications, tutorials at various conferences, and collaborations with domain
experts.

The project has identified several limitations in existing approaches to
modeling and predicting multi-agent dynamical systems. Firstly, approaches are
often domain specific, and there is a lack of general methodology to address the
full range of dynamical systems. Secondly, most dynamical systems are defined by
complex ordinary or partial differential equations that can be difficult or even
impossible to devise. Thirdly, making predictions can be very time-consuming and
may not be applicable to large-scale systems. Lastly, very little work has
addressed the problem of causal inference in multi-agent systems. The VIRTUALLAB
framework is designed to be transformative and address these challenges.
Firstly, it will provide general solutions to model multi-agent dynamical
systems across a broad spectrum of applications, where the dynamics can be
learned from incomplete and irregular observational data from the same or
related systems. This will involve addressing several challenges, such as
modeling continuous dynamics from incomplete signals, designing models that
capture high-order nonlinear dynamics, generalizing learned dynamics to new
systems with few observations, and scaling models to handle large-scale systems
and make training and inference efficient for real-world systems. Secondly,
VIRTUALLAB will provide accurate predictions of potential outcomes after an
intervention, either at the node or system level, by leveraging offline data.
Doing so will involve handling both system- and node-level intervention and
continuous-time dynamic intervention, rather than static intervention that may
occur in the future. Lastly, the project will test and evaluate the proposed
framework using several use cases, including functional brain networks,
molecular dynamics, and epidemic dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.