* 2312667
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Medium: Fundamental Limits of Privacy-Enhancing Technologies
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Flavio Calmon, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2027
* USD 225,441.00

Balancing the preservation of individual privacy and the utility of aggregate
data for societal benefit is crucial in the modern data-driven world. In fields
such as healthcare, education, and resource allocation, the responsible use of
personal data can bring transformative changes and fuel the development of
privacy- and fairness-guaranteed machine learning and artificial intelligence
algorithms. This project aims to improve privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs)
that uphold individual privacy while allowing comprehensive data analysis. The
research will result in new methods that optimize PETs for privacy while
minimizing their hidden and apparent costs, such as distortion and bias.
Moreover, this project will also develop new methods for generating synthetic
yet realistic data with privacy safeguards. Ultimately, this research will
result in PETs that are more private, accurate, and fair. In practice, these
improvements can impact a range of machine learning applications in industry,
healthcare, and government. The project also promotes inclusivity by engaging
diverse students through research internships and STEM events.

The research is divided into four interconnected areas, each tackling a distinct
aspect of PETs that ensure differential privacy (DP). The first area develops
optimal privacy mechanisms, specifically for applications that require a large
number of data processing steps, such as gradient descent-based training
algorithms used in machine learning. The second area of focus is enhancing
privacy accounting, aiming to derive accurate and computationally tractable
methods that track DP guarantees using tools from information theory. The third
area assesses the costs of privacy, scrutinizing not just the impact of DP on
accuracy, but also fairness and arbitrariness in machine learning models trained
with DP-ensuring algorithms. The final focus is on generating realistic
synthetic data, which, while maintaining privacy, can be used for various
statistical tasks. The project employs a diverse range of techniques from
information theory, optimization, mathematical physics, and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.