* 2312370
* WORKSHOP: The Future of Interfaces and Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Gregg Vanderheiden, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,757.00

Next-next generation interfaces and the technologies that will drive them
provide new challenges to accessibility, as well as new tools for addressing
these barriers. These new technologies can also help us address barriers that
some people face with today’s technologies – barriers that we currently do not
have good solutions for. This is particularly true for cognitive, language, and
learning disabilities, deaf-blindness, blindness and intellectual impairments
and other combinations of disabilities. Despite successes, it has become
apparent that this work needs a new paradigm. Thus, this workshop aims to gather
and engage mainstream and disability leaders and innovators in their fields to:
a) Thoroughly explore all visions for the future of the interface; b) Gather all
different thoughts, approaches, and paradigms from the best in the international
accessibility community; and c) Create both mainstream and accessibility
research agendas that can result in solutions for next-next generation interface
technologies, to be available when these technologies enter the marketplace
instead of five years or more behind them. As a byproduct of the workshop, a
special website will be created, capturing all of the presentations, preparatory
materials, and the final research agenda. The impact on society of more
accessible product interfaces cannot be easily measured, but with the new
estimates of a fifth to a quarter of the population having disabilities, and the
increasing reliance on digital interfaces in everything we do, even in
developing countries, the impact of more accessible interfaces will be quite
significant, both to economies and to quality of life for large sectors of the
population.

This workshop will bring together leaders in mainstream human computer
interaction and supporting technologies to help predict the future interface, as
well as the best minds in accessibility to help imagine new approaches and
methods to address these technologies. The result of just these two activities
would be of great value to the field. The creation of both a mainstream
technology and an accessibility research agenda will be of even more immediate
and long-term use to academic researchers and students, and to developers in
companies interested in practical ways to make their future product interfaces
accessible. It will also be useful to consumer groups, funding agencies, policy
makers, assistive technology developers, and independent researchers and
developers in shaping their future work, agendas, and goals. The resulting
research agenda is intended to be a living agenda that is updated over time and
used by the broad range of stakeholders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.