* 2312222
* Computational Methods for Ensemble Averaged Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Lasse Jensen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 169,268.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Lasse Jensen of Pennsylvania State
University will develop new theoretical methods to describe ensemble averaged
surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). SERS is a powerful technique that can
be used to obtain detailed information about chemical reactions and the
orientation of molecules on surfaces. Modeling is important to obtain this
information but remains difficult due to the complicated interface and the need
to average over many different molecular orientations. Professor Lasse Jensen
and his team will develop new computational tools to describe this spectroscopy
that will be disseminated to the broad scientific community through
incorporation into available computational chemistry software packages. Using
interactive simulators, Dr. Jensen will educate students on nano-concepts,
machine learning and fundamental theory; and emphasize the interplay between
theory and experiments.

In this project, the Jensen team at Pennsylvania State University will develop a
multiscale model that goes beyond the harmonic approximation and allows for
sampling over molecular configurations such that ensemble averaged surface-
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) can be modeled. The proposed research will
provide new theoretical tools for fundamental understanding of dynamics and
orientation of molecules on nanoparticle surfaces for characterizing of
interfaces of relevance for heterogeneous catalysis, photovoltaics, and
molecular sensing. The combination of a machine-learning approach with an
efficient multiscale model is expected to enable simulations of ensemble-
averaged SERS spectra that include both electromagnetic and chemical enhancement
mechanisms. The developed computational tools will be disseminated to a broad
scientific community through incorporation into software packages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.