* 2312559
* Understanding Thermal Transport Properties in Electrically Conductive Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yanfei Xu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2026
* USD 452,125.00

Electrically conductive polymers have revolutionized modern devices, enabling
advancements in plastic solar cells, electronics, and thermoelectric devices.
The performance of these devices is linked to how heat is dissipated through
conduction or how heat is trapped through insulation. This project aims to
investigate how thermal transport properties in electrically conductive polymers
are affected by charge carriers and polymer backbone structures. By enhancing
our fundamental understanding of thermal transport in polymers, this project
will provide valuable new knowledge and new practical strategies to design high-
efficiency polymer-based devices. By providing research opportunities to
underrepresented minority communities and promoting the diversity of the
renewable energy field, this project will also educate K-12 and undergraduate
students with hands-on renewable thermal energy harvesting projects, creating
the next generation of engineers and scientists in energy technologies.

Understanding thermal transport physics in polymers has been a long-standing
challenge. Existing theories and simulations do not quantitatively describe
thermal conductivity enhancement (or reduction) in polymers. The overarching
goal of this project is to elucidate how charge carriers (polarons and
bipolarons) and structural parameters (short-range positional orders,
orientational orders, and chain conformations) quantitively affect thermal
conductivities along (and across) chain directions, which are the missing pieces
in providing a microscopic picture of heat conduction in electrically conductive
polymers. This project will study temperature-dependent thermal conductivities,
heat capacities, electrical conductivities, and Seebeck coefficients through
state-of-the-art techniques including a transient frequency-domain
thermoreflectance. To tune the thermal conductivities predictively, thiophene-
based conjugated polymers with precisely controlled doping levels, tuned charge
carrier densities, and tailored chain structures will be designed and
synthesized by electrochemical doping engineering. This project will not only
create insights into thermal transport processes in electrically conductive
polymers, but also provide transformative opportunities to develop novel
electronic devices based on the interaction of microscopic energy carriers. As a
model polymer, poly(3-alkylthiophene) conjugated polymer that is widely used for
organic electronics, including field-effect transistors and solar cells, with
controllable thermal conductivity will offer unique opportunities for improved
efficiency. The broader technical impacts of this work include new strategies
for better thermal management applications such as organic light-emitting diodes
(OLEDs) without overheating issues. The education plan will promote diversity
and inclusion of all groups in engineering workforce, including women and
individuals from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.