* 2312710
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Medium:  Large Scale Analysis of Configurations and Management Practices in the Domain Name System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joel Sommers, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This project will build a broad and fundamental body of knowledge on the
characteristics of configurations and management practices used in the operation
of the Internet’s Domain Name System (DNS). Large public datasets will be used
to analyze and statistically model the DNS contents. Graph-based analysis will
be used to characterize and quantify activities performed by registrars and
domain operators. Tools will be developed for the research community to support
machine learning applications for the DNS, anomaly detection in the DNS, and a
“DNS Workbench” enabling synthetic DNS workload generation for simulation and
laboratory-based research on DNS configuration, management and performance.

This project consists of two complementary components. The scientific component
will focus on empirical characterization of the DNS as a whole and in parts by
developing and applying techniques from graph theory, statistics and machine
learning. The engineering component will use findings from the empirical
analysis to identify operational practices, to inform investigation of tools and
to drive new insights about how the DNS is used in practice. The project will
deliver new insights about how the DNS can be improved as well as new tools for
deriving and replicating those insights.

This project will contribute a deeper understanding of what is usual, and what
is unusual, with respect to the contents of the DNS. New techniques and findings
from this project will lead to a more robust, manageable, and better performing
DNS, which has potential to positively impact society as a whole. New materials
for networking and data science courses will be developed based on our research.
The students who work on the project will receive guidance and mentorship.
Research results will be disseminated by publishing in respected academic
conferences and workshops, and all software and data artifacts will be made
available to the community.

The project webpage will be hosted at https://macro-dns.github.io The webpage
will include an overview of the project, project participants, updates on latest
results and publications. It will also include all software and data artifacts
developed during the project. The webpage and associated repositories will be
available on github on an on-going basis after the conclusion of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.