* 2312226
* BRC-BIO A trait-based approach to determine fungal responses to global change drivers
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Adriana Romero-Olivares, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2026
* USD 470,999.00

This project will study how climate change affects soil fungi. Soil fungi are
important for the well-being of ecosystems. For example, plants and animals
would not exist without fungi because fungi provide critical resources while
also carrying out important processes like recycling of organic matter. Because
of how important they are, it is crucial to understand how global climate change
is affecting them, and how that in turn, can affect the recycling of organic
matter and the emissions of greenhouse gases. However, studying fungi has been
difficult because fungi are very complicated and finding ways to study them has
been difficult. This research is important because it examines ecological
traits, like how fast fungi can grow, that will allow tests of how fungi are
responding to global climate change. This will advance scientific knowledge
needed to predict how ecosystems will look under global climate change and how
that will affect the recycling of organic matter and the emission of greenhouse
gases. Consequently, this project will help with the development of ideas and
plans to mitigate the effects of global climate change. In addition, the
research will involve undergraduate and graduate students in research by
providing hands-on experiences and individualized mentoring to a diverse group
of students.

This research develops a trait-based approach to determine fungal responses to
global change drivers. It has three objectives. The first is the creation of a
trait-based framework using microbiology-based techniques combined with
sophisticated molecular tools to obtain insight on how fungi are responding to
global climate change and the extent of their response. The expectation is that
fungal species will respond differently to global change drivers and that
specific functional categories will withstand global change drivers better than
others as predicted by their traits. The second objective is to test the
predictive strength and accuracy of the trait-based framework under controlled
laboratory conditions using mock fungal communities in microcosms. The expected
outcome is that there will be an increase in the abundance of fungi that are
stress tolerators as compared to non-stress tolerators when they are grown under
stressful conditions; this trend is predicted to become stronger as the
experiment progresses in time. The last objective will test the trait-based
framework using global change field experiments that mimic predicted conditions
in ecosystems to determine the generality of the framework in modeling and
predicting how fungal communities will respond to climate change.

This project is jointly funded by the Building Research Capacity of New Faculty
in Biology program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Population & Community Ecology program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.