* 2312753
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Designing Plotkin Transform Codes via Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Pramod Viswanath, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Reliable communication, enabled by codes, is a primary workhorse of the
information age. Successful code design (e.g., convolutional codes, Turbo codes,
low-density parity-check codes, and polar codes ) is sporadic and largely a
product of individual human ingenuity, although the impact on humanity is
enormous -- every cellphone designed uses one of these codes. In this project,
we bring the tools of machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) to better
decode existing codes and invent new code families, speeding up the code design
process. The project also includes open-source code releases, graduate student
mentoring, and outreach efforts to broaden participation in the field. This
project investigates a family of codes called Plotkin Transform (PT) codes,
which include Reed-Muller and polar codes as special cases (both are capacity
achieving and polar codes are used in the 5G global cellular standard). Although
Reed-Muller codes and polar codes were invented entirely independently (and six
decades apart in time), PT codes provide a common framework design via the
computation tree of the Kronecker Operation central to Reed-Muller and polar
codes. This project exploits the PT code framework to explore the underlying
design structures that enable good encoding and decoding properties via the
tools of ML and DL to systematically generalize the family of PT codes by
nonlinear parameterizations; data-driven methods allow us to explore the space
of parameters via optimization techniques, such as gradient descent. The overall
goal is to invent new codes within the generalized nonlinear PT code family as
well as new decoder algorithms for both the standardized Reed-Muller and polar
codes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.