* 2312983
* Resolving the drivers of variation in cooperative social groups along environmental gradients
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daizaburo Shizuka, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 06/30/2026
* USD 812,181.00

Environmental variation is thought to affect the evolution of cooperative social
groups in nature, but it is not always clear why. Social groups may help
individuals buffer the effects of environmental challenges in some species,
while other groups may form because benign environments allow individuals to
tolerate each other when there are enough resources to go around. This project
makes use of within-species variation in social groups of Australian birds
across environmental gradients to better understand the relationship between
environment and social groups, and how differences between species in these
relationships relate to their underlying cooperative social behavior. By
integrating theory, citizen science, and detailed field experiments, this
project will reveal how and why some species confront environmental challenges
by helping each other in groups, while other species confront the same
challenges by breaking those groups apart. The project will use social media
platforms to engage participants, addressing their questions and sharing
research outcomes. This will allow participants to be directly involved in the
direction of future research, a key way to link the experience of participating
in citizen science projects with learning. Further, the data generated from this
study will be used in K-12 classrooms to help students understand topics both
related to and beyond biology by linking trait variation to the environment and
geographic space through a partnership with Galactic Polymath Education Studio.

This project develops an ecogeographic approach to understand the processes that
generate within- and across-species variation in structure of cooperative social
groups across environmental gradients. Such an integration of ecogeographic
patterns across two levels of biological organization will provide new
information about how cooperative groups evolve. This approach can
simultaneously address whether social systems respond to environmental gradients
and why species may respond differently from one another. This will be
accomplished through three aims: 1) developing a theoretical framework for
understanding how environmental effects on social dynamics may generate
variation in group structure across environmental gradients, 2) examining
ecogeographic patterns in social groups size across several species through the
use a cross-continental citizen science dataset on Australian fairywrens (Aves,
Maluridae), and 3) explicitly linking disparate patterns of variation to changes
in fitness and behavior through observational and experimental studies in two
specific species . This work will extend social evolution theory on group
conflict to predict the consequences for group size and behavior along
environmental gradients. Additionally, use of citizen science data on within-
species variation in social systems will address how interacting factors, such
as temperature, rainfall, or land use might decouple patterns of environment-
group size variation. Finally planned field experiments will allow the testing
of the role of social conflict in generating such patterns. This proposed method
of integrating intraspecific and interspecific patterns will contribute to
further development of ecogeographic theory generally.

This project is jointly funded by the Behavioral Systems Cluster (BSC) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.