* 2312325
* Collaborative Research: Integrated experiments and simulations to understand the mechanism and consequences of polymer adsorption in films and nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Rodney Priestley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,001.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

From lightweight materials to flexible solar panels, the materials opening the
door to tomorrow’s technologies frequently exhibit “nanostructure”: they are
comprised of two finely intermixed domains only hundreds to thousands of atoms
across. In many cases, one of these domains consists of polymers, which are long
chains of molecules that plastics, rubber, and many biological materials are
made of. In parallel, the second domain often consists of tiny inorganic
nanoparticles – rigid regions that can dramatically enhance the polymers’
properties. Over the past decade, scientists have found evidence that something
strange happens at the interfaces between these domains: the polymer molecules
become tightly ‘glued’ to the particles at the molecular level. This process,
known as “irreversible adsorption”, seems to dramatically alter these materials’
properties, with the potential to imbue tolerance of higher temperatures, to
alter permeability, and perhaps to enhance mechanical strength. However, the
cause of this effect – or even why it should occur at all – remains unknown.
Even more practically, there is little understanding of how to control this
irreversible adsorption phenomenon in order to obtain the best possible
properties for next-generation materials.

This collaborative project (co-supported by the Polymers Program and the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials
Research) will combine experiments and computer simulations to understand why
this adsorption effect occurs and how scientists and engineers can control it to
optimize material properties. Experiments will employ a nanoscale
characterization method wherein fluorescent probe molecules, localized to the
nanoscale domain near the interface, report on the properties of the adsorbed
layer and how it forms. Molecular simulations performed on supercomputers will
zoom in to the molecular scale to understand how molecules move and evolve
during irreversible adsorption, making it possible to link changes in material
properties with underlying causes in molecular structure and motion. Together,
these approaches aim to provide the fundamental scientific understanding needed
to enable more rational engineering and design of these materials, with
relevance to economic sectors ranging from infrastructure to energy. This
research will be coupled with a new high-school internship program that will
support broadening the pipeline of students moving into STEM professions.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

In polymer films and nanocomposites, the formation of an irreversibly adsorbed
layer from the polymer melt can dramatically alter the properties of the
interfacial domains that dominate the overall properties of these materials.
Unlike in polymer adsorption from solution, which is driven by a combination of
an energetic mismatch and an entropic size asymmetry between solvent and
polymer, the thermodynamic mechanism of adsorption from the melt (where these
factors are absent) remains unresolved. Moreover, numerous properties are
reported to co-evolve during adsorption, challenging the development of a theory
of adsorption accounting for all of them. A central challenge has been the
difficulty of probing the evolution of near-substrate and near-particle
properties in a temporally and spatially resolved manner during adsorbed layer
formation. To overcome these challenges, this work will employ fluorescence
experiments to locally probe the evolution of multiple properties near
substrates and particles during adsorption. These experiments will be combined
with molecular dynamics simulations that will provide spatially resolved insight
into how segmental packing, chain conformations, and polymer dynamics co-evolve
during adsorbed layer formation. Synergistic experiments and simulations will
take an integrated approach to systematically probe the layer formation process,
the behavior of isolated adsorbed layers, and the ultimate impact of the
adsorbed layer presence on material properties, all across a matrix of key
controlling variables. This strategy will establish an understanding of how
multiple mechanisms may interact to drive adsorbed layer formation and mediate
its impact on polymer properties. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.