* 2312846
* Conference: Experimental Combustion: Past, Present, and Future -- International Combustion Institute Summer School (CI-SS) 2023
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Yu-Chien Chien, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This award is to provide support for students to attend the University of
California, Irvine intensive combustion summer school. As part of this UCI
Combustion Institute Summer School (UCI CI-SS), graduate students will be
exposed to comprehensive curriculum that includes both professional lectures in
classrooms and in laboratory environment. The UCI CI-SS is targeted to follow
the best practices for diversity and inclusiveness from the summer school
participants and lecturers, particularly selecting well-established experts in
the field from traditionally underrepresented minorities as role models. The
summer school is designed to provide significant opportunity for participants to
interact with their peers within the five-day long residential program. The
program consists primarily of eight distinguished professional lectures covering
from existing methods to those being developed for future applications. The
tentative program will be held from August 20 through 25, 2023.

The UC Irvine Summer School (UCI CI-SS) offers the opportunity to bridge not
only the combustion science from past to present but also extends beyond the
known conventional approaches. The UCI CI-SS includes three critical
distinguishing features comprising: (1) a detailed introduction to experimental
combustion methods to better understand combustion physics, (2) state-of-the art
combustion diagnostics through hands on experimentation, and (3) uncertainty
quantification and comparison with numerical predictions. A true commitment to
access, diversity, equity, and inclusion (ADEI) aspects will be followed
throughout the course.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.