* 2313121
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Southern Ocean Sea Surface Temperatures and Freshening during the Late Pliocene and Pleistocene along the Antarctic Margin
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Melissa Berke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2027
* USD 345,558.00

Non-technical: As Antarctica’s ice sheets melt, freshwater enters the ocean,
which can increase sea ice cover adjacent to the ice sheet. Sea ice formation
changes the density of sea water thus regulating the circulation of water
throughout the global ocean. Sea ice expansion may also slow down the processes
driving ice sheet melt. This research will examine the relationship between
surface ocean cooling and ocean freshening from geological records recovered
adjacent, as well as farther seaward from the ice margin. These records will
provide key information regarding the role in sea ice expansion during the
process of deglaciation. The geological records span time intervals when climate
conditions were similar to predicted future warming scenarios. Therefore, these
new records will provide perspective on what the consequences of an ice sheet
melting and surface ocean freshening might be in the near-term (<100 years) and
long-term (>100-years) future.

Technical Description: Ocean warming and Antarctic ice mass loss over the last
few decades has resulted in surface freshening in the Ross Sea sector of the
Southern Ocean. Surface ocean freshening is linked to sea ice expansion, which
has an important role in regulating global ocean circulation and is hypothesized
to be a negative climate feedback slowing ice retreat. The forcings and
feedbacks involved in Southern Ocean warming, ice shelf melt, surface ocean
freshening, sea ice growth, and deep water formation remain poorly understood
due to the short-term nature of instrumental records. The objective of this
research program is to: (1) generate multi-proxy Plio-Pleistocene sea surface
temperature and meltwater records in ice-proximal and ice-marginal settings
during deglacial and interglacial intervals from archived sediment cores of
ANDRILL AND-1B as well as International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) U1524,
and (2) examine the external forcing mechanisms and orbital pacing of sea
surface temperature and meltwater variability during the Plio-Pleistocene.
Results from this project aim to better understand ocean-ice sheet driven
dynamics under varying climate scenarios of the most recent geological past.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.