* 2313746
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Analysis and Simulation of Biofilm Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ying Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2025
* USD 132,497.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Once thought to live as solitary units, bacteria are now
known to communicate with each other and live in lively microbial communities
called biofilms. Biofilms can cause severe problems, including medical
infections, fouling, and clogging in industrial applications. In contrast,
biofilms play beneficial roles in wastewater treatment and microbial fuel cells.
Scientists have been able to characterize the chemical components of biofilms
but donâ€™t know yet how an active, self-renewable, and self-healing material
emerges from these components and their interactions. How can scientists use
their vast knowledge of man-made polymers to understand these natural polymers?
Are there new physical mechanisms to be discovered in the way bacteria build
their biofilm communities? To answer these questions, this project aims to
reveal the secrets of how biofilms derive mechanical properties from their
individual components by integrating state-of-the-art mechanical measurement,
single-cell imaging, and computer simulations. Through these fundamental
studies, scientists can design better strategies that either eliminate harmful
biofilms or use beneficial biofilms to create useful structures. By integrating
multiple disciplines, this project will train a diverse group of students in the
areas of biology, physics, materials science, and engineering, and prepare them
for the next-generation workforce. The educational objectives of the project
will be realized through curriculum development, undergraduate research
opportunities, and K-12 outreach programs, with special efforts to involve
underrepresented students.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Biofilms are surface-attached communities of bacteria embedded
in a matrix made of extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs). The overarching
goal of this project is to integrate state-of-the-art mechanical measurement,
single-cell imaging, mutagenesis, computer simulations, and soft matter theory
to address how, at different time and length scales, bacterial cells build
communities with emerging mechanical properties. Specifically, the three
research objectives are to (i) establish EPS as associative polymers crosslinked
by matrix proteins, (ii) reveal the contribution of bacterial cells to biofilm
mechanics, and (iii) measure the development of biofilm mechanics and
heterogeneity at the single-cell level. These objectives are accomplished via
experiments involving rheological testing, high-resolution imaging, protein
biochemistry, bacterial genetics, and multiscale modeling. The broader impacts
of this work are to help produce a diverse STEM-capable workforce by
incorporating central concepts addressed in this project into education and
outreach activities that expose and engage students in biology, materials
science, physics, and engineering. The education and outreach activities center
on the following three objectives: (i) expanding the Pathways to Science program
for local high school students, (ii) incorporating research findings into the
curriculum for both undergraduate and graduate courses, and (iii) providing
research experiences to underrepresented minority students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.