* 2313213
* I-Corps: Novel Aligned Carbon Nanotube Arrays for Radiofrequency Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Michael Arnold, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new semiconductor material platform based on carbon nanotubes
that has enormous potential to comprehensively address challenges related to
wireless radio frequency communication and connectedness. Carbon nanotubes have
long been viewed as a potential next-generation semiconductor that offers large
performance and integration gains for radio frequency components, particularly
in switches and devices that receive and amplify weak radio frequency signals.
These components are heavily used in nearly every cell phone, WiFi, internet-of-
things, and military communications device. Higher signal-to-noise, more complex
and efficient antenna technologies, higher operating frequency with less signal
distortion than incumbent semiconductors, and better integration are all
expected, which will be essential for enabling faster and more energy efficient
NextG technologies. With further development, carbon nanotubes will be poised to
become the semiconducting material of choice in many mainstream electronic
technologies, significantly disrupting the microelectronics and radio frequency
industries in the US and worldwide.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of methods for the precise
deposition and alignment of semiconducting carbon nanotubes to leverage their
exceptional properties for electronic applications. This carbon nanotube
alignment technology overcomes persistent decades-long challenges (e.g., lack of
alignment, metallic nanotube impurities, low nanotube packing densities) that
have prevented the adoption of nanotubes for semiconductor radio frequency
components and other electronic device applications. The alignment is achieved
from an inherently scalable process that can easily be dropped into existing
radio frequency semiconductor fabrication facilities and processes. Moreover,
the room temperature alignment methods are fast and area-scalable (already
demonstrated on 4-inch wafers), offering a simple adoption path into existing
device fabrication methodologies that allows for direct transition from current
materials. Aligned and dense arrays of carbon nanotubes are poised to deliver
performance improvements for many different microelectronic devices that cannot
be achieved by incumbent materials. One of the most promising applications is in
radio frequency devices, which will be the specific market of interest in this
project. Aligned nanotubes will more broadly have the potential to revolutionize
semiconductor electronics by significantly improving the energy efficiency and
speed of logic chips and the sensitivity of biosensors, among other
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.