* 2313453
* I-Corps:  One-dimensional Titania-based Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Michel Barsoum, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of cheap and green oxygen production. Nanostructured (NS) titanium
dioxides, TiO2, have been, and remain, of significant commercial and research
interest due to their use in a wide range of fields including paints, catalysis,
photocatalysis, and others. Amongst these, NS TiO2, commercially sold as P25,
commands a small, but important market share. P25 is manufactured by gas-flame
synthesis, a relatively slow and expensive method. This method has, however,
long been considered the gold standard in many catalytic and photocatalytic
reactions but its use has been limited by its high cost. Should society elect to
run on electrochemically generated, or green, hydrogen (H2), the rate limiting
step is not at the H2 electrode, but rather the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
electrode. Commercially, iridium dioxide (IrO2) is used for OER. Iridium is one
of the rarest elements on the Earth's crust. Apart from its cost, the world
would rapidly run into serious supply issues if green H2 is mass produced. As a
result, the proposed technology for producing H2 using NS TiO2 may be a cheaper
and greener alternative to such OER catalysts.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of affordable, stable, and high
efficiency electrodes for electrolysis. The method is a one pot, near ambient,
hugely scalable, bottom-up approach that converts cheap, green, abundant water,
insoluble non-toxic precursors such as TiC and TiB2 into one-dimensional,
Carbon-containing, titania-based nanofilaments (1DT NFs). Amongst the
commercially available photocatalytic titanias, Evonik Aeroxide TiO2 P25,
synthesized via flame pyrolysis of TiCl4, is widely used because of its high
photocatalytic activity in many reaction systems. In many ways P25 has been
considered the gold standard for catalysis and photocatalytic applications. Its
major drawback, however, is its cost. Flame pyrolysis is expensive and does not
yield large quantities of material. This project is a method of synthesis of
materials that are not only significantly cheaper to fabricate but perform
better than P25 in several applications including dye degradation and H2
production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.