* 2313939
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Developing the Vocabulary of Space
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Zoe Ovans, Ovans, Zoe
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. John
Trueswell at the University of Pennsylvania and Dr. Barbara Landau at Johns
Hopkins University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist examining how children process the vocabulary that underlies spatial
relations. Vocabulary acquisition is a fundamental component of early childhood
development, and has far reaching implications, predicting cortical growth and
academic achievement as children age. The research proposed here investigates
how typically-developing children acquire an important aspect of their early
vocabulary: terms denoting spatial relations (e.g. “on” or “in”). Understanding
how children process the vocabulary underlying spatial relations will allow for
targeted interventions for children who have difficulty understanding spatial
vocabulary, such as children with Developmental Language Disorder (DLD) or
similar language delays.

We look at two fundamental distinctions: one between containment and support and
one between sub-types of support: core support relations (such as support-from-
below) and non-core ones (such as attachment-by-hanging). We ask how children
come to learn the meaning of the lexical items underlying these distinctions in
their native language(s). Specifically, we investigate whether children process
this distinction rapidly, in real time (as adults do) by measuring whether
subtle linguistic distinctions affect adults’ and children’s eye-movements to
images depicting core and non-core relations. Furthermore, we investigate the
source of children’s non-adultlike productions. We ask why children appear to
describe complex spatial relations without the lexical verbs adults generally
use (e.g. saying “The picture is on the wall” while adults more often say “The
picture is hanging on the wall”). We hypothesize that children’s still-
developing inhibitory control system is to blame for this difference, and test
this directly in a conflict adaptation paradigm. This work will bring together
two rich but disparate areas of study: work on spatial relations and work on the
development of human sentence processing. Ultimately, the goal of this work is
to fill a gap in knowledge the field has currently: how children process the
language that encodes where things are in the world around them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.