* 2313667
* I-Corps: Instant Sediment Grain Size Measurements
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Evan Goldstein, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to determine grain size quickly allowing for
designing, performing, and assessing engineering works, for example climate
adaptations (i.e., beach nourishment), sand and gravel mining, coastal and river
engineering, and river restoration. Four commercial applications will be
explored. First, coastal engineering firms are required to match local grain
size during beach restorations, necessitating grain size analysis at the site
and all nearby sand resources (onshore and offshore). Engineering works of this
nature are expected to increase in frequency and magnitude as climate changes.
Second, recent work suggests that carbon dioxide drawdown can occur during beach
nourishment if crushed olivine (a naturally occurring mineral) is used instead
of beach sand. The measurement and verification of carbon dioxide removal
requires monitoring the time evolution of olivine grain size. This can be done
quickly using this technology. Third, preliminary work has focused on coastal
applications, but river restorations also must match a target grain size to make
sure that the sediment does not immediately wash away in flood conditions, and
that new sediment is suitable for habitat for flora and fauna. Fourth, this
device is potentially useful for classifying sand and gravel for mining
aggregates.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a handheld camera-based
measurement system that uses on-device machine learning, does not require
calibration, and provides accurate in-the-field measurements within 1 second.
Much of the earth is covered with a veneer of mobile sediment. The size of this
sediment determines under what conditions it will move; larger sediment requires
larger forces to move. Grain size is a first order measurement for geologic,
engineering, and other earthmoving activities. The standard techniques for
measuring sediment grain size are time consuming and performed exclusively in
laboratory settings, not in the field. Bringing samples back to the lab to be
analyzed can take up to 6 months, even as surface grain size can change on the
timescale of seconds to minutes. This innovation is focused on the continued
development of an existing device that can analyze grain size instantaneously.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.