* 2313154
* OAC Core: LABIOS: Storage Acceleration via Data Labeling and Asynchronous I/O
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kathryn Mohror, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,999.00

Data is everywhere, and it is growing exponentially. Data-intensive computing is
a field that deals with processing and analyzing massive amounts of data for
various purposes, such as scientific discovery, business intelligence, social
media, and health care. However, storing and accessing data efficiently and
effectively is a major challenge for data-intensive computing. Current storage
systems are not designed to handle the diverse and complex data needs of
different applications. They are slow, rigid, and wasteful. This project
introduces a new way of managing data that overcomes these limitations. It
develops a new data representation and a companion storage system that are
faster, more flexible, and more scalable than existing solutions. This project
also shows how this new approach improves the performance and functionality of
various applications in different application domains, such as scientific
computing, deep learning, and microservices. It advances the state-of-the-art in
data-intensive computing and serves the national interest by enhancing
scientific productivity and output, increasing the scalability and reliability
of scientific applications that handle massive and complex data sets, and
facilitating the collaboration and communication among scientists from different
disciplines by improving the compatibility of scientific applications that use
different data formats, platforms, and protocols. This project can foster
interdisciplinary research and innovation. It also supports education and
diversity in computing and data science by creating a well-trained workforce and
enhancing the existing curricula and research programs.

The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a new input/output (I/O)
paradigm for data-intensive computing based on the concept of a Label and a
system called LABIOS. A Label is a data unit that encapsulates an operation and
a pointer to its input data. LABIOS is a distributed storage system that
executes Labels asynchronously and independently on servers that support tiered
storage (e.g., non-volatile memory express (NVMe), solid state drive (SSD), hard
disk drive (HDD), etc.). This project investigates how to design and implement
LABIOS to provide active storage semantics, software defined storage semantics,
and in-situ and in-transit analytics. It explores how to use LABIOS to support
elastic and dynamic resource provisioning, integrated storage access, and
programmable storage application programming interfaces (APIs). The performance
and functionality of LABIOS are evaluated using various applications and
workloads from scientific and Big Data domains, such as scientific computing,
deep learning, and microservices; and how LABIOS improves the I/O efficiency and
effectiveness of these applications and workloads are demonstrated. This project
also analyzes the implications of the new I/O paradigm for the existing high-
performance computing (HPC) ecosystem. It contributes to the advancement of
data-intensive computing by providing a novel data representation and a scalable
storage system that can address the diverse and complex data requirements of
large-scale applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.