* 2313971
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Reconstructing Precontact Caribbean Settlement using Ancient DNA
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jessica Stone, Stone, Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 170,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics programs. The
goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to
be an important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Maria Nieves-
Col√≥n at the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist analyzing the genetic diversity of
early populations. By providing the first ancient DNA data from the earliest
known ancestral remains from Puerto Rico and other ancient communities,
questions related to the process of population origins, island settlement, and
regional interaction will be addressed. An improved characterization of broader
human population history in the region is crucial in understanding the
biocultural connections between these ancient communities and present-day
islanders and diaspora. This project also prioritizes community consultation as
a part of the research process and supports education for a diverse group of
students by providing training opportunities.

The process of initial human arrival represents one of the most significant but
least understood population movements in the ancient history of the Americas.
While archaeological, linguistic, and more recently, genetic research has
contributed a wealth of knowledge to our understanding of human settlement and
interaction, questions regarding the population origins, dispersal trajectories,
and the extent of interaction between communities are still debated. This NSF
postdoctoral fellowship applies techniques in ancient DNA to characterize the
genetic diversity of precontact communities and time periods that have not yet
been studied using this method. These results will be integrated with existing
archaeological knowledge to address these lingering questions. Additionally, a
primary objective of this work is to prioritize community involvement and build
groundwork for ethical paleogenomics research. Through partnerships with local
universities, museums, and non-governmental organizations, this project will
include consultations to facilitate community input into the research process,
share results, and create local student education and training opportunities in
biological anthropology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.