* 2313644
* Creating Diverse Data Science Learning Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Rachel Levy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,968.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing instructional
methods and professional development for instructors that will strengthen
undergraduate students’ data literacy and skills. Data science is reshaping the
US workforce and society at large as organizations generate and look to analyze
increasing collections of rich data. The US cannot meet an increasing demand for
data literacy without ensuring significant participation in data science
education. The inclusion of multiple perspectives in the data science workforce
is needed to build flexible solutions that address the most critical needs and
serve large, diverse populations. An increasing number of community colleges,
colleges, universities and training companies are building data science courses
and credentials for undergraduates, but these courses often attract students
already in the STEM fields. In order to increase the STEM-enabled workforce, it
is critical to involve students who are not yet planning to incorporate data
science skills into their careers. This project aims to build data science
experiences that attract, retain, support, and empower learners who will be able
to bring data skills and practices to fields within or beyond STEM.

Current efforts to bring data science learning experiences to students from
different backgrounds and disciplines face two major gaps: (1) a need for
replicable models to support broader implementation; and (2) a lack of research
that demonstrates how models can support data science identity development while
attending to students with diverse disciplinary and sociopolitical backgrounds.
The goal of this project is to engage students and faculty in the study,
testing, and improvement of a model for project-based, workforce-relevant data
science education. The model is based on the hypothesis that student choice and
agency in a flexible, project-based learning environment will lower barriers to
entry and encourage students with diverse backgrounds to explore data science
during their undergraduate careers. Project research will draw upon multiple
qualitative and quantitative data streams to generate new knowledge about how
consideration of students’ identities and attention to student choice and agency
can support identity development in data science communities. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.