* 2313139
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Hardware-assisted Plausibly Deniable System for Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Weisong Shi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 150,639.00

Mobile computing devices typically use encryption to protect sensitive
information. However, traditional encryption systems used in mobile devices
cannot defend against an active attacker who can force the mobile device owner
to disclose the key used for decrypting the sensitive information. This is
particularly of concern to dissident users who are targets of nation states. An
example of this would be a human rights worker collecting evidence of untoward
activities in a region of oppression or conflict and storing the same in an
encrypted form on the mobile device, and then being coerced to disclose the
decryption key by an official. Plausibly Deniable Encryption (PDE) has been
proposed to defend against such adversaries who can coerce users into revealing
the encrypted sensitive content. However, existing techniques suffer from
several problems when used in flash-memory-based mobile devices, such as weak
deniability because of the way read/write/erase operations are handled at the
operating systems level and at the flash translation layer, various types of
side channel attacks, and computation and power limitations of mobile devices.
This project investigates a unique opportunity to develop an efficient (low-
overhead) and effective (high-deniability) hardware-assisted PDE scheme on
mainstream mobile devices that is robust against a multi snapshot adversary. The
project includes significant curriculum development activities and outreach
activities to K-12 students.

This project fundamentally advances the mobile PDE systems by leveraging
existing hardware features such as flash translation layer (FTL) firmware and
TrustZone to achieve a high deniability with a low overhead. Specifically, this
project develops a PDE system with capabilities to: 1) defend against snapshot
attacks using raw flash memory on mobile devices; and 2) eliminate side-channel
attacks that compromise deniability; 3) be scalable to deploy on mainstream
mobile devices; and 4) efficiently provide usable functions like fast mode
switching. This project also develops novel teaching material on PDE and
cybersecurity for K-12 students and the Regional Cybersecurity Education
Collaboration (RCEC), a new educational partnership on cybersecurity in
Michigan.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.