* 2313953
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Early Life Adversity Effects on DNA Methylation: Developmental Trajectories and Functional Consequences
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Noah Snyder-Mackler, Petersen, Rachel
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Amanda J. Lea
at Vanderbilt University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the effects of early life adversity. Adversity
experienced in early life is known to have health consequences lasting into
adulthood, however the biological mechanism connecting early life environment to
later life health is unknown. DNA methylation, an epigenetic process that can
impact gene regulation and disease, is one potential mechanism by which early
life experiences may become embedded within an organism’s physiology to impact
health later in life. This research proposes a large-scale investigation of how
early life adversity predicts DNA methylation and gene regulation throughout all
major organ systems of the body in a non-human primate, the rhesus macaque. Non-
human primates are an excellent comparative taxa for understanding human biology
due to our long shared evolutionary history and our similarities in physiology
and social behavior. This study will be the most comprehensive systems-wide
interrogation of how early life adversity impacts DNA methylation in a non-human
primate to date, which will aid in our understanding of how primates (including
humans) sense and respond to socio-ecological challenges and how behavioral and
health disparities emerge from these experiences. One third of children in the
US experience an adverse event during childhood, and adversity is
disproportionately experienced. By forming a greater understanding of how
childhood adversity alters physiology, this study aims to lay the groundwork for
future development of medical interventions improving the lives of individuals
from the most affected communities.

Across primate species, early life adversity (ELA) is associated with poor adult
health and proxies of evolutionary fitness, such as longevity, reproductive
rate, and offspring survival. This project aims to better understand how
hardship experienced during early life influences DNA methylation (DNAm), an
epigenetic gene regulatory mechanism that has been implicated in mediating the
relationship between early life environment and adult phenotype. Although there
are known correlations between DNAm and ELA, there has yet to be a thorough
systems-wide characterization of ELA-associated DNAm patterns. Moreover, the
extent to which DNAm drives or suppresses gene expression, a necessary pre-
cursor for impacting phenotype, is highly variable and poorly understood. To
address these gaps in knowledge, this project will leverage behavioral,
demographic, and genomic data from 293 free-ranging rhesus macaques and will
investigate the presence and developmental trajectory of ELA-associated DNAm in
10 different tissues spanning all major organ systems. Furthermore, this project
will determine the functional importance of ELA-associated DNAm in 3 tissues
(blood, kidney, and lung) by 1) assessing chromatin accessibility and the
expression of genes near ELA-associated sites, and 2) using massively parallel
reporter assays to experimentally test the impact of locus-specific DNAm on gene
expression. This study will constitute the most comprehensive systems-wide
interrogation of ELA-associated DNAm in a non-human primate to date and will be
the first to pair locus-specific DNAm data with both in vivo measurements of
gene regulation and experimental assays capable of testing for causal
methylation- expression relationships in the context of ELA. The innovative
approaches proposed here will provide new insight into the epigenetic mechanisms
that allow naturally living primates to sense and respond to socio-ecological
challenges, and will provide insight into how the socio-ecological environment
“gets under the skin” to influence phenotypic variation relevant to human
evolution and health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.