* 2313553
* Thermochemistry of Metal-Ligand Bonds and Protonated Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Peter Armentrout, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Peter B. Armentrout and his
group at the University of Utah will use a guided ion beam tandem mass
spectrometer coupled with electrospray, flow tube, and ion mobility sources to
study gas-phase organometallic and biological ion chemistry. These studies will
seek to examine the complex challenges associated with quantifying the chemistry
of excited electronic states of transition metal cations and determining
absolute energies differences between specific conformations of biomolecular
ions. Professor Armentrout and his students will investigate angular momentum
effects in collision-induced dissociation experiments, state-specific chemistry
of transition metal (TM) ions, energetics for decomposition of protonated
peptides along with their structures, as well as species formed by transition
metal activation of C-H bonds involving methane and larger hydrocarbons. Their
studies could lead to better understandings of spin-orbit coupling effects in
reactions of transition metal ions, peptide degradation processes especially for
conformation-specific energetics, and industrially important C-H bond activation
and C-C coupling processes. In addition to these broader impacts in science, the
work performed will also further the education of an informed science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce, including both
graduate and undergraduate students.

Under this award, the Armentrout group at the University of Utah will examine
several interrelated areas; a recently developed IM source will be enhanced by
the addition of novel ion sources and a compact SLIM (structures for lossless
ion manipulation) device for enhanced resolution. The IM source will be used to
study state-specific chemistry of TM ions and the energetics for decomposition
of conformer-specific protonated peptides. The latter processes are important in
understanding analytical applications for protein sequence identification and
will experimentally establish the true ground conformer for the first time.
Systems of focus will include those containing asparagine, where deamidation is
believed to be a major molecular process contributing to aging and the onset of
neurodegenerative diseases. Infrared action spectroscopy will be used to
determine structures of biological systems as well as to probe structures of
species formed by CH bond activation and CC coupling reactions of TM cations
with hydrocarbons. All areas of study will be complemented by theoretical
calculations. Potentially transformative studies include quantitative
characterization of spin-orbit coupling effects, absolute measurements of energy
differences between conformations, and methane activation processes. In all
these endeavors, the studies will provide thermodynamic data and educate future
scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.