* 2313648
* Repurposing low-dimensional hybrid perovskites for the detection of low-energy photons
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Peijun Guo, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2027
* USD 459,487.00

Nontechnical Description

Metal halide perovskites are a new class of solution-processible semiconductors.
These are hybrid materials, using a variety of organic and inorganic components
as building blocks. This allows tuning of their optical, electrical and thermal-
transport properties for the desired use. They have shown particular promise for
use in applications such as solar energy harvesting, displays, and solid-state
lighting. This project focuses on understanding the fundamental properties of a
sub-class of metal halide perovskites. These two-dimensional (2D) materials
consist of interpenetrating organic and inorganic layers arranged by design. The
team will study the structure and optical properties of 2D perovskites to gain
insight into what governs their thermal conductivity and how charge carriers
interact with the crystal lattice. Understanding the unique properties of 2D
perovskites will help to evaluate their potential for device applications and
accelerate their adoption into advanced device technologies. In particular, the
goal is to establish 2D perovskites for detection of infrared led, which has
traditionally relied on vapor-phase grown semiconductors that are expensive to
process. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in synthesis
and characterization of novel semiconductors, including building and modifying
instrumentation.

Technical Description

The ability to detect light is crucial in areas ranging from photography and
bio-imaging to materials characterization and precision metrology. The
difficulty of light detection depends on the energy carried by each photon, the
smallest energy quanta of light. While silicon-based detectors are mature and
sensitive, the detection of photons whose energies fall below the bandgap of
silicon is generally more challenging. The goal of this project is to understand
how the thermal conductivity and exciton-lattice interactions of two-dimensional
metal halide perovskites can be influenced and ultimately controlled through the
type of organic spacers, the intentionally introduced stacking disorders, and
the connectivity mode of the inorganic octahedral layers. A variety of
techniques, including time-resolved vibrational-pump visible-probe spectroscopy,
pump-probe optical imaging, and synchrotron x-ray diffraction, will be employed
to characterize the structure-property relationships of judiciously chosen two-
dimensional perovskite compositions. The understanding gained will provide a
fundamental understanding of the thermal and optical properties of these
solution-processable materials and establish the knowledge base to use them for
detecting low-energy photons in the near-infrared to the mid-infrared range.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.