* 2313793
* Automated positive reinforcement of good programming processes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Frank Vahid, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing techniques to
automatically award points to students for following a good process when
students write computer programs. This project intends to address a common
problem that students perform poorly in computer programming courses because
they do not follow a good process. The "process" refers to an approach students
take as they develop their computer programs. While instructors may advise
students to follow a good process, students often do not take such advice,
perhaps believing they can take a shortcut to a working program. Giving points
to students is the most direct and common way to positively influence student
behaviors. However, manually awarding points for following a good process is a
labor-intensive grading task. This project intends to create automated methods
to reward a good programming process, meanwhile developing a deeper
understanding of how a good programming process can improve student
metacognition and success. This project team plans to take advantage of new
programming-learning systems that can capture process-related data to
automatically analyze students' recorded behaviors and award points.

Process behaviors to be auto-awarded with points will include four phases: 1)
starting early, 2) spending sufficient time, 3) writing programs little by
little, and 4) testing one's own programs thoroughly. Such an automation has
only recently become a possibility, via the advent of cloud-based programming-
learning environments that record much of a student's programming behavior. The
project intends to answer several research questions: 1) Can desired process
points be auto-awarded using today's widely-used programming-learning systems?
2) Can process points incentivize good process while avoiding negative
consequences like stressing students over "being watched"? 3) Can process points
be made transparent and understandable through simple visualizations and basic
explanations? 4) Will process points ultimately impact students' metacognition,
behavior, and success? The techniques will be codified in Python scripts that
will be made available to programming instructors across the country. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. This project is also supported
by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of
undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of students pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.