* 2313567
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Effect of Environment Change in Settlement Occupation and Abandonment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Kai Su, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 27,102.00

This award permits a doctoral dissertation student conduct environmental
archaeological research to understand how people interacted with their local
environments in a wetland setting. Previous studies have often linked the rise
and fall of societies to improvements and deterioration in climatic patterns.
Understanding these issues is critical as climate change affects countries
worldwide in modern times. However, these studies tend to underestimate human
and social resilience to climatic and environmental changes due to the lack of
localized, fine-grained data. In this regard, environmental archaeology is
particularly enlightening since it involves the collection and interpretation of
environmental data in close proximity (both geographically and temporally) to
archaeological discoveries. In sensitive and fragile environments such as
wetlands, climate change reshapes the landscape even by a small fluctuation of
precipitation and temperature. From the long-term perspective of archaeology,
people adapted to the new environments through technological innovation and food
diversification. This human adaptation also causes environmental consequences.
This project sheds light on the complex feedback loop between human adaptation,
environmental consequences, and the long-term sustainability of human-
environmental interactions. The researchers aim to facilitate knowledge exchange
between themselves and today's residents, deepening their understanding of
managing the local environments and promoting environmental sustainability.

The student investigates how human behavior and settlements evolved with
changing environments, particularly the fluctuating lake levels in one study
area. The archaeological site is located on the edge of a highland lake, and it
is one of the earliest human settlements in the region. The site was
continuously occupied for over a millennium, between ~3600 and 2300 cal. BP,
providing a unique opportunity to explore environmental changes before, during,
and after human occupation. Due to active sedimentation and tectonic activities
in the study area, archaeological deposits are buried deeply underground. To
reconstruct the environmental conditions, the researchers use coring to retrieve
soil samples from the past and analyze them in the laboratory. By comparing the
environmental data with findings within the site, the researchers can
distinguish whether changes were induced by human or climatic events and whether
the changes were significant enough to render the site uninhabitable. This
research fills in the gap of environmental archaeology in this part of the
world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.