* 2313737
* CAREER: Scalable and Adaptive Edge Stream Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Liting Hu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2025
* USD 306,231.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications such as self-driving cars, augmented
reality, interactive gaming, and event monitoring have a tremendous potential to
improve our lives. These applications generate a large influx of sensor data at
massive scales. Under many time-critical scenarios, these massive data streams
must be processed in a very short time to derive actionable intelligence. This
CAREER project aims to support time-critical IoT applications by applying the
stream processing paradigm to the Edge computing architecture. The success of
this research will benefit many time-critical IoT applications in the areas such
as factory automation, the tactile internet, autonomous vehicles, and process
automation. It will also substantially improve the performance profiles of a
variety of data processing systems, such as wide-area data analytics systems,
mobile data access systems, event tracking systems, and streaming databases. As
an integral part of its research program, this CAREER project involves K-12,
undergraduate and graduate level education in partnership with the local Public
School system.

Specifically, this CAREER project will build a scalable and adaptive Edge stream
processing engine, which enables fast stream processing of a large number of
concurrent IoT queries in the dynamic, heterogeneous Edge environment. This work
includes three primary research directions. First, a new dynamic dataflow graph
abstraction will be implemented, which automatically chains, parallelizes and
replicates stream operators to adapt to the Edge dynamics and handle failures in
a scalable way. Second, a new customizable data shuffling service abstraction
will be implemented, which customizes the data shuffling path (e.g., ring
shuffle, hierarchical tree shuffle, butterfly wrap shuffle) at runtime for the
given network topology and workload. Third, a fully decentralized architecture
with many distributed schedulers will be implemented, in which each scheduler
operates autonomously to process IoT queries. All three parts of the project
will be prototyped and implemented on real-world stream processing systems and
validated by performing real-world experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.