* 2313440
* Investigating Effective Methods that Adults Use to Improve Children's Math Achievement in Informal Learning Environments: A Meta Analysis
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Gena Nelson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 11/30/2023
* USD 183,760.00

This project is designed to explore how adults, including parents and childcare
providers, can help children better learn mathematics in informal settings. To
do so, this research study will conduct a meta-analysis of mathematics teaching
strategies used in informal learning environments, such as museums, libraries,
and the home. A meta-analysis examines published research data, paying close
attention to differences in findings, and uses statistics to analyze the
findings across different studies. This meta-analysis will summarize the
relevant research about mathematics teaching that has been published since 1980,
focusing on children in preschool to the end of third grade. It will also focus
on mathematics learning topics of numbers and operations, algebra, geometry,
measurement, and data analysis. The researchers will include data from peer-
reviewed research, conference proposals, reports, and dissertations. In choosing
which research studies should be included in their analysis, the researchers
will consider the specific teaching strategies used, the participants in the
study, and the training that the adults received. The project intends use their
analysis to show what effective mathematics teaching looks like in informal
learning environments. This information can provide insights about best
mathematics teaching practices for young children in informal learning
environments. In this way, it can benefit mathematics education by informing the
decision-making of researchers, practitioners, parents, childcare providers,
teacher educators.

After a thorough review of the literature and collection of relevant studies,
the researchers will code each contributing study for methodological,
participant, and intervention characteristics, study quality, and type of
dependent measure. The researchers will also double code studies to establish
inter-rater agreement to ensure consistency in coding procedures across
reviewers. A random-effects meta-regression will then be used to synthesize
standardized mean difference effect sizes to determine an overall average effect
and evaluate coded moderators that may account for variability in the observed
effects. Cluster robust variance estimation will be used to account for
dependence between effect sizes collected from the same study. This project has
the potential to make a unique contribution to the field by (a) responding to a
recent upward trend of empirical research on mathematics interventions in
informal learning environments; (b) reporting on the current quality of evidence
of intervention studies as a means to improve future research studies in this
area; (c) broadening stakeholdersâ€™ knowledge base regarding training parents and
childcare providers to implement effective mathematics interventions; and (d)
implementing a rigorous research plan and meta-analytic techniques. This project
is jointly funded by the Education and Human Resource Core Research (ECR)
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.