* 2313948
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Integration of new information into existing knowledge with sleep
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Brynn Sherman, Sherman, Brynn E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Anna
Schapiro and Sharon Thompson-Schill at the University of Pennsylvania, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
how sleep supports the way we integrate across related memories to build up new
knowledge. In our daily lives we are constantly bombarded with new information.
However, this information is typically related in some way to our previous
knowledge of the world. For example, when you go to the zoo, you may learn about
a new species of bird that you have never heard of before. Learning about this
new bird requires not only learning the unique aspects of the particular
species, but also relating this information to what you already know about other
birds. How does the brain integrate new and old information? The literature has
pointed to a possible role for sleep — a time when new and old information can
be reactivated and synthesized — in this integration process, but this idea
lacks direct tests.

This project will combine electroencephalography (EEG), behavioral memory
assessments, and computational modeling to uncover how sleep supports this
integration process. Specifically, we will test the hypothesis that in order to
integrate new memories with previous knowledge, the brain needs to replay both
kinds of memory during sleep, in an interleaved fashion. We will first test this
empirically by running a multi-day experiment. Over the course of multiple
training sessions, participants will learn about novel objects from different
categories. They will then return for a final session one to two weeks later,
during which they will learn about new objects from the same categories and
subsequently take a nap in the laboratory with EEG recording. During the nap, a
procedure known as Targeted Memory Reactivation (TMR) will be used to cue either
newly learned objects (the objects learned just prior to the nap) or both newly
learned and existing knowledge (both the objects learned prior to the nap and
the objects learned the during the previous sessions) during sleep. Upon waking,
we will assess participants’ memory for each object as well as their integration
of new and old objects. This approach will allow us to test the hypothesis that
integration of new information relies on the interleaved activation of that new
information with previously learned information. We will also simulate the task
(including TMR during sleep) in a neural network model of offline hippocampal-
cortical interactions, providing a mechanistic account of the impact of
different forms of replay on memory change. Together, the findings and resulting
theoretical framework will advance our understanding of how sleep influences
memory integration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.