* 2313010
* SHF: Medium: Scallop: A Neurosymbolic Programming Framework for Combining Logic with Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Rajeev Alur, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2027
* USD 586,531.00

Neurosymbolic programming is an emerging paradigm that aims to address
fundamental challenges for deep learning by combining it with classical logical
reasoning. This project aims to realize the promise of neurosymbolic programming
by developing a methodology, algorithms, software implementation, benchmarks,
and case studies. To execute the proposed research, the team brings together
researchers with expertise spanning machine learning, logical reasoning, formal
methods, and programming systems, and will collaborate with a radiology
researcher on a real-world application in healthcare. The primary outcome of the
project will be an open-source framework for neurosymbolic programming that will
be of technical interest to researchers in both machine learning and logical
reasoning. In a broader sense, the project contributes to the vision of
Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI), and enables its deployment in critical
applications such as healthcare. Through education and knowledge transfer
activities, the project will build a community of researchers at the
intersection of machine learning and logic, to facilitate tight integration of
research results with education, and to promote diversity.

The project is centered around a neurosymbolic programming framework, called
Scallop, that integrates neural architectures with a declarative rule-based
logic programming language. Such a design allows convenient specification of
challenging tasks such as visual question answering by a suitable decomposition
of the desired computation into neural and symbolic components. To address the
core challenge of developing end-to-end gradient-descent-based learning
algorithms for such neurosymbolic programs, the research is organized along
three foundational themes: 1) symbolic reasoning constructs that allow
specifying rich domain knowledge yet enable efficient inference and learning; 2)
scalable learning for neurosymbolic programs based on ideas rooted in abductive
inference and data provenance; and 3) theory and techniques for semantic
robustness of neurosymbolic programs. Complementary research tasks include
development of the Scallop compiler and toolchain, collection of benchmarks for
neurosymbolic learning from a wide range of computational tasks, empirical
evaluation, and exploring an application to improve breast cancer risk
assessment by integrating neural-network-based image processing of mammograms
with rule-based expert knowledge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.