* 2313936
* Advancing Latino Parents' Access and Engagement with Science-Based Strategies for Climate-Resilient Parenting through a National Media and Community Campaign
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gail Scowcroft, Child Trends Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,881,329.00

Climate change presents a significant challenge for parents worldwide as they
navigate the task of preparing the next generation for a rapidly changing world.
This interdisciplinary project aims to address this challenge by focusing on the
needs of under-resourced Latino families, with a particular emphasis on Latino
children who bear a disproportionate burden from climatic changes. By
integrating insights from climate science, child development social sciences,
climate change communication, and learning sciences, the project seeks to
develop effective strategies that empower parents and promote positive parenting
practices in the face of climate change. The project acknowledges the unique
challenges faced by under-resourced Latino families who often lack access to the
resources and information necessary to navigate the impacts of climate change.
By centering their voices and concerns, the project aims to provide these
families with the tools and knowledge needed to raise resilient children capable
of coping, adapting, and contributing to sustainable solutions. Through the
integration of knowledge from multiple disciplines and collaboration with
trusted community-based organizations, the project aims to develop a Science-
Based Roadmap for Parenting During Climate Change. This roadmap not only
supports parents in addressing the specific challenges posed by climate change
but also contributes to ongoing research in climate science, child development,
and communication. The project has the potential to inform and advance related
lines of inquiry and foster the integration of equity-centered approaches in
future research and practice. Furthermore, the project recognizes the broader
impact of its work on other fields and society as a whole. By developing
effective communication strategies and engaging with communities in culturally
responsive ways, the project seeks to bridge the gap between scientific
knowledge and under-resourced communities. It strives to broaden access to new
knowledge among low-income Latino families with lower educational attainment,
ensuring that they have access to science-based parenting recommendations
through trusted media channels and community organizations. The project also
aims to enhance the capacity of parents as learners and STEM communicators,
empowering them to play an active role in addressing the climate crisis and
fostering a more inclusive and sustainable future.

The primary goal of the project is to advance access to and engagement with
science-based parenting strategies for Latino parents during the climate crisis.
The project aims to address several key research questions: (1) What is the
current knowledge level of parents regarding climate change (CC), their existing
parenting strategies related to CC, and the knowledge and skills they wish to
acquire? (2) Which key messages effectively address parents' concerns and needs,
leading to learning and adoption of science-based parenting behaviors? (3) What
are the most effective communication approaches for parents to discuss climate
change with their children? (4) What skills can children acquire to better cope
and adapt to the impacts of climate change? (5) Which STEM career paths will be
in higher demand as climate change advances, and how can parents expose their
children to these opportunities? (6) How can scientists collaborate with
communities in culturally responsive ways to foster parent learning and
children's connections with life and ecological systems? To answer these
questions, the project will employ a multidisciplinary approach, integrating
expertise from child development, climate science, informal learning,
communication, and Latino studies. The research methods will include
participatory research, which involves actively involving parents in the
research process, and the design and development of a Science-Based Roadmap for
Parenting During Climate Change. The roadmap will provide evidence-based
guidelines and recommendations for parents to support their children's ability
to cope, adopt sustainable lifestyles, contribute to climate change mitigation,
and thrive. To evaluate the effectiveness of the project, a rigorous evaluation
framework will be implemented, assessing the impact of the Science-Based Roadmap
and the public engagement campaign launched in collaboration with Televisa
Foundation and the Inner Space Center. The evaluation will measure changes in
parents' knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors related to climate change, as well
as the extent to which children acquire the necessary skills to adapt to climate
impacts. Dissemination efforts will focus on ensuring broad access to the
Roadmap's parenting recommendations through trusted media outlets and community
organizations, with a particular emphasis on reaching low-income families of
color who have limited access to scientific research. The broader impacts of
this project are multifaceted. Firstly, it aims to advance equity and belonging
by raising the voices of Latino parents and addressing the unique needs and
concerns of under-resourced communities. By actively involving community
organizations, the project ensures that communication products and
recommendations are culturally relevant and accessible. Secondly, the project
seeks to promote public engagement with STEM among under-resourced audiences,
improve the well-being of individuals and society, foster partnerships between
academia, industry, and communities, and increase participation in STEM careers.
By expanding the capacity of parents as learners and STEM communicators, the
project empowers them to play an active role in addressing the climate crisis
and promotes a more inclusive and sustainable future for all. This Research in
Support of Wide-reaching Public Engagement with STEM project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that:
(a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's
role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational
success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d)
foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and
empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve
community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's
engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.