* 2313020
* Explaining the Destruction of Monumental Architecture
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Nicos Makris, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 155,481.00

The goal of this project is to increase understanding ancient societies by
examining the destruction of monumental architecture. More than a century of
archaeological research has focused on the construction of impressive
architectural and engineering feats around the globe—with far less research
devoted to the cause(s) of their demolition. This research focuses on sites
where hundreds of massive, stone statues were carved, transported, erected, and
subsequently toppled over. Popular accounts have attributed the destruction of
statues to a chaotic period of warfare and societal collapse. It has also been
suggested statues may have been toppled by neglect, or strong earthquakes. The
research team comprised of archaeologists, a seismologist, and civil engineers
are working closely with students in conducting this research. The project
serves to enhance indigenous cultural understanding and the results are
anticipated to form the basis of a consensus explanation for this case study and
promote related inquiry elsewhere.

Monuments are a critical window into people’s values, beliefs, and social
memories. The destruction of monuments is especially important since it can shed
light on how these aspects of societies change over time. To begin to understand
the destruction of statues the team is conducting two types of research. The
first is to build a chronology of statue toppling based on the exposure of the
broken surfaces of statues to weathering. Exposure to rain and sea spray will
over time damage statues in way that can be measured non-destructively with a
specialized handheld ultrasound. To determine how long damage observed on
statues took to accumulate, the team is artificially weathering stone blocks as
well as conducting other experiments. Their second objective is to assess how
statues were toppled by looking for distinctive patterns in the timing and
location of statue toppling that can be linked to purposeful destruction,
neglect, or earthquakes. The team takes advantage of advances in
archaeoseismology, specifically engineering computer simulations that predict
how statues might behave in major earthquakes, coupled with recorded and
synthetic earthquake waveforms. Data produced by these two objectives are
delivered to the local community to help make decisions about future
conservation of statues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.