* 2313905
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: A Novel Exploration of Global Variation in the Human Estrobolome
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Richard Bribiescas, Brittain, Rebecca Shae Anna
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Richard
Bribiescas at Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist to investigate the relationship between the human
estrobolome, associated lifestyle factors, and health and disease. Microbiome
researchers have discovered a subset of gut microbes, coined the “estrobolome,”
that are capable of metabolizing estrogens. In the gastrointestinal tract, these
microbes convert inactive estrogens that have been marked for excretion back
into active form, which can subsequently be reabsorbed into circulation (i.e.,
recycled). Estrogen is important for growth, cardiovascular and bone health, and
is linked to human life history traits such as age at menarche, menopause, and
fertility. However, high lifetime exposures to estrogen are also associated with
increased risk for estrogen-dependent cancers. While the mechanistic pathway for
estrogen recycling has been described, variation in different gut microbial
community capacities to metabolize and recycle estrogens has not been
systematically explored between populations or individuals. How these estrogen-
metabolizing microbes vary in abundance and composition between individuals and
populations has not been systematically investigated.

This research will use an evolutionary public health perspective to explore
estrobolome variation within and between populations globally. Our objectives
are to: 1) estimate global human variation in estrogen recycling capacities
within and between populations, 2) identify lifestyle factors associated with
variation in estrobolome composition and estrogen recycling capacities, and 3)
explore the potential role of the estrobolome in human life history traits,
health, disease, and biological trade-offs. At a broad geographic scale, we will
analyze publicly available microbiome sequences from human populations across
many different lifestyles. We will compare microbiome communities and their
inferred estrogen recycling capacities with data on health, diet, physical
activity, age, ages of menarche and menopause, and estrogen-associated diseases.
These results will advance our understanding of human estrobolome variation and
provide a basis for future research and conversations about the role of the
estrobolome in human health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.