* 2313372
* AF: Small: Hardness of Approximation Meets Parameterized Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Karthik Srikanta, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Many important optimization problems are not tractable. Two typical ways to cope
with the intractability of optimization problems is to either design algorithms
that find solutions whose cost is close to the optimum or design algorithms
which find exact solutions but run in time purely polynomial in the input size
but exponential (or possibly worse) in terms of a parameter of the problem
(referred to as fixed parameter tractability runtime). For several optimization
problems, it is possible to prove that (i) finding good approximate solutions is
as hard as finding optimal solutions, and (ii) for specific parameters of
interest, under plausible assumptions, the problem does not admit algorithms
with fixed parameter tractability runtime. In fact, for many important problems,
it is possible to prove that for specific parameters of interest, and under
plausible assumptions, the problem does not even admit algorithms computing only
an approximate solution while having fixed parameter tractability runtime. This
project concerns the study of such inapproximability results. The research goals
of the project will be integrated with teaching, mentoring, and dissemination
activities. The research will involve participation of graduate students and
post- doctoral fellows.

This project deals with the challenging task of developing the nascent area
arising from the intersection of hardness of approximation and parameterized
complexity, drawing from toolkits in coding theory, extremal combinatorics, and
analysis of Boolean functions. The problems that are planned to be investigated
in this project are essentially the same problems pursued in the 1990s in the
non-deterministic polynomial (NP) world which then formed the bedrock of
hardness of approximation results therein. In the NP world, these results (and
the techniques developed) served as the starting point to prove the
inapproximability of various other problems of interest to the Theoretical
Computer Science community (such as Clustering, Travelling Salesman Problem,
Scheduling problems, etc.). Upon successfully answering the questions in this
project, researchers in parameterized complexity will have sufficient results
and tools at their disposal to prove the hardness of approximation for the
problems of their interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.