* 2313609
* RAPID: Mathematics Within the Tapestry of Civic Engagement Discourse
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Carlos Gómez Marchant, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,944.00

Quantitative measures and their interpretations play a significant role in
school administrators’ and community members’ argumentation during civic
discourses. In the public sphere, quantitative measures have long been used to
signal logic and objectivity to mathematical models and characterizations of
phenomena, which disproportionately affect Communities of Color. The effects
have had historical and contemporary implications with respect to school change,
including closures, mergers, and funding allocations. This study provides an
opportunity to understand how mathematical ideas and discourses are weaved into
civic engagements of communities.

A richer understanding of mathematics within the tapestry of civic discourses is
needed. Employing an ethnographic research design, the overarching research
question is: What mathematical ideas are used by school district personnel and
community members during discussions of school district change? This research
will focus on the following three specific objectives: 1) Analyze and compare
mathematical discourses by community members, district personnel, and policy
makers; 2) Develop a data-driven conceptual framework for understanding (a) the
mathematics used during civic engagement and (b) the perpetuation of mathematics
as neutral, ahistorical, objective; and 3) Design video cases emphasizing the
use of racial and mathematical discourses for developing teachers’, students’,
and leaders’ conocimiento, knowledge and consciousness, with respect to civil
engagement.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU
Racial Equity). The program supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with NSF’s
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity program
in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and
development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.