* 2313105
* RI: Medium: Foundations of Recourse Verification in Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tsui-Wei Weng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,182,881.00

Machine learning models now automate decisions that affect millions of
individuals in the United States, assigning predictions to decide who will
receive a loan, a job interview, or a public service. Modern approaches for
building such models do not account for actionability - i.e., how individuals
can modify the features used by a model to determine their predictions. As a
result, models in domains like lending and hiring can assign predictions that
are fixed - meaning that individuals who are denied a loan or an interview may
be permanently locked out from access to credit and employment. This project
will develop new methods to ensure that models assign predictions that
individuals can change through their actions in feature space. These methods
will allow practitioners to build models that protect the right to access in
applications like lending, hiring, and the allocation of public services.

The project will develop methods that can be used to ensure access at various
stages of the modern machine learning lifecycle. This includes methods for (1)
confinement detection, i.e., to identify regions of feature space where
individuals may be unable to change their features due to actionability
constraints; (2) model-specific verification, i.e., to check that a model can
provide recourse in model development or deployment; (3) learning with recourse
guarantees, i.e., to train a model whose predictions can be changed through a
well-defined set of actions in feature space. The methods will draw on the
research teams’ expertise in using modern optimization techniques to promote
fairness, robustness, and reliability in machine learning, and be refined
through real-world applications in lending and hiring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.