* 2313104
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Community-Driven Design of Fair, Urban Air Mobility Transportation Management Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Yasser Shoukry, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Urban Air Mobility (UAM) envisions integrating the skyscape into the
transportation network and encompasses services such as delivery drones, on-
demand shared mobility by Vertical-Take Off and Landing (VTOL) aircraft for
intra-city passenger trips, and, in the longer run, electric and autonomous
VTOLs. This possible modal alternative provides a safe, reliable, and
environmentally sound option to reduce surface-level congestion. Nevertheless,
the history of transportation infrastructure development shows that it is
imperative to design transportation infrastructures with the community to find
the best balance between these sociotechnical requirements. Much research shows
that the design of transportation systems has a long-lasting, often
discriminatory effect that reinforces existing socio-economic inequality. As UAM
is being developed as a new transportation mode, we are at an opportune moment
to design its infrastructure to provide effective and equitable air mobility for
all, avoiding our past mistakes. This project will focus on understanding the
preferences, attitudes, and concerns of all stakeholders of UAM, including the
potential users of UAM, the general public in different communities who may be
positively and/or adversely affected by UAM, policymakers, and city planners.
The knowledge elicited from the stakeholders will guide the design of an open-
source Computer Aided Planning tool that policy-makers and urban planners can
use to design UAM infrastructure that accommodates communitiesâ€™ priorities and
enables transportation equity. While the timeline for UAM may be in the future,
its deployment may entail significant future investment in infrastructure which
makes inclusion of equity considerations and early community engagement
critical.

We propose a ''Community-in-the-Loop Integrative Framework for Fair and
Equitable Urban Air Mobility (UAM) Infrastructure Design''. Our integrative
framework will develop methods to engage with key stakeholders to address
significant socio-technical challenges, including (a) understanding the
community preferences and desiderata in terms of necessary considerations for
equitable mobility, (b) developing novel machine learning techniques to generate
design options that optimize for community desiderata efficiently and (c)
devising community-driven evaluative measures and trade-off decision mechanisms.
We address these challenges by drawing from urban and transportation
engineering, aerospace, and computer and information sciences. The final product
of our framework is an open-source Computer Aided Planning tool called VertiCAP.
VertiCAP will be equipped with novel machine learning-based algorithms to
navigate complex design space options, including long-term decisions (i.e.,
allocation of UAM airports, also known as vertiports), medium-term decisions
(i.e., design of air space), and short-term decisions (i.e., air-traffic
control). We will establish a ''community council'' representing different
stakeholders. Through continuous interactions with the community council, we
will evaluate and demonstrate the effectiveness of the developed VertiCAP tool
in the City of Austin, TX and Southern California.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.