* 2313054
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: Learning Semantics of Code To Automate Software Assurance Tasks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Wei Le, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2027
* USD 533,995.00

Deep learning has demonstrated great potential for accomplishing software
engineering tasks. However, its capabilities are limited for challenging yet
very important software assurance tasks such as bug detection, debugging, test
input generation, and test suite prioritization. These tasks are hard to
formulate into a learning problem. A major part of the difficulty is that these
complex tasks require modeling of program semantics.  To the best of our
knowledge, even state-of-the-art deep learning models have an insufficient
understanding of program semantics. As a result, the models fail to achieve
sufficient precision and recall to be more widely deployed. The tools do not
generalize well to unseen projects and are not robust to small perturbations in
source code. It also takes large amounts of computational resources and data to
train the models. 

In this project, the team of researchers aims to improve the performance,
robustness, generalizability and efficiency of deep learning models for software
assurance and to enable deep learning for complex tasks that have not yet
successfully used deep learning. Solutions will target encoding program
semantics into the program representation by combining program analysis,
software engineering, and deep learning expertise to develop novel formulations
to effectively reduce software assurance problems via deep learning. The project
has three research thrusts: To learn with abstract semantics, the project will
study how to combine static analysis algorithms and the results from static
analysis with deep learning models. To learn with concrete semantics, the
project will study how to use program execution traces to guide deep learning.
Finally, the project will investigate how to identify spurious features used by
the current models and then apply causal learning to discourage models that have
spurious features.  Research results, datasets, and tools will be disseminated
to the research community, and workshops will be organized to strengthen the
research community of deep learning for code.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.