* 2313296
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Secure and Trustworthy Cyberphysical Microfluidic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2024
* USD 625,915.00

The goal of this project is to ensure the security and trustworthiness of cyber-
physical microfluidic systems. Microfluidics refers to the interdisciplinary
study of fluid manipulation at nanoliter/picoliter volumes. Microfluidic lab-on-
chip systems are integrated with sensors and intelligent control, networked for
data analysis, and are being commercialized for use in medical diagnostics,
environmental monitoring, and basic laboratory research. These systems are
cyberphysical in nature and are unfortunately coming of age in an era of rampant
cybersecurity issues. Consequently, we anticipate novel security and trust
problems that need to be addressed using interdisciplinary expertise in
microfluidics, microbiology, hardware design, and cybersecurity.

This project is a collaboration between Duke University and New York University
(NYU). It includes four thrusts: 1) understanding the security threats,
motivations, attack surfaces, and their consequences for the research landscape,
industry, and society, 2) developing security and trust techniques to prevent,
detect, and mitigate these threats, 3) experimental validation on the benchtop
using biomolecular protocols, and 4) fabrication of printed circuit board (PCB)
lab-on-chip prototypes with security primitives. The methods used to realize the
research goals will draw upon the multidisciplinary and synergistic expertise of
the investigators: microfluidic biochips, threat analysis and countermeasures;
bioprotocol synthesis; design automation; experimental microbiology.

This project will foster multi-disciplinary research and education for students
in hardware design, CAD, molecular biology, and security. Growth and investment
in CPMS, adoption by end users, will be fostered by intellectual property
protection. This project has the potential to pave the way for new tech
companies. CPMS designed with security in mind will restore trust after the many
recent publicized violations of diagnostic and research integrity. The attacks
and defense techniques will be submitted to the annual embedded systems security
challenge (ESC) held at NYU, where the strengths of the security techniques are
being evaluated by student hardware hackers.

All data related to this project will be disseminated through the DukeSpace
repository, https://dukespace.lib.duke.edu/dspace/. The papers are all in PDF.
Supported formats for data and metadata include JPEG, PNG, GIF, TIFF, AIFF, MP3,
DRM-free AAC MPEG, XML and CSV. Source code for testing, input/output files, and
documentation are also being released as the project matures. All data and
software will be maintained on a Duke website, and this data will be available
for 5 years after the project is completed. Similarly, all data and software
will be maintained on an NYU website for 5 years after the project is completed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.