* 2313739
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: The Ecology and Evolution of Social Interdependence in Primates
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Joan Silk, Feder, Jacob Alexander
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Joan Silk
and Jason Kamilar, this postdoctoral research fellowship, hosted at Arizona
State University, supports an early career scientist examining how and why the
social groups of closely related primate species differ in their composition and
structure. While most primate groups remain cohesive, others split into small,
discrete social clusters, resulting in a patchwork of neighboring family groups
that subtly mirrors the shape of human communities. This fracturing process
could be triggered by ecological hardships, social threats, or some combination
of ecological and social challenges. However, previous tests of these
possibilities have lacked the dense, detailed behavioral data necessary to
quantify subtle differences between species, instead relying on coarse,
simplistic social categories. To address these gaps in our understanding, this
project will combine and collate data from several multidecadal primate field
projects. Using this rich dataset, the present study will then capture social
variation and its drivers both within social groups and across study
populations. Using closely related primates as models for human social
evolution, this project will pinpoint forces that could have pushed ancestral
human groups to first form interdependent family “cliques” long before the
emergence of complex, ultrasocial communities. More broadly, the database
enabled by and generated through this research will become an invaluable tool
for methods development, teaching opportunities, and broader scientific use.

This project will quantify social network structure and identify its drivers in
baboons and other papionin primates — a group that has long been promoted as a
useful model for human evolution and has been studied intensively. However, this
clade is not a monolith, inhabiting varied environments and comprising disparate
social structures. Most notably, a few papionin taxa independently evolved
“multi-level societies,” in which small social groups are hierarchically nested
within larger supergroups. However, the purported evolutionary causes of this
flexible social system vary widely, may differ between lineages, and have yet to
be rigorously tested. Combining a wealth of longitudinal data with cutting-edge
analytical approaches, this project will achieve the following research aims:
(1) capture the extent to which kinship, social status, and shared reproductive
interests shape the strength of dyadic relationships within and across study
populations; (2) track group-level changes in social network structure in
response to both nutritional shortfalls and social upheavals; and (3) develop
phylogenetically informed models linking cross-population network variation with
key social, ecological, and demographic variables. By combining these
complementary analytical approaches, the project is well poised to target long-
standing questions regarding primate social evolution and identify the broader
underpinnings of variation in social structure. The project will also provide
value-added to decades of field research, uniting dense behavioral datasets that
have previously only been analyzed in isolation, facilitating methodological
advances, and building infrastructure necessary to achieve the comparative goals
that initially motivated primate research within the anthropological sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.