* 2313365
* Atomic-level Imaging and Molecular Beam Scattering Studies of Interfacial Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Steven Sibener, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2026
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Steven Sibener of the University
of Chicago is studying chemical reactions that occur when molecules collide with
surfaces. Understanding these gas-surface reactions is challenging, since the
likelihood of reaction depends on the speed and angle that molecules strike the
surface, and these are difficult to control. Further complicating matters, when
surfaces are viewed up close, they exhibit many atomic-scale structures,
including steps, missing atoms, and islands, each of which can exhibit different
reactivity. Professor Sibener and his students will use molecular beams to
control the collision with the surface and then visualize how molecules attach
to, react, and depart from the interface. Their discoveries could reveal the
underlying mechanisms that govern chemical reactivity in a host of emerging
technologies, including the design and development of new functional materials
for sustainable chemistry and quantum information science applications. The
project will also contribute to the development of the Nation's science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scholars, as well as outreach activities involving local schools and Chicagoâ€™s
Museum of Science and Industry.

This project will examine issues in surface chemical dynamics that include site
specific reactivity, adiabatic and non-adiabatic gas-surface interactions such
as dissociative chemisorption including energy dissipation and surface mobility,
directionally-controlled deposition and film growth, thin film reactivity, and
geometry-constrained and stereo-specific reaction studies in which energetic
atomic species react with molecules that are pre-aligned due to the nature of
their bonding and film structure. Reactants will be pre-aligned using either
oriented surface adsorption or pre-ordered reactive end-groups on self-assembled
monolayers, thus presenting sterically controlled reaction partners to incident
gas phase reagents. This will allow systematic exploration of molecular
reactivity and reaction pathways using defined entrance channel reaction
conditions including well-defined energy and polar/azimuthal angles of attack
with respect to the molecular framework. Comparisons with dissociative
chemisorption and reactive scattering calculations, done in conjunction with
quantum theory and molecular dynamics simulations, will lead to precision tests
of calculated reaction potential energy surfaces and mechanistic reaction
pathways. Control of reagent energy, incident angle, intensity, and quantum
state will enable the examination of interfacial chemistry under non-equilibrium
energetic conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.