* 2313242
* Dark Data from the White Continent: New Light on Five Decades of Vertebrate Paleontology Collections from the Triassic Fremouw Formation of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 390,879.00

Part 1: A nontechnical description of the project Around 252 million years ago,
the Permian–Triassic mass extinction wiped out over 90% of species on Earth. At
about the same time, the Antarctic portion of the supercontinent of Pangea
transitioned to a warmer climatic regime devoid of a permanent ice cap. Compared
to lower latitudes, relatively little is known about the survivors of the
extinction in Antarctica, although it has been hypothesized that the continent’s
more polar location shielded it from the worst of the extinction’s effects.
Relevant fossils from the Early Triassic of Antarctica have been collected for
over 50 years, but nearly all of the small reptiles found have been assigned to
either Procolophon or Prolacerta. However, preliminary data suggests that this
is an undercount of the true diversity. This grant supports one postdoctoral
researcher with expertise in fossil reptiles to reassess the Early Triassic
fossil record of Antarctica, including their identification, relationships, and
how they fit into the terrestrial ecosystem of Antarctica and other southern
hemisphere terrestrial assemblages considering the major reorganization of post-
extinction environments. A quantitative reassessment of historical fossil
collections is a major part of this work. Undergraduate students at the
University of Washington will be actively involved as part of this research and
learn skills like hard tissue histology and CT data manipulation. Public
engagement in Antarctic science will be accomplished through the University of
Washington Burke Museum, which is the Washington State museum of natural history
and culture, and include display development and visits to schools in the
Seattle area.

Part 2: A technical description of the project This two-year project will bring
new analytic techniques to bear on the nearly 1100 vertebrate fossils collected
from the Lower Triassic portion of the Fremouw Formation of Antarctica over the
past five decades. Through a combination of CT-based analysis of particularly
well-preserved specimens, preparation and restudy of other critical fossils, and
quantitative comparisons between the assemblages of the Fremouw Formation and
coeval strata from lower latitudes, we can make substantial progress in
understanding the significance of Antarctic vertebrate faunas during the initial
stages of the Triassic. More specifically, this research will 1) document
previously undescribed species, 2) understand the taxonomic and ecological
composition of Fremouw vertebrate (particularly reptile) assemblages, 3) make
comparisons to several lower latitude assemblages, 4) measure skeletal
completeness and anatomical representation in the records of synapsids,
temnospondyls, and reptiles, and 5) assess taxonomic abundance and diversity of
these major tetrapod groups across different localities and depositional
environments. The problem of ‘dark data,’ or museum records not accessible
digitally, will be addressed by providing the Antarctic data generated by this
research to several repositories and online venues, including iDigBio. Overall,
this research will provide new insights into the vertebrate fauna of the Fremouw
Formation, as well as shed light on the evolution of terrestrial ecosystems in
southern Pangea in the wake of the Permian-Triassic mass extinction. Broader
impacts work will include involving undergraduates at the University of
Washington (UW) in several research projects, featuring Antarctic fossils at the
UW Burke Museum’s annual DinoFest, developing a new display on Antarctic
paleontology, and visiting local Seattle schools with a curriculum developed by
the Burke Museum’s education department.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.