* 2313303
* BRC-BIO: Unraveling mechanisms of neural regeneration and functional recovery in zebrafish
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Erika Calvo-Ochoa, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 452,935.00

The study of regeneration of the adult nervous system remains at the forefront
of scientific research, as it is absent in most vertebrates. Zebrafish is a
widely studied model organism, with one of the most significant degrees of
neural regeneration among vertebrates, making it an ideal model for studying
these processes. This research aims to better understand mechanisms of neural
regeneration and functional recovery in adult organisms. To do so, the
researchers will investigate the recovery of the olfactory system of zebrafish
following injury, employing an array of molecular, biochemical, imaging, and
behavioral techniques. Undergraduate students from the Calvo lab will receive
rigorous research-based training and professional development opportunities,
while some of the research objectives of this proposal will be incorporated into
a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) for neuroscience
undergraduate students at Hope College. Furthermore, researchers from the Calvo
lab will partner with ExploreHope, an outreach office at Hope College, to
develop and lead a bilingual STEM summer camp for local Latinx K-12 students who
will receive full scholarships to attend. Ultimately, this research may provide
valuable clues that could potentially be used to stimulate brain regenerative
strategies in other vertebrates, while strengthening and diversifying STEM
education by fostering community-wide engagement with Biology research.

This research project aims to identify critical factors and mechanisms
underlying regeneration and functional recovery in the olfactory system of
zebrafish, which experiences rapid structural recovery following injury and
enables the investigation of functional recovery by means of olfactory-mediated
behavioral assays. Preliminary studies show that olfactory system injury causes
widespread neurodegeneration and olfactory loss, and that both structure and
function are recovered within 21 days. The central hypothesis is that factors
underpinning this olfactory regeneration can be identified during early recovery
timepoints, and that neurogenesis is an essential process for functional
recovery in the olfactory system. Researchers will test this hypothesis by
undertaking the two experimental aims. First, they will test the prediction that
critical molecular and cellular factors underpinning regeneration and recovery
of the olfactory system can be identified during the first 7 days by means of
histological, transcriptomic, and gene and protein expression characterizations
throughout early recovery. For the second aim, researchers will test the
prediction that lesion-induced newly born neurons contribute to neural
regeneration and recovery of olfactory function, by means of olfactory-mediated
behavioral tasks following neurogenesis ablation with a targeted genetic
approach. The completion of this project will increase the understanding of
regulators and processes that orchestrate complete neural regeneration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.