* 2313023
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Medium: High-Performance, Verified Accelerator Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2026
* USD 533,000.00

Emerging applications are pushing the limits of high-performance computing. New
hardware accelerators are being developed to handle particular workloads much
more efficiently than can be achieved in software, but it is expensive to
develop these hardware units and the software that connects to them. In fact,
today the majority of hardware-development budgets go to the combination of
finding and fixing hardware bugs and developing software support for the new
hardware. This project studies how to improve that whole development process
with end-to-end formal verification, where machine-checked mathematical proofs
establish correct behavior for the whole hardware-software stack. The research
team is specifically concerned with tensor computations, as appear in graphics
and machine learning. The project's novelties are in extending the idea of end-
to-end mechanized proof for the first time to cover hardware accelerators,
specifically tensor processing units (TPU). The project's impacts are the
potential for dramatic lowering of the costs of developing new hardware
accelerators or iterating on their implementations over time, while providing
strong mathematical correctness guarantees to applications, e.g., the tools to
show that a machine-learning system protects user privacy, despite the use of
complex performance optimizations.

Three main levels of computing system are covered by the project, all with
logical specifications and proofs that are to be composed into system-level
theorems in the Coq proof assistant. The top level is a source programming
language called Exo, which allows programmer-guided optimization of nested-loop
programs, where appropriate use of accelerators is gradually introduced through
rewrite rules. General optimization tactics, or reusable transformation
procedures, are being developed alongside their proofs. The middle level is the
Bedrock2 programming language, which is similar to the C language, with formal
support for external functions that can be used to model hardware facilities.
That mechanism is being extended to support modern accelerator interfaces, in
contrast to the simpler, embedded-systems-oriented interfaces of past work.
Finally, processors and accelerators are verified, requiring new developments in
modular specification and proof of hardware.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.