* 2313964
* Collaborative Research: Competition for acoustic space as a driver of species diversity in vibrationally-signaling insects
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Jason Fritts, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Alarming worldwide insect declines have widespread effects on ecological
communities, ranging from bird population reductions to decreased ecological
functioning. Understanding how the environment shapes insect diversity is
critical to combat these rapidly declining insect populations. In this project,
the researchers test whether vibrational communication in insects contributes to
these patterns. While many insects use sound to communicate, the vast majority
of singing insects (>90%) use sound that travels as tiny vibrations through
plant stems and leaves. These vibrational signals are important for processes
like territorial disputes and mate attraction. However, the signals may be
disrupted if other insects living on the same plant produce similar vibrational
signals. The researchers test whether communities of vibrationally signaling
insects avoid overlap in their signals. If so, then this partitioning of
vibrational acoustic space could shape which insects live together. Thus,
anything affecting how many different types of vibrational signals can occur on
the vegetation would also directly affect the number of insect species living
there. The results of the work could open new avenues of research on insect
diversity, highlight the untapped potential of vibrational signals to monitor
insect communities, and provide insight into how human impacts on vegetation
affects insect communities. In addition to testing a novel hypothesis for the
environmental variables shaping insect communities, this project will provide
multiple training opportunities for a diversity of students.

The proposed work tests the acoustic niche hypothesis in shaping prairie insect
communities through a novel lensâ€”vibrational signaling space. Competition for
the vibrational space on any given plant can restrict the types of vibrational
signals that can coexist. Due to the species-specificity of vibrational signals,
competition should therefore also restrict insect diversity. The researchers
test this novel hypothesis in insect communities living in prairies with varying
management histories and current practices. Vibrations and insects will be
collected from multiple 1-m radius plots on each of six prairies. Using piezo
recorders that pick up tiny insect vibrations from plants, the researchers will
record the vibrations in each plot over 24-48 hours. Then, they will immediately
collect insects from the plot using a standardized time period of beat netting.
Additional intensive recordings from a subset of sites will be conducted to
optimize longer-term vibrational sampling strategies. The researchers will
process the vibrational data using machine learning algorithms and look for
vibrational space partitioning, compare vibrational acoustic diversity indices
to insect species diversity indices, and develop novel toolsets for using
vibrations to monitor insect communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.