* 2313843
* RUI: Exploring the Function of FtsZs and the Cytoskeleton to Determine the Molecular Mechanism of Mitochondrial Dynamics in Dictyostelium discoideum
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Kari Naylor, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2027
* USD 541,615.00

Cellular mitochondria regulate many processes, such as calcium levels and
programmed cell death. However, they are best known for energy transduction and
are often referred to as the powerhouse of the cell. This project focuses on
mitochondrial structure because without appropriate structure, mitochondria
become dysfunctional. Although mitochondria developed from an ancestral
bacterial cell, different organisms (e.g., humans, amoeba, algae, yeast, etc.)
maintain mitochondrial structure in different ways. If we can understand the
mechanisms that maintain structure across these organisms, we can learn why the
mechanisms are different while also gaining insight into the causes of
mitochondrial dysfunction. The broader impacts of this project include the
intrinsic merit of the work as the vast majority of eukaryotic cells contain
these organelles. Other activities will involve K-16 students. Students at a
primarily undergraduate university in central Arkansas will carry out this
project. Exposure to quality, well-funded research provides students the ability
to explore whether research is an appropriate career choice for them. It
prepares students for doctoral programs, and mentoring students in research is
critical for retention of those from groups traditionally underrepresented in
STEM. In addition to training undergraduates, this project involves outreach to
K-6 students. The plan is to formalize relationships with local elementary
schools, specifically ones whose ACT Aspire scores indicate a deficit in
science. Interactions with K-6 students via hands-on-activities are designed to
inspire students, show them that science is fun, and continue to develop their
scientific inquiry skills.

The essential functions of the mitochondria are dependent upon their structure,
which, in turn, is dependent upon mitochondrial dynamics, fission, fusion, and
motility. In many cell types such as mammalian and yeast cells, a protein family
known as dynamin-related proteins (DRPs) maintains the highly interconnected
network of mitochondria. Importantly, our model organism, Dictyostelium
discoideum does not use DRPs to regulate mitochondrial dynamics. Rather, the D.
discoideum genome encodes two proteins, FszA and FszB, which are derived from
the bacterial cell division protein, FtsZ. It is not understood why some
organisms use DRPs and some use what appears to be derived FtsZ proteins. A
long-term goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanism of
mitochondrial dynamics in D. discoideum in order to identify when and why some
organisms replaced FtsZs with DRPs as they evolved. The first project goal is to
identify the role of extant FtsZs in mitochondrial dynamics and will involve
altering protein levels, identifying interacting proteins, and analyzing FtsZs
structural complexes. Recent work has shown that the cytoskeleton is a major
player in the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics, and the second goal of this
project is to study the relationship of the cytoskeleton with mitochondrial
dynamics by identifying fission/fusion events, along with transport velocities
when the cytoskeleton is disrupted. Completion of this project will help
determine if FtsZs function like DRPs, and how the D. discoideum cytoskeleton
regulates mitochondrial dynamics. Ultimately, this work will contribute to
understanding the evolution of mitochondria and mitochondrial dynamics and
specifically why some organisms use DRPs and some use FtsZs.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competititive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.