* 2313255
* Conference: Proposal for Student Participation Grant and Distinguished Speakers in Health Community
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Hossain Shahriar, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 16,000.00

This conference proposal requests funds to support student participation in the
IEEE International Conference on Digital Health (ICDH), scheduled for July 2-8,
2023, in Chicago. ICDH brings together leading researchers, community leaders
and visionaries from academia and industry, end-users, and healthcare
professionals, in the area of digital health to share their research, practical
experience, and visions of the future of sustainable health and social care
transformations. The funds will be used to provide travel support for eight
students, cover registration fees for 30 students, and prizes for a student
research project competition. This support will serve both societal goals around
broadening participation, enrich the intellectual diversity of the conference,
improve dissemination of the latest results around digital health to a wider
population, and further the training of the next generation of researchers
interested in digital health.

The organizing committee is looking to expand the benefits of the conference by
(1) providing opportunities to students, with priority to underrepresented
graduate students, to present their original research work in ICDH and providing
a forum to showcase initial research project ideas under the mentoring of expert
researchers as student research competition; and (2) diffusing and fostering
digital health research among the medical community with the help of medical
experts closely related to the digital world. The PIs will accomplish these
goals by providing travel support to students who have papers accepted at the
conference, and by hosting a student competition for US-based graduate students,
with the grant covering the conference registration fees for the students
participating in the competition. Students selected for the competition will
also participate in virtual mentoring sessions with conference speakers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.