* 2313310
* A Fundamental Study on Unsteady Heat Transfer and Dynamic Ice Accretion Processes Pertinent to UAV Icing Protection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 346,307.00

Unmanned-Aerial-Vehicles (UAVs), also known as Drones, is one of the most
remarkable developments in the aviation community with emerging civilian and
military applications. Unlike conventional, large-sized, manned aircraft
cruising at high altitudes, light-weighted UAVs are designed specifically to fly
in low-altitude airspace, thus, are much more vulnerable to the impacts of icing
weather such as frozen rain, snow, and sleet. Current UAV icing avoidance
strategy is either keeping UAVs on the ground or modifying their flight paths,
thereby, greatly reducing the UAV operation capability in cold climate. This is
particularly troubling for life-saving search & rescue operations and military
UAV applications, in which icing conditions would lead to aborted missions and
loss of crucial tactical capabilities. This project aims to improve our
understanding about the underlying UAV icing physics and to develop novel
anti-/de-icing strategies for assured UAV flight safety in all weather
conditions. The project will also encompass significant educational activities,
including a multi-year graduate/undergraduate research program, development of
new teaching modules, and an outreach program for local K-12 students with a
focus of promoting the participation of female students and those from under-
represented minority (URM) groups.

The goal of this project is to conduct a fundamental study to characterize the
important micro-physical processes (i.e., unsteady heat transfer, transient
surface water runback, and dynamic ice accretion process) pertinent to UAV
inflight icing phenomena. The effects of the surface properties (e.g.,
hydrophobicity and thermal conductivity) on the dynamic ice accretion process
over UAV wings and rotating propellers will be evaluated systematically. An
explorative study will be performed to develop a new class of low-power and
effective strategies for UAV inflight icing mitigation. A comprehensive outdoor
flight test campaign will also be conducted to fly experimental UAVs in
atmospheric icing weather (e.g., snow, frozen rain, and sleet) to fill the
knowledge gaps between the idealized lab experiments and realistic UAV inflight
icing process. The proposed research would significantly improve our
understanding about the underlying UAV icing physics. It will also lead to a new
class of low-power and effective anti-/de-icing strategies for assured UAV
flight safety in all weather conditions, which are very critical to life-saving
search & rescue operations and military UAV applications of Americaâ€™s defense
and national security concerns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.