* 2313252
* Nanoscale Interaction of Engineered Quantum Dots with Cephem Skeleton
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yarilyn Cede√±o-Mattei, University of Puerto Rico in Ponce
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2026
* USD 395,244.00

Antibiotics are widely used to treat bacterial infections in humans and animals.
They are also commonly used in agriculture and aquaculture to prevent and treat
bacterial infections in livestock and fish. Unfortunately, the widespread use of
antibiotics has led to an increase in antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the
environment. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria can spread from farms and aquaculture
facilities to the surrounding environment through runoff, soil erosion, and
other means. They have serious implications for human health, as antibiotic-
resistant bacteria can cause infections that are difficult to treat with
existing antibiotics. It is imperative to find new or improved ways to minimize
the occurrence of antibiotics in water bodies and in the environment in general.
Materials produced at the nanoscale are an alternative due to their unusual and
tunable properties. Quantum dots are tiny particles that are so small they are
measured in nanometers (billionths of a meter). They are often used in a process
called photocatalytic degradation where light produces species that break
pollutants or harmful substances (i.e., antibiotics, dyes, among others) into
smaller, less harmful components. This research project will study the
interaction of iron-doped zinc sulfide quantum dots with antibiotics. These
quantum dots will have magnetic characteristics that will permit easy recovery
using magnets. The photodegradation derivatives will be analyzed and identified
using a separation technique. Overall, the importance of this research project
lies in the potential to enable the design of devices to treat contaminated
surface water. Undergraduate students involved in the research will acquire
invaluable knowledge and experience that will be disseminated in local and
national conferences as well as in peer-reviewed articles.

Antibiotics are ubiquitous in surface water because they are broadly used in
human health, agriculture, and food production. The presence of antibiotics in
water resources presents three significant problems: (i) occurrence of
antibiotic resistance genes in aquatic life, (ii) reduction of overall microbial
diversity, including taxa responsible for carbon cycling and primary
productivity, and (iii) reproductive problems and muscle weaknesses in human
populations by chronic ingestion of contaminated drinking water. Alternative
approaches must be found to destroy these pseudo-persistent substances and avoid
their accumulation in aquatic matrices. The long-term goal of this research
project is to create doped quantum dots, producing engineered nanostructures
with enhanced capacity to produce reactive oxygen species which can destroy
antibiotics. The specific objective of this project is to create new energetic
states into crystalline nanostructures through the achievement of three aims.
Aim one is to generate novel nanomaterials with enhanced optical properties and
magnetic characteristics. Aim two is to measure the nanoscale interaction of
engineered quantum dots and antibiotics that have cephem skeleton, by Liquid
Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry. The third Aim is to determine derivative
products after nanoscale interaction of light-activated doped-quantum dots and
antibiotics. The generation of doped quantum dots will provide a fast and
efficient photocatalytic degradation technique for drugs. Furthermore, using a
dopant agent with magnetic properties will offer a quick recuperation and reuse
of these nanomaterials, unveiling new and fascinating scientific and
technological possibilities for designing devices to treat contaminated surface
water. The activities of this project will strengthen the research community
within the University of Puerto Rico at Ponce, contributing to the development
and consolidation of competitive and innovative investigation areas. Results
from the research will be disseminated through peer-review publications,
interdisciplinary conferences, and workshops. Undergraduate students
incorporated into this project will acquire the scientific knowledge and
educational skills to be proficient in conducting research and in presenting
their research outcomes to the scientific community. In addition, these students
will gain knowledge and research experience which will yield useful skills for
successfully navigating their undergraduate tenure as well as their future
careers in STEM fields.

This project is jointly funded by the Nanoscale Interactions Program within
CBET and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.