* 2313258
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Structural Determinants of Exposure and the Gut Microbiome
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Carlye Chaney, Chaney, Carlye
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Elizabeth
Mallott and Theresa Gildner at Washington University in St. Louis, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist studying the
relationship between pesticide exposure, social factors, and human biology
during childhood. Some pesticides contain chemicals that can disrupt the
endocrine system and influence metabolic function. When this disruption occurs
during key periods of development, such as childhood, it may have both short-
and long-term effects on human biology and health. Furthermore, not all
individuals are equally exposed. The results from this project will inform our
understanding of the interaction between individual, household, community, and
societal factors as they relate to pesticide exposures. This project will also
improve our understanding of how pesticide exposure may be related to metabolic
function and the gut microbiome during childhood. In doing so, it will expand
our knowledge of the biological pathways that underlie socioenvironmental
interactions in low-resource communities of the United States.

This NSF postdoctoral fellowship will test the hypothesis that pesticide
exposure influences childhood metabolic development, including the prediction
that the gut microbiome affects the relationship between pesticide exposure and
thyroid function. The project will answer the following questions: 1) Is greater
pesticide exposure over time associated with body composition, changes in
thyroid hormone levels during adolescence, and changes in the gut microbiome? 2)
Do structural factors in the environment, including sewage and drinking water
infrastructure, contribute to differences in environmental exposures and
metabolic development? 3) What other environmental exposures in rural
Mississippi influence health beyond pesticides, such as per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS)? To test this hypothesis, we will measure childhood pesticide
exposure, thyroid hormone levels, body composition, and microbiome composition.
By investigating environmental exposures across varying scales of analysis and
identifying new biological pathways by which these exposures affect child growth
and development, this project will deepen our understanding of the effects of
pesticides during childhood. Together, these findings will advance research on
the social and biological influences on childhood development in the United
States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.