* 2313689
* EAGER: North American Monsoon Prediction Using Causality Informed Machine Learning
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Curtis James, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 162,492.00

This research seeks better understanding of monsoon thunderstorm activity and
precipitation in the Southwest. The project creates an innovative machine
learning tool trained using regional numerical weather model output and
satellite remote sensing data (the predictors) with respect to known
thunderstorm cell locations and intensities detected by radar (the targets). The
tool will be designed to extract important fundamental relationships between the
predictors and targets that help explain the development and evolution of
thunderstorms. After an intense training, validation and testing phase, the
relationships will then be leveraged to generate better forecasts of the timing,
severity and location of future thunderstorm events in the Southwest. The tool
will be shared with the National Weather Service to help forecasters predict
thunderstorm-related hazards such as large hail, flash flooding or wildfire
ignition. This innovative approach will also provide a framework for improving
operational meteorological and geophysical prediction systems and for guiding
scientific field studies.

The project develops a probabilistic model to predict convective initiation,
rain rates, and convective cell tracks during the wet phase of the North
American Monsoon (NAM). Predictors of convection (e.g., relative humidity,
convective available potential energy, precipitable water) will be collected
from dynamic mesoscale model (High Resolution Rapid Refresh, University of
Arizona-Weather Research Forecast model) analyses and forecasts and combined
with new satellite-derived observations of soil moisture and surface temperature
to produce a unique prediction tool. A novel machine learning approach –
causality informed learning – will be applied to identify the most suitable
predictors for further training in a neural network and to gain insight into the
processes governing convective initiation and evolution. Hourly forecasts of
precipitation occurrence, nature, and categorical rain rates will be produced
operationally to guide forecasters and field research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.