* 2313192
* Collaborative Research: OAC CORE: Federated-Learning-Driven Traffic Event Management for Intelligent Transportation Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Da Yan, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,991.00

Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) utilize smart traffic surveillance and
machine learning (ML) technologies to optimize traffic management and guarantee
driving safety. Currently, centralized ML is the mainstream learning method in
the ITS, where vast amounts of traffic video data among distributed edge devices
(e.g., smart traffic cameras and dashcams) are transmitted to a central server
to train an ML model, resulting in prohibitive efficiency and privacy concerns.
Federated learning (FL) is a promising paradigm that leverages the computing
power of distributed devices to enable collaborative training of shared ML
models over large-scale data while keeping the data local and safe.
Unfortunately, existing FL packages fail to fully support the FL on resource-
limited devices, which dominate the road infrastructure edge devices. This
project aims to build an edge-friendly cyberinfrastructure that allows FL to be
deployed for ITS applications in an efficient, secure, and privacy-preserving
manner. The proposed research will bring transformative advances in many
transportation applications, such as naturalistic driving study and traffic
conflict prediction. The proposed cyberinfrastructure will be deployed for real-
world traffic management to enhance transportation agencies’ situational
awareness and decision-making capabilities. The proposed software tools will be
open source to enhance the research infrastructure for the broad ITS
communities. Educational activities include curriculum development, student
mentoring, and outreach to K-12 students.

The project will establish new theoretical and practical results about the FL
from the critical perspectives of efficiency, security, and privacy — three
properties necessary for broad adoption and deployment on the massive resource-
limited road infrastructure edge devices in the ITS. Specifically, (1) this
project will systematically investigate the interplay between the FL and
distinct types of efficiency issues in the ITS, such as expensive computation
cost, high communication consumption, and low device utilization. (2) This
project will provide theoretical and practical security tools for both empirical
and certified defenses against malicious attacks on data and models in the ITS.
(3) This project will investigate the relationship between FL and privacy in the
traffic video data by proposing new theoretically grounded designs and FL
architectures, such as privacy-preserving data and model sharing. (4) This
project will develop a real distributed testbed with NVIDIA Jetson Nano devices
to test the above-proposed methods. These small devices can be deployed in
junction boxes and vehicles for FL to serve ITS applications.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
(OAC) Core Research program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.