* 2313703
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Taking a Computational Approach to Understanding Schema-Memory Interactions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* James Lampinen, Ramey, Michelle M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. James
Lampinen and Grant Shields at the University of Arkansas, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating schema-memory
interactions. Loss of memory is one of the most feared and detrimental
consequences of aging--but when older adults' prior knowledge (i.e., schema) is
consistent with what they are trying to remember (e.g., remembering medication
is in a medicine cabinet), older adults' memory is similar to younger adults'
memory. When their prior knowledge is conflicting with to-be-remembered
information (e.g., remembering medication is in an unusual place like the
fridge), however, older adults have more difficulty remembering that
information. Despite the importance of understanding memory loss with age, it is
not known how or why older adults' memory differs so markedly between schema-
consistent and schema-inconsistent information. This project will address this
gap by using a combination of cutting-edge methods--computational cognitive
model development and new eyetracking metrics--to test new mechanisms and put
forth a new theory of why older adults' memory is so affected by schema
consistency. The findings as well as the novel computational models we develop
are expected to substantially advance the field's understanding of memory in
general and in aging. Moreover, these findings are expected to provide a
foundation for the future development of interventions for memory decline in
aging, such as interventions targeting the use of schemas in memory decisions.

The aims of the proposed research are 1) to develop two new computational
cognitive models that allow the dynamics underlying schema-memory interactions
to be assessed, and 2) to use these models as well as eyetracking to probe
mechanisms underlying age differences in schema effects on memory and test a new
theory. Older and younger adult participants will search for schema-congruent
and schema-incongruent objects in scenes, complete a spatial recall and scene
recognition memory test, and complete a schema-related scene rating task.
Eyetracking data will be collected throughout. One computational cognitive model
will be developed to capture how schema-memory interactions unfold over time,
and another model will be developed to capture how they are weighted in memory
decisions. The proposed research stands to substantially advance our
understanding of schema-memory interactions in general and in aging by
developing and disseminating new models that can be used to answer future
questions in memory research, directly testing previously theorized mechanisms
for the first time, identifying new mechanisms that had not previously been
considered, and putting forward a new theory that stands to reconcile competing
theories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.