* 2313370
* BRC-BIO: Investigation of the tissue-specific role of the ER membrane protein complex (EMC) in the development and maintenance of a multicellular organism
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rebecca Delventhal, Lake Forest College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 502,591.00

Cells require many proteins, either embedded in the cellular membrane or moved
outside of the cell via small packages, for numerous processes. These proteins
can serve a variety of essential functions, such as receptors, tethers, and
signals to other cells. These proteins typically are particularly challenging to
fold into the correct shape. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the location
where this processing occurs with the help of specialized protein complexes. The
PI and undergraduate researchers recently found that loss of one component of an
ER membrane protein complex, EMC4, in specialized cells of the nervous system
called glia, led to a shortened lifespan, locomotor deficits, and other
detrimental outcomes in the model organism, the fruit fly. The proposed research
will investigate novel questions regarding (1) when during the life cycle is
this component required for organismal health, (2) which types of cells in the
nervous system require this component to function normally, and (3) what is the
role of other members of this ER membrane protein complex. Answering these
questions will provide insight into how the ER processes proteins and whether
this differs between specialized cell types or life stages of an organism. This
project will provide scientific training to Lake Forest College undergraduates
through mentored research experiences, improving their access to and preparation
for STEM careers. The proposed project will also incorporate a multi-year
Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) to significantly increase
the number of students that gain valuable research training. The recently
discovered ER membrane protein complex (EMC) consists of 8-10 conserved
subunits, and is thought to be involved in insertion, folding, and protection
from degradation of membrane proteins. However, understanding of EMC function is
limited by the fact that most prior work has been conducted in single-cell
systems. A multicellular organism is required to investigate the cell type-
specific roles of EMC subunits or the impact of EMC function on different life
stages. Drosophila represent a powerful model system to answer questions that
integrate the molecular and cellular function of EMC with its impact on the
organism. The PI and undergraduate researchers recently discovered that glia-
specific RNAi knockdown (KD) of the fly homolog of an EMC subunit, EMC4,
severely reduces adult survival. Flies lacking glial expression of EMC4 also
display a mild developmental delay, but no significant decrease in developmental
viability. EMC4 glial KD flies also display severe locomotor defects and
increased protein aggregation. This research proposes to investigate (1) the
role that glial EMC4 plays in different life stages, specifically during
development vs. during maintenance of an adult organism, (2) the cell-specific
function of EMC4 in specialized cell types of the nervous system, and (3) the
specificity of any of these phenotypes to EMC4 vs. other EMC subunits. This
research will advance understanding of the role of EMC in membrane protein
biogenesis by taking an integrative approach examining survival, behavior, and
development alongside molecular and cellular function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.