* 2313969
* Egalitarian Equivalent Treatment Effects: The Econometrics of Inequality-Sensitive Treatment Effects Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eduardo Zambrano, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 231,797.00

Decision makers often have a strong interest in understanding the distributional
effects of different practices, but existing analyses of these experiments often
either fail to adequately consider these issues or lack a clear economic
framework for evaluating them. The proposed research seeks to bridge this gap by
developing a statistical framework for analyzing distributional impacts in
interventions, building on modern welfare economic theory. This will provide a
more comprehensive and rigorous approach to evaluation that brings both
eﬀiciency and distributional concerns to the analysis.

The proposed work will consist of three components. The first component, written
in collaboration with Marc Fleurbaey, involves developing a methodology for
determining an evaluator’s social preferences based on the tradeoffs between the
well-being of different individuals that the evaluator considers acceptable. The
second component involves incorporating this social welfare information into a
statistical estimation framework, using an egalitarian equivalent representation
of the evaluator’s preferences, a concept akin to the certainty equivalent
representation in expected utility theory. The third component involves applying
this framework to the analysis of optimal treatment rules in randomized
controlled trials, using Bayesian, maximin, and minimax regret criteria, and
testing the developed methodologies on several well-known trials that exhibit
considerable treatment effect heterogeneity. Interventions that exhibit
treatment effect heterogeneity can be diﬀicult to evaluate and summarize in
terms of welfare. The methods developed in this project provide specific,
quantitative guidance for how to do this evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.