* 2313452
* Systematic mapping of magma bodies under Cascades volcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Geoffrey Abers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 433,198.00

Volcanic eruptions threaten public safety and can cause severe social and
economic damage. Most eruptions of continental arc volcanoes are supplied from
molten rock, or magma, that builds up in a reservoir somewhere in the crust.
However, the size, distribution and depth of crustal magma systems, and their
variability between volcanoes, remain poorly known beneath most active systems.
The aim of the project is to quantify this variability by providing a synoptic,
holistic seismic imaging survey of magma systems along one arc, the Cascades arc
of Washington, Oregon and northern California. This arc poses the largest threat
to population centers of any in the United States. The study leverages abundant
newly deployed or upgraded seismographs placed within a few kilometers of the
summits of many of the high-threat Cascades volcanoes, operated by the U.S.
Geological Survey. These instruments for the first time provide seismic signals
at a scale that could pass through the magma reservoirs. The signals will allow
for the first uniform sampling of the magma systems beneath most major Cascades
volcanoes. The project supports a postdoc and a graduate student at Cornell
University, who will collaborate with scientists at the U.S. Geological Surveyâ€™s
Cascades Volcano Observatory (CVO). The project will help CVO set up a workflow
for continuously monitoring volcanic activities.

The project will take advantage of the upgraded seismic monitoring network of
CVO and apply several robust seismic techniques to image key volcanic centers
along the Cascades volcano arc systematically. Receiver functions frequently
show large-amplitude signals near volcanoes that are not seen elsewhere. They
will be derived for all near-summit stations, and used to identify and describe
sharp interfaces, particularly the tops of magma bodies that produce distinctive
seismic velocity inversions. Ambient-noise imaging will be conducted to measure
absolute S-wave velocities in the regions sampled by receiver functions, to
constrain critical physical properties. These and other measurements are
complemented by a comprehensive suite of full-waveform forward models to
understand better how finite-wavelength signals interact with magma bodies.
These measurements will be jointly inverted and interpreted in a context of
variable geometry melt-wavespeed relationships. The ambient noise analyses will
also serve as a baseline in a search for temporal changes in seismic wavespeeds
near volcanoes, a potential indication of magma movements. The work, for the
first time, provides robust, consistent images of magma plumbing systems at
multiple volcanoes and will provide more systematic assessments of magma
reservoir characteristics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.