* 2313721
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Anthropological Investigation of Demographic Variability in the Ancient Oral Microbiome
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Laura Weyrich, Ham, Allison C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) programs. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laura Weyrich
at the Pennsylvania State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career researcher investigating the effect of demographic
variables (age, sex) on variation within the ancient oral microbiome to
elucidate how these differences relate to health outcomes in the past. While
there is a strong connection between the oral microbiome and disease in living
populations, the relationship between individual variation in oral microbiota
and health disparities remains unclear. Hence, this project aims to gain insight
into the relationship between the human oral microbiome, health, and disease by
investigating what demographic factors produce individual variation in oral
microbiota. Anthropological studies on human-pathogen interactions can further
our understanding of the etiology of certain diseases and how social and
environmental conditions in the past helped to shape health inequities observed
in living populations. Therefore, by contributing temporal information on past
biological, social, and environmental factors related to health outcomes, the
results of this project can help in the development of public health
interventions that target health risks and exposures and can help to improve the
quality of the life for groups who are disproportionately impacted by health
disparities.

Drawing on perspectives from anthropology, microbiology, demography, and
ecology, this project studies age- and sex-specific variability in the ancient
oral microbiome using paleodemographic and biomolecular analyses conducted on
existing dental calculus samples from medieval and post-medieval cemeteries to
achieve two primary research objectives. First, reexamine the effects of
demographic factors (age and sex) on the diversity and composition of the human
oral microbiome. Second, investigate how variation in microbiota diversity and
composition effects sex-based health outcomes, as manifested in variation in
risks of mortality, across time. To achieve these objectives a Bayesian approach
to transition analysis is used to generate age point estimates for age-at-death,
and genomic and proteomic procedures as well as traditional morphological
skeletal traits are used to estimate sex. Oral microbiota diversity and
composition are assessed using metrics of alpha- and beta-diversity, and
hazards-based statistical approaches are employed to assess the effect of these
metrics on survivorship. Ultimately, this project’s integration of
paleodemographic and biomolecular data can shed light on the etiology of
skeletal manifestations of disease and their relationship to survival; the role
pathogens played in shaping past human populations; and the mechanisms involved
in human-microbial interactions and the production of differential patterns of
human health across time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.