* 2313797
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Motivating Allyship Behaviors to Broaden Participation in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Charlotte Moser, Moser, Charlotte
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Tiffany Ito
and Dr. Evava Pietri at the University of Colorado Boulder, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating ways to
encourage allyship. Allyship has been shown to increase sense of belonging and
likelihood of retention in STEM fields. This project will take a motivational
approach to tackle common barriers to engagement in allyship. Specifically, this
project will examine ways to motivate allyship based on key psychological and
group-level needs. This research will additionally examine perceptions of the
motivation to be an ally.

Although allyship has been shown to increase sense of belonging and confidence,
these effects will only occur to the extent that individuals are willing and
motivated to act as allies. The first aim of the research is to examine tactics
to encourage allyship behaviors and the mechanisms that underpin these tactics.
These studies bridge theorizing from social identity theory and self-
determination theory to provide a more comprehensive framework to understand
motivational factors for members of advantaged groups to act as allies for
disadvantaged groups. The researcher will employ a variety of experiments that
frame allyship as meeting basic psychological and group-level needs to test
whether meeting such needs promotes allyship behaviors. The second aim of this
research is to explore responses to allyship strategies across STEM groups,
expanding our understanding of the psychological impacts of allyship in general.
Taken together, this research will identify strategies to encourage allyship
that are 1) effective in increasing allyship behaviors, 2) perceived positively,
and 3) and result in positive STEM outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.