* 2313994
* Acknowledging and Shifting the Dynamics of Power: Building Equitable Partnerships Among Informal STEM Learning Practitioners, Researchers, and Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Daniel Aguirre, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 143,166.00

The National Science Foundation, particularly the Directorate for STEM
Education, has long funded work to support collaborations between researchers
and practitioners, and to promote the application of research to improve
learning outcomes in formal and informal learning environments. Popular and
successful approaches have included the development of online repositories that
help practitioners access, understand, and apply research knowledge to their
work. Increasingly, these efforts involve partnerships that require [1]
acknowledging and navigating boundaries by being open and curious to learn about
each other and [2] working across these boundaries since effective partnerships
work at these intersections as ideas are exchanged and mediated. This project
will enhance understanding of how practitioners and researchers can and should
form equitable partnerships in service of supporting lifelong STEM learning in
informal learning environments. It will also examine how "community" intersects
with partnerships, and the different levels or scales of community with which an
ISL partnership of researchers and practitioners may intentionally and equitably
engage. This two-phase Partnership Development and Planning project is conducted
by the Institute for Learning Innovation and Pueblo Collab LLC, a community-
centered consulting organization focused on shifting organizational culture to
build better relationships with communities.

This project will focus on initial processes of building equitable ISL
partnerships between practitioners and researchers by engaging in intentional
exercises for co-thinking around issues of equity and power in ISL work.
Grounded in Ferrell and colleagues' equity-in-mission and equity-in-process,
these efforts are designed to build trust and shared understanding among
partners while also confronting systemic power dynamics (and their roles in the
team's prior partnerships). In Phase one, the core project members will test and
refine the processes examining their own and each other's practices before
widening the lens. In Phase two, an expanded group of ISL and ISL-adjacent
researchers and practitioners will be engaged. Several claims will be
scrutinized using co-constructed process evaluation: 1) Providing sufficient
time and space for self-reflection and co-reflection conversations about power
in ISL researcher-practitioner relationships can support the development of
trust. 2) Providing such time and space to engage in this work is central to the
co-creation of a shared research agenda. and 3) Iteratively addressing issues
around power and trust is essential to creating a healthy, equitable, and
lasting ISL researcher-practitioner partnership. By the end of this project the
team will have a) created a strong and expanded partnership; b) developed a
collection of conversation prompts and exercises specifically useful for
developing equitable partnerships between researchers and practitioners in ISL
contexts, c) considered how researcher-practitioner partnerships engage with the
communities/public audiences, and d) identified future project ideas that ensure
reciprocal benefits for the partners and communities involved. Processes will be
shared broadly though a co-written blog series.

This Partnership Development & Planning project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes. By examining the foundational
and sometimes problematic practices in the ISL field that must be interrogated
to make meaningful change in this space, the project supports AISL's goal for
broadening participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.