* 2313164
* NeTS: Medium: Managing Datacenter Traffic Bursts, Fast and Slow
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Soudeh Ghorbani, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2027
* USD 959,491.00

As the modern “factories” for the Internet, datacenters fuel our increasingly
digital world. They host the majority of today’s applications ranging from email
to e-healthcare solutions. These applications have exceedingly low latency
requirements. Meeting these requirements is challenging due to network
congestion. Traditional approaches for managing congestion are not well-suited
for today’s increasingly complex and highly dynamic networks. In particular,
they fail to react fast enough to pervasive short-lived spikes in network
traffic. The goal of this research is to address this challenge by developing
new paradigms for fast congestion identification and management in datacenter
networks. If successful, the project will improve the speed and efficiency of
cloud-based applications. It can also enable future latency-sensitive
applications.

The project posits that ideal congestion control depends on the time scale of
the congestion event. For example, real-time and local congestion management
techniques such as packet deflection can effectively manage microsecond-scale
congestion. However, the same techniques can cause instability, throughput
collapse and, ironically, increased latency if deployed during widescale
congestion. Identifying and reacting based on the scale of congestion is
challenging in today’s dynamic, large-scale, and complex networks. To resolve
these challenges, this project pursues two lines of inquiry: (a) do congestion
events scale in datacenters and how frequently? What are the structural
properties and origins of congestion events? and (b) can we design multi-scale
congestion management systems and enable various techniques to interoperate?
This project will build a holistic measurement framework that systematically and
automatically analyzes the scaling of congestion from multiple vantage points
deployed in various layers of hosts and different topological locations in the
network. This project will also develop multi-scale congestion management
techniques and introduce novel abstractions that allow these techniques to
interoperate by dividing the task of congestion handling among different
techniques based on the scale of congestion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.