* 2313268
* Conference: 2023 Applied and Environmental Microbiology GRC and GRS: Writing the Microbial Constitution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Joel Kostka, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 19,900.00

Microorganisms are present virtually everywhere on Earth. Microbes carry out
processes that make Earth habitable and help to maintain plant, human, and
animal health. In other words, an understanding of microorganisms and their
activities is critical to sustain clean air and water, to maintain food security
and to prevent human disease. This grant will support the participation of
early-career scientists in the Gordon Conference on Applied and Environmental
Microbiology (GRC-AEM)at Mount Holyoke College, July 16-21, 2023. Established in
1950, the GRC-AEM brings together scientists to address research on the
importance of microbes in human health, interactions of microbes with animals
and plants, terrestrial and aquatic biogeochemical cycles, bioremediation of
contaminated land and water, production of biofuels, and use of microbes as
biocatalysts in industry. Areas of microbiological research covered by the GRC-
AEM have an immense societal impact on the environment and mankind and thus this
GRC remains highly topical and a very vibrant research field.

The main goals of the GRC-AEM are to provide an open forum for the presentation
and discussion of the latest research findings on environmental and applied
applications of microorganisms from the single cell to the ecosystem level. The
GRC AEM will address critical or even controversial issues for the development
of new technologies. The 2023 Conference subtitled "Writing the Microbial
Constitution" will include sessions on: Core Principles that Govern Life,
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function, Ecoengineering, Applications and Emerging
Contaminants, Ecology and Evolution of Holobionts, Transitioning Human
Microbiome Research into Health Outcomes, Probing Microbial Phenotypes In Situ,
Microbial Mediation of Biogeochemical Cycles, Microbes and Climate Change and
Symbiosis in Ecosystems. The Conference has a strong track record of stimulating
cutting edge and innovative research by scientists in academia, research
institutes/foundations and government and industrial laboratories. There will be
a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS-AEM) associated with the GRC-AEM focussed on
Exploring Complex Networks of Microbial Communities, which will be exclusively
for PhD students and postdoctoral researchers. The GRC-AEM program will also
have several poster talks by early-career researchers chosen from poster
abstract submissions. The grant will ensure broadening participation of a
diverse group of individuals who can attend both the GRS and the GRC, assisting
with costs for PhD students, postdocs and early-career faculty members to
participate in the GRS and GRC, respectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.