* 2313490
* Collaborative Research: Active deformation and exhumation at the transition from subduction to oblique collision in Central New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Colin Amos, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 264,044.00

Earth’s outer shell consists of rigid tectonic plates that interact primarily
along their edges. Several factors control these interactions, including the
composition of the plates (oceanic versus continental) and the relative sense of
motion between them (colliding, diverging, or sliding past one another). These
factors combined control the natural hazards expressed along tectonic plate
boundaries, including earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis, and volcanoes. Because
Earth’s tectonic plates are not static, the distribution and character of
tectonic plate boundaries change over geologic time. As such, understanding
plate-boundary hazards requires a comprehensive view of their evolution in
response to changes in plate motions and character. The 2016 M7.8 Kaikōura
earthquake in Aotearoa New Zealand occurred at a critical plate tectonic
transition zone, where the boundary changes from subduction (oceanic plate
consumed beneath continental) to strike slip (sliding parallel to one another)
and ultimately continental collision. The extent of deformation and triggered
landslides in this event highlight the complex hazards associated with a major
plate-boundary transition. This study will shed light on how plate transitions
evolve by studying active faults and cooling ages of uplifted bedrock in the
area surrounding the 2016 earthquake. Impacts of this study include advancing
scientific knowledge and training graduate students, thereby contributing to a
globally competitive scientific workforce. The project bolsters domestic and
international partnerships by engaging US students in collaborative,
international field work, and deepens connections between US and New Zealand
researchers. The investigators will develop an international university seminar
series focused on exploring bicultural approaches to weaving indigenous
knowledge and geoscience research. With New Zealand collaborators and Māori
advisors at the University of Canterbury, the investigators will build on their
institutional connections to indigenous and minoritized communities to broaden
participation of these groups both in the seminar and in geological field
research. Finally, this project will enhance research and educational
infrastructure by supporting new and existing analytical capacities at Western
Washington University and the University of Michigan.

This project focuses on the evolution of crustal deformation across a plate-
boundary transition from subduction to oblique collision through collection and
integration of new neotectonic and low-temperature thermochronologic data in
North Canterbury, New Zealand. Specific research tasks include: (1)
characterizing the rate and kinematics of shallow faulting for understudied
structures surrounding the epicentral region of the 2016 Kaikōura earthquake,
(2) measuring differential uplift from incised fluvial surfaces along major
rivers transecting fault-related folds in this area, and (3) quantifying the
onset, rate, and spatial pattern of bedrock exhumation associated with the
transition from subduction to oblique collision. These tasks target existing
knowledge gaps related to the mechanics and kinematics of plate boundary
migration, and will shed light on outstanding research questions including: How
do plate-boundary terminations migrate over time, and what are the fault growth
mechanisms through which a new plate-boundary structure develops? Is there a
measurable “bow wave” or “wake” attending this migration that impacts crustal
deformation and exhumation? What is the role of the subducting slab in
controlling deformation at a subduction termination over multiple earthquake
cycles?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.