* 2313865
* An Explainable Machine Learning Platform for Single Cell Data Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stefan Bekiranov, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2026
* USD 259,821.00

The rapid advances in single-cell RNA sequencing technologies have enabled us to
capture gene signatures within the fundamental units of life, single cells. This
enables discovery and characterization of cell types including novel ones in
multicellular organisms; cell-cell communication and the complex interactions
between various cell types in tissues; spatially resolved mapping of organs at
the single cell level; and identification of genes and pathways in specific cell
types of an organism affected in different contexts. The project introduces a
set of novel and explainable machine learning approaches tailored to single-cell
data analysis. A platform for explainable machine learning will be developed
capable of supporting advanced analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing data and
making explainable predictions to directly link phenotypes with genes and
pathways in specific cell types. The approaches from this project are
translational to any tabular datasets with low-sample-size or many variables,
which are prevalent in biological research. The projectâ€™s single-cell sequencing
data analysis tools, results, and generated data will be excellent exemplars of
research projects for exposing undergraduates, graduates, women, and minority
students to the development and application of explainable machine learning
approaches to advance our understanding of biology at the single cell level.
Moreover, development and application of powerful machine leaning tools that
yield interpretable results from complex biological datasets and broad
accessibility to these methods, tools and results will maximize their value,
accelerate biological discovery and advance our understanding of cellular and
molecular biology.

Specifically, the project will develop a platform of novel machine learning
approaches to generate disentangled representations of cells and genes in latent
spaces for single-cell RNA sequencing data, which can be used to make
explainable predictions of phenotypes. The project contains three synergistic
tasks: (1) develop explainable cell-prototype-based approaches to single-cell
RNA sequencing data analysis, (2) develop explainable concept-based machine
learning models for single-cell RNA sequencing data analysis, and (3) develop
machine learning methods to generate representative single cell expression data
from bulk RNA sequencing data. Through these tasks, the project develops
algorithms, models and tools that enable the full power of state-of-the art
explainable machine learning to be applied to single cell data analysis and
phenotype prediction at single cell resolution. The algorithms and tools
produced by this project will be broadly applicable to predicting genes and
pathways at the single cell level in different organisms. The platform can
significantly enhance the utility of single-cell data, and assist researchers in
analysis of their own datasets. The results of the project can be found at:
https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~az9eg/website/projects.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.