* 2313109
* Collaborative Research: CPS Medium: Learning through the Air: Cross-Layer UAV Orchestration for Online Federated Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Christopher Brinton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 799,204.00

Propelled by the growth in demand for artificial intelligence-enabled
applications, the past decade has witnessed the emergence of Collaborative
Cyber-Physical Learning Systems (CCPLS). CCPLS carry out distributed, learning-
based processing tasks through coordination among Cyber-Physical System (CPS)
devices, and are envisioned to provide critical functionality across the
commercial and defense sectors in the next several years. However, the data
generated by CCPLS is often large-scale, high-dimensional, heterogeneous, and
time-varying, which poses critical challenges for intelligence modeling.
Concurrently, unmanned vehicles, in particular Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
have shown promise of scaling up information-sharing in CCPLS, especially in
under-served regions such as rural areas. The project's novelties are in
establishing a concrete foundation for UAV-CCPLS integration that unifies the
associated learning, networking, and communication design aspects around
appropriate intelligence metrics. The project's impacts are the development of
UAV-assisted CCPLS for smart agriculture tasks, as well as advancing the
manufacturing of UAVs and other unmanned vehicles tailored for CCPLS. Project
outcomes will be disseminated by releasing open-source software and research
videos and tutorials. The investigators will further engage in Curriculum
development, diversity, and outreach activities including mentoring
undergraduate researchers.

Research investigations center around three interconnected thrusts. Thrust 1
develops a novel UAV-assisted intelligence framework for CCPLS and introduces a
precise, task-oriented notion of data dynamics and heterogeneity. Additionally,
this thrust develops a `learning for learning’ framework that aims to
predictively estimate the rate of data dynamics. Thrust 2 investigates
methodologies for jointly optimizing resource utilization and intelligence
quality through co-design of UAV trajectories and UAV-to-CPS network
establishment. The data dynamics framework from Thrust 1 is integrated into this
design through an online, network-aware sequential decision-making framework.
Finally, Thrust 3 develops CCPLS communication protocols based on learning-aware
uplink and downlink wireless beamformers and over-the-air aggregation methods.
These protocols are tailored to the specific needs of the UAV-assisted learning
systems, e.g., the transmission of noisy information over UAV-to-UAV and UAV-to-
access point communication links.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.