* 2313483
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Initial Charge Separation Mechanism in Photosystem I: A Synergistic Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 470,383.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Wu Xu from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, and
Professors Sergei Savikhin and Lyudmila Slipchenko from Purdue University will
investigate the molecular mechanism of the initial charge transfer in
photosystem I complex. Photosystem I is found in all plants, algae, and oxygenic
bacteria on Earth. It is one of the major components of photosynthetic machinery
that captures the energy of sunlight and powers life on the planet. The goal of
the proposed research is to provide a detailed and unambiguous picture of the
process that enables photosystem I to convert absorbed sunlight into motion of
charges, i.e. electrical current. The work will be conducted through the unique
synergistic combination of genetic engineering, ultrafast optical spectroscopy,
and predictive molecular modeling. A practical value of the proposed research is
in its potential impact on the advancement of natural and bio-inspired systems
for energy production. This work will provide graduate and undergraduate
students with truly multidisciplinary experience and reinforce the role of such
collaborations in the future generation of scientists.

Despite three decades of intense investigation, critical details of charge
separation in photosystem I are still lacking. There is no consensus on the
kinetics and molecular mechanism of the primary charge separation in the
photosystem I reaction center. The proposed work will address these research
questions. Genetic engineering targeting the properties of various cofactors
within the photosystem I reaction center combined with ultrafast optical
spectroscopy will provide a wealth of data that carries indirect information on
the electron transfer in the complex. This data will be used to validate and
refine first-principles modeling strategies in which the only experimental input
is the structure of the photosystem I complex. The validated first-principles
model will facilitate the interpretation of the experimental data and suggest
new specific mutations with anticipated effects on photosystem I properties.
This multifaceted, synergistic project is being conducted by a team of
investigators who have extensive expertise and experience in photosynthetic
research and an established track record of collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.