* 2313996
* Iterative Improvement of a Program for Building Inclusive, Diverse, Equitable, Accessible Large-scale (IDEAL) Participatory Science Projects
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Caren Cooper, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,123,487.00

Many scientific inquiries require the participation of thousands of people
across multiple locations to share their observations and local knowledge which
together yield discoveries that are otherwise unobtainable. These large-scale
public participation in scientific research (PPSR) projects also provide an
important opportunity for public engagement in science. However, PPSR projects
share a common challenge: public participants tend to be demographically
homogeneous (white, wealthy, and highly educated), which limits informal science
learning opportunities and produces gaps in the scientific data in terms of
race, ability and lived experience. In this project, researchers and
practitioners of two national participatory science projects will beta-test a
professional development program called Inclusive, Diverse, Equitable,
Accessible, Large-scale (IDEAL) participatory science. The program was co-
created with practitioners and students who are people of color and/or
immigrants, representing a range of gender identities and sexual orientations
and neurodivergent individuals alongside facilitators that specialize in helping
STEM professionals address social inequities. The IDEAL program supports
practitioners in developing self-awareness, readiness, agency, and resources to
modify their projects with practices that support belonging, equity, and
accessibility. The project will iteratively test the IDEAL program and study
whether it can impact practitioners' subsequent behaviors to change project
structures to engage an audience of groups of the public that have been
historically excluded (e.g., people of color, people with disabilities) from
large-scale participatory science projects. This work is led by a partnership of
researchers and practitioners from North Carolina State University, Shaw
University (an HBCU), Arizona State University (a Hispanic-Serving Institution),
and two nation-wide public participation in scientific research projects,
Audubon’s Christmas Bird Count (CBC) and Colorado State University’s Community
Collaborative Rain, Hail, and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS), and guided by team
members and advisors with expertise in diversity, equity, access, and inclusion
and racially, ethnically, gender and disability diverse lived experiences.

Over a three-year period, this project will provide, iterate, and test the
impact of IDEAL practices with approximately 180 practitioners whose
implementation will reach approximately 6,000 public participants. The research
will result in evidence-based professional development to support practices for
diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion in the informal learning context
of large-scale participatory sciences. The research will examine self-awareness,
readiness, agency, and implementation of new practices by practitioners who beta
test the IDEAL program. The team will conduct document analyses of the
practitioner products and discourse analysis among the communities of practice
supported through the IDEAL program. These methods will be used to detail
evidence of IDEAL constructs (e.g., do they describe inclusion or
assimilation?), derived constructs related to intended practitioner outcomes
(self-awareness, readiness, and agency), and additional emergent themes using
content analysis. Retrospective self-reported outcomes will explore practitioner
attributions to the IDEAL training, and quantitative comparisons will help the
team begin to understand aspects that differ among identity groups. To determine
the impacts of the training on broadening participation among PPSR participants,
the team will create three comparison groups: IDEAL sites with implementation
financial support, IDEAL sites without implementation financial support, and
sites without any practitioners trained with the IDEAL Program. Using pre/post
surveys across approximately 1,200 public participants, the team will be able to
gauge the impact of the IDEAL program on diversity of participant identity
groups, participants' sense of belonging to the project, and participants' self-
efficacy for science learning and doing. The evidence-based program will be
shared widely on freely accessible blogs, websites, and resource centers.
Research findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal articles
and through public media outlets such as podcasts and a bilingual radio show.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.