* 2313578
* CPS: Small: Cyber-Physical Phases of Mixed Traffic with Modular &amp; Autonomous Vehicles: Dynamics, Impacts and Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Xiaopeng Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 390,394.00

Emerging technologies in communications and vehicle technologies will allow
future autonomous vehicles to be platooned together with wireless communications
(cyber-connected) or physically forming an actual train (physically-connected).
When physically connected, vehicles may dock to and undock from each other en-
route when vehicles are still moving. While such platooning can potentially
offer substantial societal benefits in safety, mobility and environmental
friendliness, their emergence also challenges the classic traffic flow models
that do not account for the state that vehicles can have very short to no gaps
from each other. And yet, classic traffic flow models are being used for all
traffic simulations for assessment on safety, mobility and environment. This
project aims to expand classic highway traffic flow models to account for states
where vehicles can be very close to or even physically connected with each
other. These new models will help stakeholders plan and manage future
transportation systems and supply the engineering curriculum with new methods,
tools, and experimental platforms oriented towards future smart urban systems.

The objectives of this research are (1) to gain new knowledge on the impacts of
the emerging new states in highway traffic dynamics in both ideal (e.g., with
zero sensor errors and delay, infinite communication range, and infinite
computational power ) and realistic ( e.g., with sensor noise, communication
delay and computational limits) operational conditions, (2) to devise mechanisms
and managing strategies to properly regulate the multi-state mixed traffic for
its best performance, and (3) to quantify the key components of the models and
systems via both full-scale and reduced-scale testbeds. These models will
provide theoretical insights on the upper-bound performance of a mixed traffic
system in ideal operational conditions. Then realistic cyber-physical
constraints will be incorporated into the highway system and agent-based
simulations will be conducted to understand how the system performance will be
compromised due to these real-world cyber-physical constraints. Various
management strategies will also be explored via both decentralized (e.g., each
individual vehicle making decisions on its own) and centralized (e.g., all
vehicles controlled or coordinated by a central operator) control strategies for
offsetting the performance of a transportation system closer to the theoretical
upper bound. Finally, field experiments on both multi-scale testbeds will be
conducted to validate the key components of the theorems and models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.