* 2313072
* CIF:Small:Developing Theory of Spatiotemporal-Resolution and Spatiotemporal-Localization Algorithms for Single-Molecule Localization Microscopy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Yi Sun, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 580,207.00

Single-molecule localization microscopy (SMLM) overcame the longstanding light-
diffraction barrier to provide super-resolution optical imaging, significantly
impacting biological research. Nevertheless, two important problems remain
before SMLM can be advanced further. First, still needed is a theory of
spatiotemporal resolution which speaks to the inherent power of an SMLM system
in resolving a molecule in space and time, thereby quantifying how each part of
an SMLM system affects the information-theoretical limit of spatiotemporal
resolution. Thus, a spatiotemporal resolution theory would lay an information-
theoretic foundation and provide guidance in the development of electro-optical
hardware, fluorescence molecules, and localization algorithms to advance SMLM.
Second, the majority of localization algorithms in literature exploit the
information of only a single data frame. Advanced spatiotemporal localization
algorithms need to be developed to fully exploit the information of the multiple
frames of a data movie in order to approach the information-theoretic limit of
spatiotemporal resolution. Advanced spatiotemporal localization algorithms can
significantly enhance spatiotemporal resolution and fulfill the needs of both
super spatial and temporal resolutions in biomedical research. The
spatiotemporal resolution theory and spatiotemporal location algorithms to be
developed in this project will broadly impact interdisciplinary research of SMLM
in both theory as well as in applications to biomedical research.

In this project, first, a conceptually novel theory of spatiotemporal resolution
with respect to one-dimensional (1D), 2D, and 3D spatial resolutions will be
developed based on the Fisher information of a universal model of a data movie.
The effect of system parameters on the spatiotemporal resolution and the
tradeoff between spatial and temporal resolutions will be analytically and
numerically investigated. The unbiased Gaussian information-achieving estimator
that achieves the Fisher information of a data movie will be developed and
simulated. Second, two types of advanced spatiotemporal localization algorithms
will be developed to fully exploit the spatial and temporal information in a
data movie. One is the maximum movie-likelihood (UGIA-M) algorithm that
maximizes the likelihood of an entire data movie. The other is the temporal
correlation-enhancement algorithms that exploit the temporal correlation
embedded in the frame-by-frame localized SMLM images. The two types of
algorithms will be evaluated via simulation in terms of spatiotemporal
resolution using a universal partition-based metric driven by root-mean-square
minimum distance and root-mean-square error with respect to a UGIA-M benchmark
as well as by comparison to existing high-performance localization algorithms
from the literature. The two types of algorithms will be applied to the analysis
of real datasets of biological specimens, and source code for the developed
theory and algorithms will be posted in public repositories for open access by
the community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.