* 2313246
* Conference: 32nd Annual Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Yamil Colon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 31,872.00

The Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference is an
annual regional meeting for interdisciplinary researchers in thermodynamics. Its
format and accessibility present an ideal setting for undergraduate students,
graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and early career faculty members
from the Midwest to disseminate their work. It will be held on the campus of the
University of Notre Dame on June 7-8, 2023. The MTSM Conference has historically
provided a forum for researchers working on theoretical and experimental aspects
of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics to come together, present their
work, and exchange ideas. Most participants will be from chemical engineering
and chemistry departments, although students and faculty from physics, materials
science, mechanical engineering, and computer science departments have also
participated in this conference series.

The Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference brings together
a diverse group of thermodynamics researchers for the exchange of new research
results and ideas. Research areas include self-assembly, phase transitions,
macromolecular dynamics, and macroscopic material properties, encompassing
experimental, theoretical, and computational thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics. The conference is open to all researchers, though an emphasis is
placed on providing a platform for early career researchers to increase the
audience for their results, build a network of like-minded investigators, and
identify potential collaborative opportunities. Historically, topics of interest
have included the prediction of microscopic structure and macroscopic properties
of nanomaterials, soft matter, and biological systems, where thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics are fundamentally important. Applications to a variety of
engineering applications such as energy conversion and storage, environment
protection, materials design, synthesis of polymers and nanostructures, and
investigation of biomolecules for drug delivery will be presented. This years'
conference will be the 32nd held since 1988.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.