* 2313678
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Diffusion studies in baddeleyite and zircon
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daniele Cherniak, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2026
* USD 165,744.00

The minerals zircon (ZrSiO4) and baddeleyite (ZrO2), although present only in
low concentrations in most rocks, are important phases in geochronometry
(measuring ages of rocks, meteorites, and geologic events). They incorporate
trace and minor elements useful as geochemical indicators. Zircons in particular
are very robust mineral grains and, since they can survive many types of
geological events, are some of the oldest known materials on Earth. They have
preserved information about geological processes that were occurring up to 4.4
billion years ago. Understanding the diffusion (mobility of atoms) behavior of
key elements inside these minerals provides major constraints on how we
interpret the measured ages, and chemical signatures of rocks and ancient
geological events. There has been extensive study of diffusion of several
chemical elements in zircon, even if some elements have been understudied. In
contrast, there is a lack of diffusion data entirely for baddeleyite, which can
yield complementary information to that gained from zircon analysis.
Understanding diffusion in these minerals is essential for interpreting a wide
range of geochronometric data, and evaluating and interpreting the chemical and
isotopic signatures retained in these minerals over geologic timeframes. The
main broader impacts of this work will be a contribution of important data that
can be used by a wide range of scientists in diverse, but related, fields. The
project will also provide an educational experience for undergraduate students
in physics, engineering, and geosciences, as well as high school students from
underserved communities.

The proposed experiments build on a body of work measuring diffusion of a
variety of elements in accessory minerals (minerals in generally minor abundance
in rocks, but which incorporate elements important as geochronometers or
geochemical tracers), to obtain a more complete geochemical picture of these
critical minerals. The work also continues the refinement and application of
accelerator-based ion beam techniques (Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy
and Nuclear Reaction Analysis) in diffusion studies, exploiting the superior
depth resolution of these analytical methods to access the slow diffusivities
characteristic of many species in these materials. With the increasing
application of microanalytical techniques to analyze natural samples and access
fine-scale chemical and isotopic variations, diffusion data are a critical
parameter in interpreting timing of geologic events, and evaluation of past
chemical environments and thermal histories. These measurements will yield
critical information for interpreting isotopic ages and thermal histories for
baddeleyite, a mineral of interest but for which little diffusion data currently
exist. The measurements of pentavalent cation diffusion in zircon will provide
information about the resistance to chemical alteration of elements potentially
useful as geochemical tracers, provide insight into substitutional mechanisms
and charge balance for diffusion of altervalent cations. The Xe diffusion
results may have implications for better interpreting Xe isotope systematics and
noble gas behaviors in terrestrial and lunar samples, and understanding
histories of the early Earth and Solar System. Zirconia also has utility as a
refractory and optical material, so better understanding of its properties may
have technological implications. The broader impacts of this work will be as a
contribution of important data that can be used by a wide range of scientists in
diverse, but related, fields in the geosciences, including thermochronology,
geochronology, and studies of the early Earth and Solar System. The project will
involve undergraduate students in research, providing experience in preparing
samples, crystal synthesis, conducting experiments, using various analytical
methods, and analyzing and interpreting data and presenting at research
conferences. The project will also support a community outreach effort aimed at
introducing local high school students to scientific research methods and Earth
science.

This project is jointly funded by Petrology & Geochemistry and Division of Earth
Sciences to support projects that increase research capabilities, capacity and
infrastructure at a wide variety of institution types, as outlined in the GEO
EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.