* 2313877
* Reversible long-term memory devices in bacteria inspired by mammalian chromatin modification circuits
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 481,237.00

Enabling bacterial cells to remember long time environmental cues is essential
for numerous processes including, sensing pollutants in water or soil, for
recording biomarkers of stress in the human gut, and for triggering cell death
to avoid escape in the environment. At the same time, if scientists can build
this capability, they will also understand its principles, and thereby
potentially shed light on how human cells can remember their identity for the
life-time of an organism, a critical property that is broken in some biological
processes. The unique innovation of this project is the engineering of a circuit
motif in bacteria that mimics processes associated with long-term memory of
chromatin states in mammalian cells. This design is expected to enable long-term
memory of gene states in bacteria. This project will enrich the curriculum of
the Biomolecular Feedback Systems Course, which is taught every year at MIT.
This research will train graduate students in Mechanical, Biological, and
Electrical Engineering at MIT, as well as provide undergraduate research
experience to both MIT and non-MIT undergraduate students who come to the MIT
campus yearly through the MIT Summer Research Program and Undergraduate
Opportunity Research Program. MIT undergraduate students will further obtain a
training opportunity under this project through the New Engineering
Transformation Education Program.

Reversible memory devices in bacteria, which can be switched between two stable
states with a transient input stimulus, have been engineered before. However,
after the input stimulus is removed, memory of the stable state usually vanishes
after only a few days. This limits the applicability of bacterial memory
devices. More broadly, there is a lack of understanding of the molecular
mechanisms that control the temporal duration of memory. Here, the investigators
seek to establish this understanding, engineer long-term memory devices in
bacteria, and demonstrate these devices’ application to a biocontainment test-
bed. To this end, the investigators propose to implement with bacterial
processes the circuit motifs that are implicated in the long-term maintenance of
chromatin states in mammalian cells. The investigators will use DNA inversion
through invertase enzymes as the core process of the design since, just like
chromatin modification, DNA inversion is an enzymatic reaction. The key
innovation, which mirrors mammalian chromatin modification circuits, is to
introduce autocatalysis of DNA inversions by having the inverted DNA express an
invertase enzyme that catalyzes the inversion itself. The investigators propose
to first demonstrate that autocatalysis of DNA inversion is required to achieve
stability of the inverted DNA state. They then propose to show that two
antagonistic autocatalytic DNA inversions, sharing the same substrate, create a
bistable memory switch, and that the duration of memory of each of the two
states hinges on the strength of autocatalysis. They finally propose to
demonstrate that they can extend memory to last several weeks, that they can
quickly reverse it by small molecules, and that the design can be applied for
biocontainment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.