* 2313434
* DMS-EPSRC:Certifying Accuracy of Randomized Algorithms in Numerical Linear Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Per-Gunnar Martinsson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 322,730.00

The project will improve the accuracy and robustness of randomized algorithms
for solving some of the most fundamental tasks in computational science.
Specifically, the project will focus on algorithms for solving linear algebraic
equations involving large arrays of numbers known as matrices, or large
connected systems of linear equations, using Numerical Linear Algebra (NLA)
techniques. Such equations form a core part of many computations performed on
laptops, smartphones, tablets, and supercomputers. With the rise of data science
and machine learning leading to massive datasets to process, the need for
efficient and reliable methodologies for solving such equations is growing.
Within the field of NLA, a key innovation in the past couple of decades has been
the development of a new set of algorithms that harness the mathematical
properties of extensive collections of random numbers to build new randomized
algorithms that outperform existing deterministic ones. This project will
develop techniques for certifying the accuracy of an answer computed using a
randomized algorithm. The project will further develop algorithms that combine
the speed of randomized methods with the robustness of classical algorithms. The
project will provide training opportunities for students and early career
researchers in STEM.

The project aims to develop techniques for assessing the accuracy of a
particular instantiation of a randomized algorithm for solving a linear
algebraic problem. The project will represent a continuation of a more
significant research effort on randomized algorithms in linear algebra that has
already impacted the computational sciences and enabled massively large-scale
matrix computations. This project will develop a-posteriori error estimates and
bounds, which are in contrast to existing apriori estimates and bounds. The
investigators will construct bounds that utilize only information available to
the user at the time of the computation. The new estimates will be deployed to
standard problems such as low-rank approximation, solving linear systems, and
approximating data-sparse matrices. The project will develop algorithms that
combine the remarkable speed and versatility of randomized algorithms, with the
reliability and robustness of existing deterministic methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.