* 2313856
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Enabling Access: How Mothers Support Infants’ Emerging Motor Skills to Facilitate Infants’ Exploration of the Environment
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, Schneider, Joshua L
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 10/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Karen Adolph
and Catherine Tamis-LeMonda at New York University, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating how mothers support
infants’ increasing access to the environment as a function of their developing
postural and locomotor skills. Infant learning and development are embedded in a
physical and social environment. Indeed, all infant behavior occurs in a
physical space that contains objects to explore, caregivers to interact with,
and places to go. And although researchers widely agree that access to the
environment creates opportunities for exploration and learning, we know little
about the social processes that enable infants to expand their environmental
access as new motor skills—sitting, standing, crawling, walking—emerge. Of
course, infants’ own developing abilities support their independent access to
the environment. However, development is not a solo act, as caregivers can
structure and help their infants access new features of everyday environments.
This study will test the processes that underlie this concept by: (1) assessing
caregivers’ beliefs about their infants’ abilities to access distant objects or
places in the environment (i.e., what caregivers think their infants can do) and
(2) characterizing caregivers’ moment-to-moment support behaviors as they help
their infants gain access to out-of-reach objects or places. This research will
yield novel insights into caregivers’ beliefs about their infants’ development
(an important, but understudied topic) and a deeper understanding of how
caregivers support infants’ motor skills for exploration, learning, and play.

The overall goal of this project is to experimentally test the social processes
that enable infants to access the environment. In four aims using novel methods
and a cross-sectional, age-matched control design, we will test mothers’
beliefs, support behaviors, responsiveness, and support profiles to enable
infant access. To do so, we will introduce two novel psychophysical tasks to
precisely quantify caregivers’ beliefs about their infants’ ability to access
the environment. We will test infants’ abilities to access a toy placed at
various distances from the infant, and characterize caregiver’s support
behaviors as infants attempt to access the object at each distance. To better
understand the moment-to-moment nature of caregiver support, we will also
examine whether support is responsive to infants’ real-time behaviors as infants
attempt to access the toy. Finally, we will identify unique profiles of
caregivers’ real-time support behaviors that enable infant access to the
environment. For all aims, we will leverage the power of video coding and share
all study materials with the broader research community on Databrary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.