* 2313122
* Collaborative Research: OAC Core: Topology-Aware Data Compression for Scientific Analysis and Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xin Liang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 201,765.00

Today's large-scale simulations are producing vast amounts of data that are
revolutionizing scientific thinking and practices. For instance, a fusion
simulation can produce 200 petabytes of data in a single run, while a climate
simulation can generate 260 terabytes of data every 16 seconds with a 1 square
kilometer resolution. As the disparity between data generation rates and
available I/O bandwidths continues to grow, data storage and movement are
becoming significant bottlenecks for extreme-scale scientific simulations in
terms of in situ and post hoc analysis and visualization. The disparity
necessitates data compression, which compresses large-scale simulations data in
situ, and decompresses data in situ and/or post hoc for analysis and
exploration. On the other hand, a critical step in extracting insight from
large-scale simulations involves the definition, extraction, and evaluation of
features of interest. Topological data analysis has provided powerful tools to
capture features from scientific data in turbulent combustion, astronomy,
climate science, computational physics and chemistry, and ecology. While lossy
compression is leveraged to address the big data challenges, most existing lossy
compressors are agnostic of and thus fail to preserve topological features that
are essential to scientific discoveries. This project aims to research and
develop advanced lossy compression techniques and software that preserve
topological features in data for in situ and post hoc analysis and visualization
at extreme scales. The success of this project will promote scientific research
on driving applications in cosmology, climate, and fusion by enabling efficient
and effective compression for scientific data, and the impact scales to other
science and engineering disciplines. Furthermore, the research products of this
project will be integrated into visualization and parallel processing curricula,
disseminated via research and training workshops, and used to attract
underrepresented students for broadening participation in computing.

This project tackles the data compression, analysis, and visualization needs in
extreme-scale scientific simulations by developing a suite of topology-aware
data compression algorithms for scalar field and vector field data. Such
algorithms effectively reduce the size of data while preserving critical
features defined by topological notions. This project will define and enforce
topology-aware constraints over advanced lossy compression algorithms. Such
capabilities have not been studied systematically within today’s data
compression paradigm. This project will impact specific fields, including
computational science, data analysis, data compression, and visualization, and
the broader scientific community. The research products of this project will be
delivered as publicly available software to significantly advance the research
cyberinfrastructure for current and upcoming exascale systems. This project will
foster novel discoveries in multiple scientific disciplines beyond cosmology,
climate, and fusion by enabling efficient and effective compression on a wide
range of platforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.