* 2313985
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: A Comprehensive Modeling Framework for Semantic Memory Search
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2026
* Nicholas Ichien, Ichien, Nicholas
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Sudeep Bhatia
at the University of Pennsylvania, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist investigating how adults search their general
knowledge to answer simple questions. People search their general knowledge
every day when they converse, come up with new ideas, recognize familiar and
novel objects, etc. The aim of the proposed research is to build a computer
model that searchers a store of knowledge in the same way that humans do.
Developing such a computer model enables formal specification of the processes
that the mind carries out when it accomplishes certain behaviors, and these
models serve as quantitative, mathematical theories of human thought. This
project presents a novel and unified computational approach for modeling how
people generate ideas from what they know. We aim to evaluate this approach by
collecting human responses to these simple tasks and examining how well basic
variants of our model can predict these responses. Once we have a good idea that
our model coheres with the way that humans search their memory, we will be able
examine the memory in more clinical populations.

The current proposal details a project which aims build a computational model of
semantic knowledge retrieval and test model assumptions using naturalistic human
experiments. The proposed model aims to clarify how people retrieve knowledge
from memory, an important issue that has received considerable attention from
cognitive scientists and psychologists. However, researchers have not yet
developed cognitive process models of semantic memory search that can
parameterize mechanisms involved in knowledge retrieval, and predict sequences
of concepts, features, or relations listed by human participants, in response to
arbitrary open-ended knowledge retrieval prompts. There are, for example,
millions of potential features and relations that could describe a given target
concept. Specifying these features and relations, and modeling the memory search
processes that operate on these features and relations, poses significant
theoretical and technical challenges for researchers. We plan to address these
challenges using new techniques in artificial intelligence known as transformer
networks. We will use existing feature norm datasets to train the networks to
predict which of millions of distinct features and relations hold for common
concepts. We will then use these trained networks to generate a knowledge base
constituting the representations over which our proposed models of semantic
memory search operate. We will subsequently evaluate our models using
individual-level parametric model fitting on a wide range of open-ended
knowledge retrieval tasks, including semantic fluency, feature generation, and
analog generation. If successful, this project will offer a novel theoretical
paradigm that integrates computational models of semantic cognition with
cognitive process models of memory search.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.