* 2313240
* Collaborative Research: Research: Understanding and Scaffolding the Productive Beginnings of Engineering Judgment in Undergraduate Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jessica Swenson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2026
* USD 204,012.00

Most of the courses that undergraduate engineering students take are
“engineering science” courses that present foundational engineering concepts and
formulas. However, in these classes students typically complete well-defined
“textbook” problems that only have one correct answer. They do not have many
opportunities to apply these concepts to ill-defined, complex, open-ended
problems like the ones practicing engineers solve. With open-ended problems, the
core engineering work is not finding the answer, but rather deciding how to
mathematically represent (i.e. “model”) the system so that it can be analyzed.
These modeling skills of engineers are called “engineering judgment.” Students
need opportunities to learn and practice engineering judgment throughout their
entire education, starting in their engineering science courses when they first
learn these foundational concepts. This project features two integrated goals—to
develop a new type of assignment and to conduct learning science research in
context—that will advance knowledge around students’ professional formation as
engineers. The new assignment being developed, called Open-Ended Modeling
Problems, gives students a chance to practice engineering judgment by asking
them to model a complex, real-world system. Intertwined with this assignment
development is the in-depth study of how students exhibit engineering judgment
in ways that are similar to that of practicing engineers—just at an
undergraduate level. This research will inform the structure and implementation
of the Open-Ended Modeling Problems and will produce generalizable knowledge
about how students solve open-ended problems. This project will be conducted by
a research team consisting of engineering education researchers and engineering
faculty who will collaborate to develop, implement, and study Open-Ended
Modeling Problems.

Engineers solving problems in the workplace use mathematical models to analyze
physical phenomena in the real world and to design solutions to problems. When
constructing mathematical models, engineers use judgment to make assumptions,
simplify real world characteristics, and assess the reasonableness of a model’s
output. While engineering judgment is essential for engineering practice,
engineering students rarely practice or engage in judgment while in school.
Students are not usually given the opportunity to solve ill-defined problems
that necessitate and cultivate the use of judgment until their capstone design
course. This project seeks to investigate how novice engineers—students—make
modeling judgments when given the opportunity to solve ill-defined dynamics and
thermodynamics problems. It uses a design-based research methodology to produce
foundational engineering education research knowledge and evidence-based
pedagogical reforms. This project will use a constructivist grounded theory
approach to identify students’ emergent judgment skills and to characterize the
productive beginnings of engineering judgment (RQ1: In what ways do
undergraduate engineering students display the productive beginnings of
engineering judgment?). The research project's findings will contribute towards
training engineering students to solve more complex problems and better prepare
them for solving problems in engineering practice. The project will also
investigate how to create scaffolding guidelines to help faculty develop
problems that give opportunities for students to practice making judgments (RQ2:
What assignment scaffolding supports students’ development of the productive
beginnings of engineering judgment?) and help them recognize judgments in
students’ thinking and work (RQ3: What assignment scaffolding makes students’
productive beginnings of engineering judgment visible to instructors?). The
research team will use interviews, group discussions, student work, and surveys
to triangulate the findings. The study will produce a framework of the
productive beginnings of engineering judgment; research-to-practice guidelines
for writing, assigning, facilitating, and grading open-ended modeling problems;
and samples of student work and student discourse that exemplify the productive
beginnings of engineering judgment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.