* 2313130
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Foundations of Few-Round Active Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ruoxi Jia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Supervised machine learning has found widespread application, often achieving
state-of-the-art performance. However, these algorithms rely on labeled training
instances, which can be challenging to acquire. Labeled instances are often done
by humans and require time and money to obtain. Active Learning strives to
minimize labeling costs by identifying the most informative instances for
annotation. While Active Learning techniques have shown promise in producing
high-performance models with fewer labels, their applications remain constrained
due to the necessity for multiple interaction rounds with annotators, which can
be time-consuming or infeasible. This project aims to advance Active Learning
algorithms and understanding of their fundamental capabilities in scenarios with
limited interaction rounds. A broad spectrum of machine learning applications is
expected to benefit from the results of this research, reducing the time and
cost associated with obtaining sufficient data for training accurate models.
Additionally, this project engages underrepresented minority students through
hands-on research and learning activities, develops course modules on resource-
efficient machine learning, and disseminates our findings to industry and
academia via an extensive online Active Learning tutorial.

This project will launch a comprehensive investigation of few-round active
learning, where the learner can actively request feedback on specific data
points within a limited number of rounds. To achieve this, the project will
interleave two algorithmic tasks: robust data utility quantification and
planning with limited adaptivity. First, the investigators will explore methods
to measure the utility of unlabeled data, taking into account data size,
underlying data characteristics, and downstream learning tasks. Subsequently,
the team will develop algorithms that optimize the data utility metric while
simultaneously improving the metric's quality over time in a few-round active
learning setting. The project findings will establish principled approaches for
addressing a novel exploration-exploitation dilemma specific to few-round active
learning and provide a fundamental understanding of adaptivity's role in
budgeted learning. Finally, the project will evaluate the proposed approaches
across various high-impact machine learning applications, including autonomous
driving, smart buildings, dialog systems, and biochemical engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.