* 2313850
* Developing Guidelines for Neurodiversity-Affirming Engineering Programs in Museums and Science Centers through Universal Design for Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sylvia Perez, New York Hall of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,235,328.00

Historically, many informal learning institutions have not accounted for
neurological differences as they planned learning experiences, or they have
offered separate programming for autistic individuals to accommodate sensory or
behavioral differences. This project will address the limitations of these
previous approaches by developing and testing neurodiversity-affirming
guidelines for engineering programs in museums and science centers. These
guidelines will be designed to foster a sense of belonging for neurodivergent
individuals by prioritizing their full inclusion in informal learning spaces,
and by framing different ways of thinking as inherently valuable to engineering
and to society. To develop these programs, museum practitioners from
geographically diverse institutions will partner with autistic youth and their
families to iteratively co-develop and evaluate three informal engineering
programs that are transferrable and adaptable across sites. These programs will
be grounded in principles of Universal Design for Learning, as interpreted and
applied by the youth and practitioners. These principles include offering
multiple tools and materials for engineering design; using multiple
representations and modalities to introduce content relevant to engineering
challenges; fostering engagement through situating the engineering challenges in
real-world contexts; providing autonomy and choice; normalizing the use of
numerous types of supports; and encouraging learners to build on personal
interests and strengths. After the engineering programs and accompanying
guidelines have been co-developed and tested across sites, the project team will
use them to provide professional learning opportunities to museum practitioners
across the nation. Research will explore whether and how the integration of
Universal Design for Learning fosters a sense of belongingness for neurodiverse
children and their caregivers in informal engineering programs. Ultimately, this
project will result in a comprehensive suite of materials and research-based
guidelines on how to foster a sense of belongingness for neurodiverse youth in
programming offered by informal learning institutions.

In this project, three informal engineering programs will be iteratively
developed and refined at the New York Hall of Science in New York City; the
Explora science center and children’s museum in Albuquerque, New Mexico; and the
Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh in Pennsylvania. At each site, autistic youth
(ages 8-12) and their caregivers will work with museum practitioners to co-
develop the programs, which will be grounded in principles of Universal Design
for Learning (UDL) and designed to foster belongingness among neurodiverse
youth. Researchers from Education Development Center will guide participatory
design research to investigate whether and how the UDL-based programs influence
neurodiverse youth’s engagement in engineering design processes; and whether and
how UDL fosters a sense of belongingness for neurodiverse youth and their
caregivers. To achieve these research purposes, the project team will generate
data such as interviews with the youth co-designers and participants; interviews
with family members; observations of youth participating in the program; and
surveys of children and their caregivers. Thematic analyses using inductive and
deductive methods, such as coding schemes from existing belongingness surveys,
will be used to analyze the data. Resulting materials include a practitioner
guidebook for creating neurodiversity-affirming programs in museums and science
centers; professional learning materials for museum educators; descriptions of
the three informal engineering programs as exemplars; observation tools and
other instruments to evaluate programs; and guidelines for using co-design
processes to develop informal learning programs. These materials will be
disseminated widely through a Community of Practice hosted by the Association of
Science and Technology Centers, as well as through journals, conferences, and
networks for stakeholders in museums and science centers. This Integrating
Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and
practice that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in
STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.