* 2313369
* Conference: Advancing a Community of NSF Engineering Education and Centers Scholars, Leaders, and Innovators
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Alexandra Sharpe, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,053,751.00

The American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) proposes to host a series
of ten (10) conferences in the next two (2) years to bring together grantees and
other relevant stakeholders to cultivate communities within the National Science
Foundation’s Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) division ecosystem to
address current issues facing engineering. • Two EEC Grantee Conferences that
will provide a forum for EEC PIs and team leaders to learn, explore, and share
ideas that promote innovation in education, research, and practice. Grantees
will be invited from the broadening participation, engineering education and
workforce development clusters. • Two Centers and Networks Cluster Meetings that
will enable Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) teams to share ideas and
strategies on how to produce 1 transformational engineered systems and develop
engineering graduates adept at technological innovation and leadership. • Three
RED Consortium Meetings that will provide a forum for Revolutionizing
Engineering Departments (RED) teams to learn, explore, and share ideas that
promote transformation in engineering education research and practice. • Three
Virtual RET Poster Sessions for Teacher Participants that will provide a forum
for Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site teacher participants from the
NSF Directorates for Engineering (ENG), Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), and Biological Sciences (BIO) to share posters and
presentations showcasing their research experiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.