* 2313156
* HCC: Medium: Shape Optimization for the Design and Simulation of  Electromagnetic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniele Panozzo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,164,641.00

This project aims to create an advanced software tool that automates the design
and optimization of electromagnetic (EM) systems, with particular emphasis on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) an essential medical imaging technology. EM
systems are broadly applied and include cell phone antennas, 5G networks, and
medical imaging devices. Currently, the design and optimization of these systems
are labor-intensive and require a high level of user expertise and interaction.
Our software aims to simplify and automate the process. The software will be
tested and validated by addressing an open problem in MRI: the optimization of
radiofrequency (RF) coil design, a keyl part of MRI machines that significantly
impacts the quality of images produced. Current manual optimization processes
for RF coils are inefficient and results are suboptimal leading to longer
scanning times and lower accuracy. This project will not only make advancements
in technology and improve the design process of EM systems, but it also supports
interdisciplinary training by involving students from various disciplines.
Further, the project holds potential societal benefits in healthcare, cognitive
neuroscience, and other sectors that rely on MRI performance.

The project's objective is to develop and validate a software pipeline for the
shape optimization of EM systems, particularly focusing on automating the
forward simulation and the inverse problem of parameter optimization. The
proposal combines geometry processing techniques and advanced EM simulations to
automate this optimization. The approach will involve novel techniques for
differentiable EM simulation, machine learning for acceleration, and shape
modeling for automatic geometric variations exploration. The focus of the
project will be on RF coil design in MRI machines, particularly those operating
at high frequencies (3T and 7T), where existing coil designs only achieve 70-80%
of the optimum signal-to-noise ratio. The team will fabricate and test an
optimized 7T coil design and compare its performance with commercial RF coils.
The project will also introduce an innovative adjoint formulation for efficient
shape gradient computation, enabling gradient-based optimization for EM systems
with hundreds of design parameters. The results of this project will include an
open-source software suite for EM system design and optimization, and it is
expected to impact other research projects and contribute to educational and
training resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.