* 2313009
* Race, Ethnicity, and Place Conference and Pre-Conference Workshop: Mapping and Empowerment
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Elizabeth Chacko, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,818.00

This award supports the 2023 Race, Ethnicity, and Place Conference (REP) and its
pre-conference workshop. The biennial REP meetings bring together diverse groups
of scholars to encourage and facilitate research in geography and related
scientific disciplines. Through a focus on mapping as a tool for empowerment,
especially among racial, ethnic, and other minorities, the 2023 REP pre-
conference workshop examines justice and equity issues within the discipline. In
addition to social science research and teaching, the conference and workshop
seek to promote greater participation of historically underrepresented groups
within the discipline of geography and to support the professional development
of minority graduate students as well as early and mid-career faculty through
mentoring, networking and program development.

The REP 2023 conference advances research and teaching of mapping perspectives
by recruiting a cadre of new scholars—geography graduate students and early and
mid-career faculty—from a broad range of institutions (community colleges,
liberal arts colleges, and research universities). The conference focuses
especially on the role of mapping in representing and promoting diverse voices,
experiences, and knowledge within the classroom, in research endeavors and
through public pedagogy. Conference participants examine how cartography may be
used in curricula, research and in the public realm as an important tool in
recruiting students, future scholars, and other professionals from traditionally
marginalized groups and to advance geography as an inclusive discipline that
seeks to advance equity. The conference and workshop are vehicles for
strengthening and disseminating knowledge regarding alternative research
methods, to increase and strengthen resources available to underrepresented
scholars, to support graduate students and to aid faculty to be better mentors.
The conference integrates new participants through active recruitment and
engagement, by designing strategic panels and keynotes to attract a broader
audience, and by offering a pre-conference mentoring and professional-
development workshop for early-career faculty and advanced graduate students,
especially from underrepresented groups. Responding to national workforce needs,
the conferences advances goals of training early-career scholars in cartographic
skills and geospatial analysis. The conference and workshop also facilitate new
collaborative relationships and sustainable networks across educational
institutions, governments, and civil society organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.