* 2313720
* Conference: Language Variety in the South
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,06/30/2024
* William Kretzschmar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,812.00

The fifth meeting of Language Variety in the South (LAVIS V), held once per
decade, builds on and extends the academic foundation of the previous four LAVIS
meetings, which have brought together prominent linguists and researchers in the
United States for a thematic symposium to examine issues of language variation
and change in the US South. Past LAVIS conferences have focused on the role of
African American English, and on language variation and central questions about
sociolinguistic methodologies, analysis, description, and application of
sociolinguistic data in the regional context of the American South. More
recently, and especially in LAVIS V, a greater variety of ethnic groups is
considered. This meeting continues and expands upon this tradition by exploring
language in the "Changing South," a region that has undergone dramatic
demographic, social, and cultural change in the past half-century. This
conference and the resultant publication raise awareness (both inside and
outside academia) of linguistic and cultural diversity in the South, helping to
dispel misconceptions and stereotypes.

The Language Variety in the South (LAVIS V) conference features four plenary
events including three plenary talks and a panel on African American English
that features speakers from three different generations. The balance of the
conference offers papers contributed by linguists and other interested scholars
about topics relevant to the languages and language variation of the South.
LAVIS V is held in conjunction with the annual meeting of the Southeastern
Conference on Linguistics, thereby expanding its audience and reach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.