* 2313289
* AI-enabled Automated Algorithm Selection and Configuration for Mathematical Optimization Problems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 372,500.00

Mathematical optimization is the cornerstone of decision-making in chemical
engineering. In problems such as the design and real-time operation of chemical
process systems interacting with renewable energy resources, the design of
resilient supply chain networks, and the sustainable operation of chemical
production facilities, the complex behavior of the underlying processes and the
presence of multiple temporal and spatial scales lead to large-scale and complex
optimization formulations. Algorithms for solving these problems have been and
continue to be developed, but (i) their implementation is challenging and
computationally intensive since they involve numerous steps, and (ii) it is not
clear a-priori which algorithm is better suited for a given problem. In this
research program, state-of-the-art artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) tools will be employed to select and implement the best
optimization algorithm for a given problem. These methods will be automated and
incorporated in open-source software to facilitate the solution of complex
problems by industry practitioners and academic researchers alike. In this
research program, graduate students will be trained in fundamental research
cutting across chemical engineering, mathematical optimization, and data
science. Outreach activities to high schools in Minneapolis, rural Minnesota,
and the American Indian, Hmong, and Somali communities in Minnesota will
highlight the increasing importance of data science in the chemical industry and
will aim to motivate careers in chemical engineering.

This research will leverage state-of-the-art methods in artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning (ML) to enable the automated selection and
configuration of state-of-the-art optimization algorithms for the solution of
nonlinear and mixed integer nonlinear problems that arise in process systems
engineering. The research will address the following tasks: (i) a graph neural
network framework will be developed to represent generic nonlinear optimization
problems in a form that captures detailed information on the variables and
constraints; (ii) geometric deep learning methods will be employed for the
selection of the best solution strategy and the tuning of optimization
algorithms in an automated manner; (iii) explainable AI methods will be employed
to decode the relationship between optimization problems and the computational
performance of optimization solvers. The optimization framework to be developed
and implemented in open-source software will facilitate process systems
researchersâ€™ ability to solve complex decision-making problems efficiently by
selecting the most appropriate solution method and optimally tuned solution
algorithm. In addition, this framework will make possible detection of possible
performance bottlenecks in current modeling practices and/or optimization
algorithms, and in turn guide problem reformulation or algorithm improvements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.