* 2313972
* Informal Biodiversity Education Models for Rural and Tribal Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Judy Diamond, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David Daniel
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,200,000.00

Attracting and retaining youth from all sociodemographic backgrounds in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields is a national priority
for ensuring equity and diversity in the STEM workforce. Prior research
recognizes that a strong science identity increases the likelihood of youth
persistence in STEM, and out-of-school STEM experiences are crucial for
developing and maintaining science identity. However, access to informal science
is limited in rural and Tribal communities. Concurrent with these equity
challenges, there is an urgent need to educate youth, families, and communities
about processes that impact biodiversity, which are critical for sustaining
future populations and the agricultural workforce. Leveraging existing
partnerships with eight rural and eight Tribal libraries as community resource
centers, the goal of this project is to develop, research, and implement an
informal biodiversity educational framework that empowers rural and Tribal
youth, youth practitioners, and librarians to (1) become stewards of
biodiversity; (2) foster an enhanced sense of science identify and belonging in
STEM; and (3) hone analytical and problem-solving skills. Program content will
be individually co-developed with each community, engaging 160 total youth ages
11 to 15 for 12-14 weeks. Expected outcomes include enhanced science identity
and environmental stewardship among participants and a framework that can be
leveraged by rural and Tribal communities across the country to engage youth,
families, and practitioners in local scientific research practices.

Three research questions will advance understanding of how and to what extent a
co-created biodiversity educational model impacts middle-school-aged youths'
sense of environmental stewardship, science identity, problem-solving, and
analytical skills: (1) What are the effective strategies to strengthen
partnerships between libraries, youth, and their youth leaders and the
integration of Indigenous and Western science approaches around biodiversity
programming? 2) To what extent does the biodiversity model increase youths'
environmental stewardship, science identity, belonging, self-efficacy, and
interest? (3) How does practitioner co-creation of youth biodiversity projects
increase facilitators' self-efficacy in engaging youth in science practice and
problem-solving? Working with librarians, youth leaders, tribal community
members, and indigenous advisors, the project will collect data using a
combination of interviews, focus groups, observations, and surveys. Findings
will be synthesized using a grounded theory approach and broadly shared through
continuing conversations with each library (librarian, staff, youth), project
staff, and advisors to get feedback and revise the program. In addition to peer-
reviewed research outlets, all associated project findings will be shared with a
Tribal organizations, and a book-length product will be made available that will
serve as a guide for creating opportunities for youth ecological monitoring in
other areas.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.