* 2313853
* Harnessing the Unique Science, Education and Outreach Opportunities of the 8 April 2024 Great American Total Solar Eclipse
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Miguel Nunes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 821,311.00

Total solar eclipses are awe-inspiring astronomical events with profound impact
on those who witness them. This project funds imaging and spectroscopic
observations in the visible (VIS) and near infrared (NIR) part of the coronal
emission during the 8 April 2024 total solar eclipse (TSEs). The observations
will probe the most critical spatial extent of the solar corona spanning the
solar surface out to several solar radii (Rs). Observing sites across the US
path of totality will be selected to acquire 20 minutes of continuous
observations. Graduate and undergraduate students from the University of Hawaii
will participate in TSE observations and engage with local communities at the
observing sites for outreach. This project is in response to NSF Dear Colleague
Letter 23-014: Great American Solar Eclipses 2023 and 2024.

Remote sensing broadband, narrowband and spectroscopic imaging during TSEs are
currently the only tools for exploring the underlying physical processes
responsible for producing complex coronal structures due to the intricate
coupling between coronal plasmas and magnetic fields. These processes also
produce the steep temperature gradient beyond the 6000 K surface temperature
which is responsible for coronal expansion in the form of the solar wind.
Inferences of plasma properties from observations of coronal emission resulting
from scattering, collisions and photo-excitation, the broadband visible and
select emission from ions at discrete wavelengths in the VIS and NIR wavelength
range include the elemental and ionic composition of coronal plasmas, species
temperatures, densities, outflow velocities and non-thermal motions. Predicted
to coincide with a maximum in solar activity, operation of the instrumentation
at the 2024 TSE from multiple observing sites spread across a few thousand km
will further provide the thermodynamic characteristics of dynamic events, such
as jets, waves, turbulence and coronal mass ejections (CMEs), triggered
primarily by erupting prominences. The accessibility, duration and availability
of multiple observing sites during the 2024 total solar eclipse will not only
provide invaluable scientific data but will also offer an outstanding
opportunity for education and public outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.