* 2313223
* SBIR Phase I:  Multiple input multiple output (MIMO) radar processing module for significantly enhanced detection of severe weather and disaster management
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Keith Kelly, Agile RF Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to design novel technologies for accurate and fast
weather updates for severe weather surveillance using small radars. The
technology increases accuracy with faster update rates and also has advantages
in terms of decreased power consumption, size, and weight. Small and large
airports may benefit from higher accuracy wind shear detection phenomena enabled
by the proposed radar processing. Equipped with better spatial resolution and
faster updates, these radars and the phased array technology can provide
information about rapidly evolving weather conditions in a timely manner to the
airport staff and warn the pilots before storms or other adverse conditions
affect the planes. Some of the potentially dangerous and short-lived weather
conditions, such as wind shear in the airport area, can be detected with better
spatial resolution and faster updates to warn the pilots to avoid specific
routes. Municipalities can use these small radars for severe weather warnings
and aid in rapid assessment of hail damage. By deploying small radar networks
with data services, media will have access to real time events to share with the
public and gain a more complete knowledge of weather phenomena.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop and
demonstrate multiple input multiple output (MIMO) radar for significantly
enhanced detection of severe weather events such as tornados, hail, and wind
shear by small radars. During Phase I, algorithms will be developed, simulated,
and implemented in the existing four channel software defined radar. These
algorithms will first be evaluated by simulation to assess performance and
optimize the multiple input and output parameters. The optimized parameters will
be implemented and compared to data collections using the single input single
output mode. The high-level system radar parameters of the portable weather
radar developed by the team will be utilized. The optimized MIMO parameters will
be implemented and the portable weather radar (PWR), or a very similar
prototype, will be used to collect data in single input single output (SISO)
mode and compared to data collections using the MIMO mode. The collected data
will be post processed to quantify performance benefits of the MIMO collection
mode. A variety of weather types will be encountered and analyzed during planned
efforts to contrast and compare performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.