* 2313433
* SHF: Small: Compositional Certified Concurrent Abstraction Layers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2026
* USD 540,000.00

Concurrent abstraction layers (CCAL) are ubiquitous in modern computer systems
because of the pervasiveness of multithreaded programming and multicore
hardware. Despite their obvious importance, concurrent abstraction layers have
not been treated formally. In 2016, the investigator and his team developed CCAL
---a fully mechanized programming toolkit (in Coq) for building certified
concurrent abstraction layers. They also applied it to build Certified OS
Kernels (CertiKOS), the world's first fully certified concurrent Operating
System (OS) kernel. CCAL, however, does not support the general composition of
linearizable concurrent objects. It focuses on atomicity but many concurrent
libraries do not have sequential atomic specification. This significantly limits
CCAL's power and applicability in verifying realistic concurrent OS kernels.
This project aims to develop a novel compositional theory of linearizability and
a new CCAL toolkit that addresses all of the previous shortcomings. The
project's novelties also include new semantic models and formal frameworks for
supporting compositional specification, abstraction, and refinement of
concurrent programs. The project's impacts include a new set of technologies for
building reliable concurrent operating systems, which in turn facilitates the
construction of large-scale secure system infrastructures and improves the
cybersecurity of our society in general.

More specifically, the project will make several related scientific
contributions regarding the theory and practice of linearizability, the gold
standard for reasoning about correctness of concurrent objects and supporting
compositional verification of concurrent programs. First, it will contribute a
novel and significantly generalized compositional theory of linearizability that
goes much beyond atomicity and can support realistic threading models
(containing multiple Central Processing Unit (CPU) cores, kernel/user-level
threads, and hardware devices with interrupts), liveness reasoning, crash-safe
concurrency, and weak consistency models. Second, basing upon these new
compositional semantic models, it will develop and implement various
compositional program logics to verify both the safety and progress properties
of concurrent objects with support to blocking concurrency, system crashes, and
weak memory models. Third, it will implement and integrate the new theory and
program logics into the new CCAL toolkit and apply it to verify advanced kernel
synchronization libraries and build realistic compositional concurrent OS
kernels and hypervisors. On the educational side, this project will develop new
courses on certified system software and formal verification. Artifacts
resulting from the project will be made open source to ensure rapid
dissemination of ideas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.