* 2313719
* Chromosomal dynamics as a driver of subcellular organization in a bacterial cell
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Jaan Mannik, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project aims to uncover some of the fundamental principles that govern
organization of the bacterial cytosol. A key feature of this intracellular space
is the nucleoid, a distinct membrane-less organelle that houses bacterial DNA.
The project seeks to understand how the millimeter-long DNA molecule is
compacted within the micron-sized nucleoid, which lacks a nuclear membrane. This
compaction is expected to affect DNA replication, segregation, transcription,
and, via transcription, most cellular processes. Additionally, the project aims
to determine how chromosomal DNA is partitioned between two daughter cells
during cell division, a crucial process for cell propagation and bacterial
infectivity. Beyond offering insights into basic biological processes, the
project will develop microfluidic devices that could be used in different
studies of bacteria and the cell-free production of enzymes. The project will
provide research opportunities for Ph.D. and undergraduate students, including
those from the University of Tennessee VolsTeach program, which prepares high
school teachers in STEM disciplines. The PIs will supervise VolsTeach students
in their Research Methods course and offer internships for summer research. Both
activities will help empower the next generation of science teachers by
providing them with valuable hands-on experience they will be able to draw from
when they start teaching. The researchers and their graduate students will also
give presentations on their research in local middle and high schools to
popularize science education and careers.

For a cell to propagate, its DNA must be replicated and partitioned between two
new daughter cells. While processes involved in DNA replication are well-known,
the mechanisms by which newly synthesized chromosomes segregate and partition
into daughter cells are poorly understood. No evidence exists that supports the
involvement of a mitotic spindle-like apparatus in segregating chromosomes in
any bacterial species. Instead, it has been hypothesized that excess free energy
created from DNA synthesis drives the segregation without a need for dedicated
protein machinery. Objective 1 of this project will investigate the role that
configurational entropy plays in segregating two daughter chromosomes. Objective
2 focuses on the partitioning aspect and will determine the mechanism that
activates DNA translocase FtsK, which pumps DNA away from the division plane
during septal closure. While DNA pumping by FtsK has been demonstrated, our
preliminary data indicate that even without FtsK, cells can partition their
chromosomes. Thus, we will also test the hypothesis that this movement results
from steric interactions between chromosomes and the closing septum. Such
sterically induced movement, as it does not rely on specific proteins, may have
been the modus operandi of early protocells and may also be present in organisms
beyond bacteria. Objective 3 of the project is to determine how differently-
sized macromolecules are distributed between the nucleoid phase and the
remainder of the cytosol. This distribution impacts the rate of protein
synthesis and cell growth. It is also a key determinant in the compaction of the
nucleoid. The experimental work in the Escherichia coli model will be
accomplished via a multidisciplinary approach that includes genetics,
biochemistry, high- and super-resolution optical microscopy, and microfluidics.
Experimental results will be complemented with theoretical and modeling
approaches using concepts from polymer physics and statistical mechanics. These
efforts aim to develop a predictive model of how prokaryotic chromosomal DNA
organizes itself and its cytosolic environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.