* 2313979
* The Cultural Roots of STEM: A Synthesis of Non-Western STEM Learning Paradigms
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hsin-Yi Chien, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,231.00

Despite efforts to foster inclusivity in Informal Science Learning (ISL),
achieving equity remains challenging. Learners and professionals in the ISL
field predominantly experience science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) through a Eurocentric or Western paradigm, which reinforces and seeks to
normalize the perspectives and practices of privileged groups who have
historically dominated STEM fields. Learners/professionals with worldviews and
ways of learning different from what is presented as normative in STEM may
experience exclusion, face difficulties, or be pressured to assimilate, which
may add barriers to their engagement and success in STEM. While there is a
growing commitment in ISL to broadening participation in STEM, genuine diversity
cannot be attained if current efforts continue to revolve around a dominant
paradigm. This research synthesis project will review, summarize, and interpret
existing research and knowledge on non-Western STEM knowledge, worldviews, and
ways of knowing. It will also provide evidence-based resources for promoting
diverse ways of learning and doing STEM in Informal Science Learning (ISL)
environments. These resources will enhance awareness, expand conversations, and
advance research on pluralistic STEM knowledge systems among ISL professionals.
This project is led by the Exploratorium with contributions from a national
advisory panel.

The project's overarching research question is: What are the extent, range, and
nature of existing literature on the heterogeneity of STEM knowledge systems and
ways of knowing? To answer this question, the research team will follow a three-
phase approach guided by a Community Engagement in Research framework. Phase 1
will be a scoping review to systematically collate and catalog existing research
on non-Western STEM knowledge, ways of knowing, and sense-making. In Phase 2,
project advisors and selected community knowledge brokers--professionals from
community-based and other organizations and/or individuals who have a foot in
the ISL world and a foot in marginalized communities of color--will participate
in a professionally-facilitated consultation exercise. The goal of this
stakeholder consultation is to validate the findings from Phase 1 and identify
topics and research questions for further exploration. Based on this
consultation exercise, the research team will conduct a synthesis study tailored
to address the identified research questions. Phase 3 will consist of two
virtual facilitated convenings. The convenings will engage members from
historically marginalized communities of color, science museum practitioners,
and project advisors to collectively interpret and discuss Phase 1 and 2
synthesis results. The main objective of Phase 3 activities is to collectively
identify knowledge gaps in the current literature to inform future research and
propose evidence-based design principles and recommendations that reflect and
support diverse worldviews and ways of knowing. In summary, the project will
generate these deliverables: (1) Reports of the project's synthesis findings;
(2) A research agenda identifying primary research necessary for the promotion
of onto-epistemic heterogeneity [multiple ways of knowing and being] in ISL; and
(3) Community-informed strategies, and design principles to encourage
exploration of the affordances of multicultural STEM knowledge, ways of knowing,
and sense-making in ISL. The project will contribute to the National Science
Foundation's strategic goal of broadening participation in STEM learning and
careers by providing a research foundation and pathway for both marginalized
communities of color and privileged, dominant communities to explore and embrace
multiple ways of knowing without compromising their cultural identities.

This Synthesis project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice
that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM;
(b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.