* 2313803
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Afterlife of Regulations: Mapping the Social Landscape of Pesticide Bans
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Annie Shattuck, Sears, Caitlyn
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 170,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Annie
Shattuck at Indiana University Bloomington, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the intended and unintended
consequences of pesticide bans and other regulatory actions. Regulatory bans are
tools used by national governments in response to scientific evidence of harm
and public pressure to ban particular active ingredients. However, the outcomes
of bans, or “regulatory afterlives,” vary and can include the continued use of a
banned active ingredient, the illicit trade and sale of a banned substance and
the shift in use to less well-regulated locations. Understanding these varied
outcomes can help policy makers better assess the effects of bans, and re-direct
regulations toward more efficient and effective policy actions.

This research responds to renewed critical social science analysis on the
pesticide complex as a whole, and the changing patterns and dynamics of
production, trade, use and regulation. The goals of the research include
identifying and analyzing key policies that influence agrochemical regulation,
comparing a historical ban alongside a contemporary one in order to illuminate
the practices and institutions shaping bans over time, and to analyze the
patterns and relationships between pesticide bans, and production, trade, and
use of banned pesticides and their alternatives. The research will consist of
extensive data collection of primary sources, media and news outlets, and non-
governmental organization reports, as well as semi-structured interviews to
analyze the “regulatory afterlives” of pesticide bans. The findings from this
research will contribute to our understanding of the increasing complexity of
the pesticide complex, and the shortcomings and strengths of current regulatory
actions to better advance policymaking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.