* 2313866
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Customizable Geo-Obfuscation to Protect Users' Location Privacy in Mobile Crowdsourcing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chenxi Qiu, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 06/30/2026
* USD 111,228.00

Geo-obfuscation is a privacy protection technique that allows users to report
obfuscated locations instead of their precise locations in location-based
applications such as mobile crowdsourcing. While geo-obfuscation offers strong
privacy guarantees, the location errors that arise due to obfuscation can affect
the quality of the service. Current research on this topic focuses on minimizing
quality loss through optimization techniques, but due to the high computation
overhead, it is limited to a small number of locations. Consequently, existing
works restrict the scope of geo-obfuscation to either low granularity in a
large-scale region or high granularity in a small-scale region, leaving little
room for users to customize geo-obfuscation to their specific requirements. The
project's novelties are to design a user-centric geo-obfuscation in multi-
granularity and multi-scale, which can be customized based on users' diverse
demands. The proposed research significantly enhances the flexibility and
scalability of existing geo-obfuscation techniques, thereby advancing their
application in various mobile contexts. The project's broader significance and
importance are to positively impact the wide adoption of many advanced
crowdsourcing applications while ensuring individual privacy. In addition, the
educational efforts of this project encompass curriculum development, K-12
outreach activities, and the engagement of underrepresented students in
research.

The project comprises three research tasks. Firstly, the project designs time-
efficient algorithms capable of calculating geo-obfuscation for a wide range of
location granularity and scales, covering millions of locations in a hierarchy
that includes counties, cities, streets, buildings, and rooms. Secondly, based
on the developed geo-obfuscation algorithms, the project aims to customize geo-
obfuscation according to the demands of a large group of mobile users, taking
into account their diverse mobility features and contextual information across
different scenarios. Finally, the project identifies potential threats to
customizable geo-obfuscation at various granularity levels. On the basis of the
insights gained from the threat models, the project designs countermeasures to
better protect users' location privacy against the new threats.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.