* 2313212
* COVID-Inspired Data Science Education through Epidemiology
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Janice Mokros, TUMBLEHOME, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 679,471.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic provides a starting point for empowering young
people to understand uses of data science through epidemiology. Through this
program, 400 underserved youth nationwide will engage in a 15-hour out-of-school
multimedia program centered on a project-developed text, The Case of the COVID
Crisis, which is integrated with data activities, modeling, animations, and
career exploration. Participants will: 1) Learn to use data tools and models to
track the spread of infectious diseases; 2) Develop an understanding of how to
ask and address their own questions of data; and 3) Gain confidence in their
ability to use data to study and communicate to local audiences about
epidemiological challenges. The program is also aimed at encouraging youth’s
interest in the myriad careers of the data-rich discipline of epidemiology. The
project will achieve these goals through a multifaceted partnership involving
Science Education Solutions, Tumblehome Books, Imagine Science/STEM Next,
Concord Consortium, Jackson Laboratory (JAX), Strategic Learning Partners for
Innovation, and the PEAR Institute (Partnerships in Education and Resilience).
Datasets and tools are entering everyday usage at a rapid rate, especially
during the pandemic. The project’s research breaks new ground on how youth,
especially those who traditionally have not had access to data tools in school,
begin using these tools to address the spread of COVID-19 and other diseases.
This research is based on cultural historical activity theory, and employs a
mixed methods approach involving surveys, documentation, and artifact analysis.
The research will contribute to the field of data science education by: 1)
Elucidating the ways in which youth use datasets and data tools to ask
epidemiological questions, examine patterns, and make predictions; 2) Studying
how youth become motivated to engage in work in the intersection of data science
and epidemiology; and 3) Examining the affordances of a multifaceted
intervention integrating pedagogical strategies, including the use of narrative,
inquiry-based data activities, accessible data tools, animations, and career
exploration. The project also will make an important contribution to the
burgeoning area of K–12 epidemiology education by incorporating authentic,
personally relevant data into out-of-school programming. This project is funded
by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.