* 2313734
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Social Dynamics and Hierarchy in Grammar and Language Use: Documenting Honorifics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2024,08/31/2026
* Eric Campbell, Tsutsui, Martha Satoko
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 170,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics programs. The
goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is an important
level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral
Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Prof. Eric W. Campbell at
University of California, Santa Barbara, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career researcher investigating language change and honorific
systems. Honorifics are culturally specific terms that encode rich social
information about hierarchical relations between a speaker and an addressee or
the way in which a speaker creatively wishes to express or influence such a
relation. They are uncommon across the languages of the world, but due to their
cultural importance and contextual embeddedness, they are a crucial part of
understanding how human language can be shaped by specialized usage of their
speakers. Studies about honorifics are still relatively few, but almost nothing
is known about how honorific are used and change in processes of language shift.
This project will provide a linguistic documentation and description of the
rapidly shifting honorific system. The data from this project could also be used
for future sociolinguistic studies regarding social structures and how these
structures affect language use in communities. More widely, understanding
language-specific strategies gives us a deeper understanding of underlying
principles of social interaction across languages and cultures.

This project is fieldwork and community-based, collecting spontaneous
interactional data from speakers in context to undertake a pragmatic
documentation in the community. This project will draw upon notions of
linguistic repertoire and indexicality among others from sociolinguistics,
pragmatics, and discourse analysis. This study will contribute to theoretical
notions of linguistic honorification and explore how stylistic linguistic
shrinkage, results in language loss in public domains and contexts where
speakers would have historically used honorifics. This project contributes to
the broader documentation of endangered languages that are considered
“fragmentary,” according to UNESCO. This project will have several broader
impacts, the most notable of which will be the community’s engagement and
empowerment in the documentation of their language, which can be
transformational for the revitalization of the language. As a part of this
project, younger community members will continue to be trained in language
documentation methods, enabling intergenerational cooperation and knowledge
sharing. Data will also be archived, which will ensure the long-lasting
preservation of the data for future academic and community purposes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.