* 2313785
* PFI-TT:  Smart City Curbside Parking Management
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Juhua Hu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project in benefitting cities and drivers by
enhancing scientific and technological understanding of smart mobility. The
cities will benefit from accurate curbside parking management system, which can
help them optimize curb lane space, parking planning, and parking pricing. The
curbside parking inventory database will also allow map and navigation service
providers to lessen the amount of time that vehicles spend driving around
looking for parking spaces. With the parking search navigation solution, drivers
will spend less time on curbside parking search, avoid illegal parking, save
gas, and enjoy peace of mind during parking search. The cities will further
benefit from reduced traffic congestion and pollution. The proposed research
will foster new research and education opportunities. Students will be trained
to conduct machine learning (ML) and IoT research in smart mobility. This
project is being undertaken by a team consisting primarily of female
researchers, female entrepreneurs, and minorities.

The proposed project will build a smart curbside parking management system by
jointly utilizing the ML and IoT technologies. The goals of the proposed applied
research are to develop technologies to correctly read and locate the curbside
parking signs from the street videos taken by dashcams and to detect and track
the parked vehicles and open parking spaces from roadside deployed cameras. The
proposed research will address the technical hurdles in (i) accurately reading
curbside parking signs from the street videos taken in different cities by fine
tuning the team’s AI models for sign detection, sign tracking, and sign text
recognition; (ii) accurately locating the curbside parking signs from the street
videos by fusing the results/data from video odometry technology, map, and video
GPS footage; (iii) detecting open parking spots by jointly utilizing the team’s
curbside parking inventory database and the AI models for lane detection and
vehicle detection; and (iv) tracking curbside parking occupancy by studying ML-
based parked vehicle detection and tracking technologies. The anticipated
technical results include a series of AI models and algorithms, a curbside
parking rule database, and a system for curbside parking inventory management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.