* 2313356
* BRC-BIO: Optimizing Snake Identification by Understanding the Interplay of Computer Vision, Crowdsourcing, and Expert Verification
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrew Durso, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2026
* USD 454,184.00

Species identification is fundamental to biology, and in the case of snakes not
only helps understanding their diversity but could also be critical in the case
of snake bites. Recently, computer systems that can help people with
classification tasks have become a lot more common. Computer vision algorithms
are computer programs that have been trained to perform specific classification
tasks, such as Shazam, Google Lens, iNaturalist’s Seek, and eBird’s Merlin app.
This research aims to understand the influence that conflicting information can
have on the accuracy of classification tasks. This is important because it could
lead us to an optimal pipeline that allows humans and computers to work together
to perform these tasks while making the minimal number of mistakes. This project
involves the identification of snake species from photos, a task that is
difficult for both humans and computers because there are over 4,000 different
snake species and some of them look extremely similar. In the project, people
will be shown images of snakes and asked to identify them to species. Sometimes,
they will also receive information about what other people or computer vision
algorithms called these snakes. The researchers will measure any changes in
identification accuracy that are caused by the additional information. The
researchers will also gather images of rare species of snakes from preserved
specimens in natural history museums to determine whether these types of images
can help train computer vision algorithms to better identify these snakes in the
wild. This project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as invite participation from the public in
identification and data collection.

This project will explore the intersection of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
and human species identification. It will also study effects of accuracy of CNNs
from different training sets, using field and collection data. Using a gamified
platform, researchers will pre-test the snake ID skills of participants, then
randomly assign participants snake ID tasks with or without prior labels. Some
prior labels will be correct and others will be incorrect. Some prior labels
will appear to come from other participants and others from computer vision
algorithms. Researchers will measure how frequently players give an incorrect ID
that matches competing or confirming prior information. Whether and how
susceptible players are to join the “bandwagon” of incorrect IDs from algorithms
or other humans will help determine how and when to add a “human-in-the-loop”
while maintaining or increasing identification accuracy. In the second project,
the performance of computer vision algorithms trained on images of museum
specimens, wild snakes, or both will be compared in order to better understand
the potential of using photos of museum specimens to nourish training datasets
for computer vision algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.