* 2313084
* Collaborative Research: FET: Medium: Efficient Compilation for Dynamically Reconfigurable Atom Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mikhail Lukin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Quantum computing is considered one of the most promising alternatives to go
beyond the Moore’s Law scaling and provide drastic acceleration for selected
applications and further the information technology revolution. The
groundbreaking research carried out over the past four decades indicates that
large-scale quantum systems may be used for far-reaching applications ranging
from simulations of complex quantum matter to general purpose quantum
information processing. Several quantum hardware platforms have made substantial
advances in the past decade. Neutral atoms trapped in arrays of optical tweezers
have recently emerged as an exceptionally promising experimental platform for
programmable quantum simulations and quantum computation. These systems are
readily scaled to large numbers and demonstrated experimentally that the qubit
coupling for entanglement can be reconfigured dynamically during the quantum
computation process, thus, are named dynamically reconfigurable atom arrays
(DRAAs). DRAA introduces a number of unique opportunities. In particular, it
supports a cache-compute computation model, where temporary data can be “cached”
in a specific atom array for later computation, mimicking the architecture of
modern CPUs. Moreover, algorithms involving error-corrected logical qubits can
be implemented very efficiently, with a number of controls that scales with a
number of logical (rather than physical) qubits. However, to take full advantage
of this unique architecture, novel methods for compilation need to be developed,
as programming a DRAA involves not only qubit placement and gate scheduling, but
also atom movement. In addition, error correction needs to be considered and
optimized under the constraint of available resources.

This project aims at developing a novel DRAA compiler that simultaneously
considers the problems of qubit placement, gate scheduling, atom movement, and
selected error correction under a common compilation framework. In particular,
it addresses four interrelated problems, including (i) Scalable compilation for
DRAA that can efficiently support mapping, scheduling, and atom movement for
DRAAs with hundreds to tens of thousands of atoms; (ii) Efficient support of the
cache-based DRAA architecture, which has a memory zone, an entanglement zone,
and a readout zone, with data reuse and data movement optimization; (iii)
Customized support for hardware-efficient error correction on DRAAs that takes
full advantage of atom movement capability, transversal property, and DRAA-
specific error-biasing; and (iv) Selective error correction under resource
constraints, where error criticality is analyzed and identified. The algorithms
and compilation flow will be tested experimentally on the DRAA quantum computer
developed at Harvard University. The project is an interdisciplinary
collaboration effort by a team of researchers from the University of California
Los Angeles (UCLA) Computer Science Department and the Harvard Physics
Department. The investigators plan to integrate the research with education to
expose students to the exciting opportunities of quantum computing and train a
new generation of students so that they have deep knowledge in both quantum
computing device technologies and large-scale design automation and
optimization. The research results from this project will be disseminated widely
via publications and tutorials at various conferences. The team will further
facilitate the technology transfer and community-wide participation using open-
source releases of both the compilation system and the DRAA experimental data
developed under this project. Finally, the investigators plan to broaden the
participation in computing via high-school summer programs and partnerships with
various diversity and outreach programs, such as the Center for Excellence in
Engineering and Diversity at UCLA and CUAEngage at Harvard.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.