* 2313147
* Collaborative Research: CCF Core: Small: User-transparent Data Management for Persistence and Crash-consistency in Non-volatile Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hui Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Non-volatile memory is a type of computer memory that can retain stored data
upon a power loss or system crash. Due to its large capacity and low energy
footprint compared to traditional volatile memory, non-volatile memory has long
been envisioned as an ideal solution for building large-scale, cost-effective,
energy-efficient, and recoverable applications in many critical domains,
including high-performance computing, machine learning, and embedded systems.
Although non-volatile memory is available as commercial memory chips and offers
numerous promises, it has not yet been widely adopted in production systems. The
major obstacle is the difficulty to ensure that data is timely and correctly
written to non-volatile memory, allowing it to be restored to a consistent state
after a crash. Currently, application developers carry the burden of porting
legacy applications to non-volatile memory, which is tedious and error-prone.
This project seeks to establish a generic framework for user-transparent
persistence and crash consistency that allows unmodified legacy applications to
run efficiently and correctly with non-volatile memory. The success of this
project will help unleash the full potential of non-volatile memory and make it
easier to adopt. The research will also provide valuable insights into data
management in future hybrid, disaggregated memory systems. In addition, this
project involves mentoring Ph.D. students, engaging minority students, course
development, and K12 outreach activities.

This project integrates non-volatile memory into the page/buffer cache in memory
management – i.e., an abstraction that bridges the view of byte-addressable
memory and a backing memory device -- to provide persistence and crash
consistency to user-space programs with no or little user involvement. The
challenges lie in 1) how to intercept program updates and redirect them to non-
volatile memory for persistence; 2) how to properly order the updates and ensure
update atomicity to guarantee crash consistency; 3) how to efficiently integrate
non-volatile memory into page/buffer cache management without incurring
noticeable overhead or performance degradation. This project addresses these
challenges by focusing on persisting three types of program data – file-backed
data, dynamically allocated application memory, and program metadata for virtual
memory management, such as page tables, and exploring various software and
hardware techniques, such as copy-on-write, undo logging, shadow paging, and
extended page tables, for each data type to achieve efficient crash consistency.
This project advances the understanding of hybrid memory management for volatile
and non-volatile memories while simultaneously achieving high usability, good
backward compatibility, and high efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.