* 2313062
* SHF: Medium: Efficient and Scalable Pattern Matching via Hardware-Software Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Kaiyuan Yang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 07/31/2027
* USD 936,802.00

In today's computing landscape, analyzing complex unstructured data streams from
physical, biological, chemical, and other systems is becoming increasingly
common. However, as the amount of data being processed continues to grow, energy
consumption has become a major bottleneck. This is especially true for small,
battery-powered, and resource-constrained devices, but also for large data
centers where energy usage can lead to high monetary costs and carbon dioxide
emissions. To address these challenges, our project aims to design a holistic
computing platform that is both ultra-efficient and widely applicable. This
platform will help alleviate the scarcity of computing and energy resources for
real-time data-driven applications such as network security, bioinformatics, and
data mining.

The project focuses on creating a holistically designed computing system for
detecting rich patterns over data streams, which is a key computational task for
the analysis of unstructured data. The patterns are described using high-level
formal specification languages based on extended regular expressions. For
efficient pattern matching, the formal specifications are translated into a
novel type of nondeterministic finite-state automata augmented with registers.
These automata are co-designed with a non-von Neumann hardware architecture that
leverages content-addressable memories and efficient hardware implementations of
low-level computational primitives. A holistic co-design strategy is followed
for the automata model, hardware, and software, resulting in a complete system
prototype, including a fabricated chip and a complete software toolchain for
compiling patterns and deploying them on the chip for execution. Moreover, the
project develops high-quality benchmarks for pattern-matching applications and
explores new applications of the pattern-matching hardware in pathogen
identification and long-read mapping of human genomic data. The project will
also train graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.