* 2313695
* Bilingual Biopolymers: Harnessing Dual Information Codes to Control Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Heemstra, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2024
* USD 236,662.00

Non-technical:

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Emory University is for exploration of new biomimetic materials that can be used
for applications in the detection of drugs and toxins, or for the controlled
delivery of therapeutics. Both nucleic acids and proteins have the ability to
encode information and perform specific functions, yet they each benefit from
unique advantages with regard to designability and breadth of function. To date,
all polymers seeking to mimic these natural biopolymers only take advantage of a
single code – either nucleic acid or protein. The proposed work explores novel
polymers that are able to simultaneously encode both nucleic acid and protein
information, in turn providing greater control over structure and function.
Specifically, the research will explore the uptake of these polymer assemblies
into cells and their ability to bind and release small molecules such as
therapeutics. Additionally, the proposal will explore new modes for controlling
structure that mimic those found in nature. This research project will span the
fields of materials science, chemistry, and molecular biology, providing
undergraduate and graduate students with a highly interdisciplinary training
experience involving the use of cutting-edge techniques. This project will also
contribute to public scientific literacy through a science communication project
implemented in a course taught by the PI, as well as through the PI’s
participation as a judge and student mentor for the high school International
Science Fair.

Technical:

The overarching research goal of this NSF proposal is to explore “bilingual
biopolymers” as a new class of programmable materials capable of interpreting
both peptide and nucleic acid information codes to direct assembly, disassembly,
and guest release. Peptide nucleic acid (PNA) serves as an ideal scaffold for
these polymers, as it has a peptide-like backbone that can be functionalized
with amino acid side chains, and is able to bind sequence-specifically to DNA
and RNA. Using prior NSF support, this team generated and characterized
“bilingual” PNA sequences having an amphiphilic amino acid code to drive
assembly into micelles. They demonstrated stimuli-responsive disassembly in the
presence of a complementary DNA or RNA sequence, as well as cell permeability
and the ability to sequester hydrophobic guest molecules. Building upon these
exciting results, the proposed experiments aim to: (1) Evaluate the effect of
side chain structure and pattern on assembly and small-molecule binding
capabilities; (2) Investigate the effect of micelle size and surface properties
on cellular uptake and small-molecule release; (3) Expand the scope of stimuli-
responsive control of assembly via chemically addressable cross-links. The
broader impacts of the proposed research include activities aimed at improving
undergraduate education and public scientific literacy, and the potential to
benefit public health through the development of improved diagnostics and drug
delivery platforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.