* 2313418
* Development of a University-Community Partnership to Offer Informal Computer Science Opportunities to Children and Youth Diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Lucy Barnard-Brak, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 11/30/2024
* USD 149,996.00

The purpose of this project is to establish and foster a new partnership between
the University of Alabama and Arts nâ€™ Autism, a community organization that
provides supervised after-school care and outreach to children and youth with a
diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). There have been limited
opportunities for youth with ASD diagnoses to engage in many learning
opportunities due to pre-existing societal barriers for individuals with
disabilities, such as stigma and a lack of accommodations. There are also
additional barriers specific to individuals with ASD diagnoses, such as sensory
sensitivities and diminished social communication, which impede their full
participation. Partnering with an organization that serves children and youth
with ASD will provide an innovative structure to tailor the delivery of an
informal learning program focusing on robotics and coding. The goal of this
project is to engage with stakeholders, including staff (n=4), children and
youth ages 10-14 with a diagnosis of ASD (n=5-10), and the parents of
individuals diagnosed with ASD (n=10-20) to determine and document their needs
and preferences for engaging in informal computer science learning. The project
will develop novel informal learning opportunities for children and youth with
ASD diagnoses via robotics and coding as the means of engagement to build
capacity and community in STEM.

The objectives for this project are to: 1) Gather and inventory stakeholder
input; 2) Determine the needs and preferences of partners and constituents and
the necessary components of a viable partnership; 3) Facilitate partnership
check-ins and lead workshop planning discussions on future planning; and 4)
Collaboratively plan a future informal research and development project aimed at
implementing and evaluating robotics and coding with children diagnosed with ASD
to generate opportunities and interest in STEM. Data collected for this project
will include: 1) Parent interviews and questionnaires that will help the
researchers determine appropriate ways to engage youth with ASD in robotics and
coding in an informal setting, 2) Observations during unstructured assessments
of preferences as youth with ASD engage with robotics and coding, 3)
Observations, field notes, and transcripts from partnership planning meetings.
Data will be analyzed using a concurrent mixed methods design. The project will
produce a new STEM-focused partnership with an organization that serves children
and youth diagnosed with ASD.

This Partnership Development and Planning project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes. This project is also partially
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.