* 2313075
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Aerodynamic Virtual Human Simulation on Face, Body, and Crowd
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Bo Zhu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2027
* USD 383,000.00

This project develops the first high-fidelity aerodynamic virtual human model to
support the scientific community and to tackle various emerging public-health
problems. The proposed collaborative research addresses the significant and
numerous computational challenges associated with the modeling and simulation of
dynamic virtual human systems, involving aerodynamic flow processes and various
physical components (e.g., face, hair, clothes, crowd, and thermal
environments). The specific focus here is on modeling the human's aerodynamic
micro-environment and its interactions with human respiratory activities, which
have largely been neglected in the virtual human literature. The research aims
are: (1) model the aerodynamic microenvironment consisting of thin layers of
airflow near the boundary of human face; (2) simulate contact, friction, and
solid-air coupling with areas of the human body, including skin, hair, and
clothing surfaces; and (3) develop numerical algorithms to model aerodynamic
crowds for multi-physics and multi-agent simulation. Among these aims,
differentiable numerical solvers will be developed to facilitate optimization
and computational design for human respiration-related problems.

The proposed algorithms will introduce a new family of computational tools based
on first principles to fill the gaps in simulation, animation, design, and
education regarding the previously ignored aerodynamic subarea of virtual human
modeling. The PIs will also disseminate the results as open-source software
libraries and databases of simulation results. If successful, the availability
of these aerodynamics-aware virtual human models, augmented by an ensemble of
differentiable physics simulators, individualized data models, interactive
visualization, and VR/AR display, can provide convenient and intuitive tools for
various applications that involve the human form.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.