* 2313395
* Fundamental Understanding of SEI Effects on Li Dendrite Formation and Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2024
* USD 81,210.00

Lithium ion batteries are the state-of-the-art choice for powering today's
electric and hybrid electric vehicles. The energy density and power capability
are limited; new chemistries are needed to increase the performance of the
electric vehicle. Replacing the graphite electrodes in the commercialized
lithium-ion batteries with lithium metal is expected to boost the energy density
of batteries significantly. However, research efforts to use lithium metal
electrodes in batteries have failed due to non-uniform deposition of lithium
metal during charge and discharge cycles. This project will utilize several
state-of-the art computer simulation tools and real-time microscopy techniques
to investigate the lithium metal deposition in various battery electrolytes. In
particular, the project will address how the by-products of electrolyte
reactions with lithium metal affect the growth and morphology of lithium
dendrites. The formation of these filaments in the battery shorts the battery
causing failure. The results of this project will pave the road for developing
high energy density lithium metal batteries. Several venues for integrating
research with undergraduate and graduate education and outreach activities at
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) will occur as a result of this project.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to several advanced
microscopy tools and computer simulation packages that will provide a unique set
of research experience. Outreach activities are planned to disseminate the
results of this study to high school and undergraduate students and motivate
them to pursue studies related to electrochemical energy storage technologies.
Outreach activities for local high school female and underrepresented students
in STEM during the UIC-Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department Open
House and UIC Summer Youth Program will be conducted.

Lithium-metal electrodes have the potential to enable lightweight and high
energy density batteries for transportation propulsion applications. A major
obstacle to achieve this goal remains on the non-uniform deposition of lithium
metals that appear in the form of fibrous or dendritic morphology. These lithium
dendrites can poke through the electrolyte and separator of batteries and
eventually result in electrical short circuit potentially causing fire.
Significant research has been conducted to develop prevention mechanisms of Li
dendrite growth; however, the progress has been limited due to the lack of
fundamental understanding on the formation and growth of the dendrites. The
fundamental questions such as how Li dendrites are formed, grown and split under
the influence of the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) remain unanswered. The
PIs will employ a multi-scale and multi-physics approach using advance
experimental and theoretical methods such as in-situ transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), in-operando optical microscopy, electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy (EIS), density functional theory (DFT) calculations, and phase-
field modeling (PFM) to study the growth of Li dendrites under the SEI
influence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.