* 2313290
* CAS-SC: Uncovering Mechanistic Details of Photo-Induced Charge Transfer in Thin Films of Photoactive Materials with In situ and Operando Transient Absorption Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Elizabeth Young, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2026
* USD 459,800.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Elizabeth Young of Lehigh University is
using sophisticated time-resolved spectroscopies to study photoactive chemical
conversion devices under operational conditions. Photochemical cells operate by
absorbing light from the sun and use that light energy to drive chemical
reactions. The efficiency of the device is the net result of a series of
interdependent fundamental processes, including light absorption, charge
separation, and charge migration, as well as the collection of charges that can
be used to drive chemical reactions. The separated charges can also undergo
unproductive recombination within the device, resulting in loss of efficiency.
Each of these interconnected processes depends heavily on the types of materials
used within the cell, making it necessary to study a functional system rather
than the individual parts in isolation. Dr. Young and her students will use
femtosecond pump-probe methods to study photoactive devices under potential bias
and steady-state illumination. Their discoveries could further our understanding
of the complex kinetic networks that are central to the functioning of the
chemical conversion devices needed for sustainable chemistry applications. The
project will also provide research opportunities for students, thus contributing
to the development of the Nation's scientific workforce.

This project centers on the use of transient absorption spectroscopy coupled
with electrochemical and photolysis techniques to quantify charge transfer
dynamics in semiconductor material stacks that undergo photo-induced charge
transfer. The project will utilize atomically precise, extremely thin absorbing
chalcogenide materials synthesized using atomic layer deposition. Such materials
are particularly well suited because layer thicknesses and compositions can be
finely tuned to enable systematic study in both planar and nanostructured
devices. The influence of an applied electrochemical potential and steady-state
illumination (i.e., the most realistic operating conditions for photovoltaics
and photoelectrical chemical cells) on charge-carrier dynamics and charge
transfer kinetics will be quantified to determine how steady-state conditions
influence ultrafast lifetimes and charge transfer kinetics. Such work could
ultimately provide insight into the function and efficiency of devices such as
photovoltaic and photoelectrochemical cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.