* 2313938
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Measuring Impacts of Community Seed Banks on Nutrition, Food Security, and Food Sovereignty in Underserved Regions
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Alder Keleman Saxena, Limeberry, Veronica
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Law
and Science program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Alder Keleman Saxena at Northern Arizona
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating the interlinking issues of nutritional security, hunger
reduction, and sustainable agriculture. As the United States experiences
increasing environmental changes (e.g., heatwaves, droughts, wildfires, and
flooding) on local access to nutritional foods is fundamental. Food crops that
evolve and adapt are central to securing food access in rapidly changing
environments. This project undertakes these interrelated issues, examining the
ways in which locally-based community seed banks are protecting crop diversity
while increasing local access to nutritional, healthy foods. Community seed
banks can serve as central nodes that 1) connect people to food resources, 2)
steward the environment, and 3) preserve and grow important regional food crops.
Despite their importance in these roles, there is little to no research on how
they actually serve impacted communities. This undertaking fills this gap,
examining community seed banks in areas of high poverty and hunger, to trace the
pathways from seed banks to food access and nutrition. The project will
contribute original data on these pathways, illustrating where, how, when, and
who benefits from local seed banks.

The research objective of this undertaking is to identify existing
agrobiodiversity conservation initiatives in most impacted regions of the US,
linking them to how they facilitate community networks for the goal of providing
and increasing access to food and nutritional security. This project undertakes
a four-part research design, including network analysis and pathway mapping to
determine the flow of seeds to and away from community seed banks, identifying
the various actors involved, their levels of participation, and outcomes of seed
and benefit sharing to the community. Additionally, it will identify a typology
of seed-to-food pathways, which could include backyard garden projects,
community gardens, community supported- agriculture, free community fridges,
educational spaces, school gardens, and others. Community members and community
seed bank organizers in each case site area will be interviewed, with all
interviews coded and housed in qualitative data coding software. Finally, focus
groups will be held in each identified case site to assess perceptions of
community seed banks and their pathways, along with how communities themselves
identify these pathways. This research will contribute 1) methods for examining
the conditions under which CSBs support food security/nutrition through
expanding access to agrobiodiversity; 2) multiple data sets, including indexes
of locally and regionally conserved seed varieties, ecosystems in which they are
used, and how communities use them; and 3) network analyses introducing a
typology of actors and institutions that support the flow of agrobiodiversity to
and from communities. Broadly, this postdoctoral project directly contributes to
global calls for increasing research on the status of agrobiodiversity.
Furthermore, it contributes to understanding the intersections of sustainable
food systems with food security/access/and nutrition. This research emphasizes
the ways in which human societies interact and engage with their physical
environments, with potential to shape theories on environmental governance and
food policy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.