* 2313869
* Side by Side: Youth-Authored Art-Science Exhibits to Broaden Participation in Climate Communication
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Mary Osnes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,999,998.00

This project builds on an NSF-funded program which engaged youth in the creation
of art-science experiences that use the biology and the experiences of migratory
birds as a means for communicating the impact of a changing climate. The
preliminary success of this program at increasing participants' science
identity, connectedness to nature, and feelings of efficacy about environmental
action inspired the current project's goal of studying the impact of this youth-
led climate communication on other young learners. High school-aged youth in the
Denver Metro Area will be engaged in a 10-day summer intensive program where
they will be guided by near-peer mentors and domain scientists in studying
migratory birds to better understand how bird biology intersects with changing
local environmental characteristics, and in translating their STEM understanding
into interdisciplinary art-science exhibits that will engage K-4th grade
learners. The exhibits will contain a mix of youth-designed materials intended
to give audiences a firsthand understanding of the impact of a changing climate
on birds and their migrations. The youth-created interactive exhibits will be
designed to fit into shippable trunks which, in partnership with the Environment
for the Americas' World Migratory Bird Day events, will be sent to informal
learning locations across the Americas where the migratory species travel, at
times when the species will be in those locations. The traveling exhibits will
help both the youth creators and the youth audiences perceive how local habitats
and changes to them are part of larger, global scientific phenomena like
migration and climate change.

The project engages undergraduate near-peer mentors, high school-aged students,
and researchers in the design and implementation of a participatory action
research study of the co-design process and the impact of the exhibits on target
audiences (K-4th grade learners). The purpose of using this methodology is to
ensure that the voices, interests, and perspectives of the diverse youth
participants influence both the exhibits themselves as well as the research
design. There is currently a lack of climate change messaging produced for, and
by, non-dominant audiences, and so this project is deliberately working with
Latine female-identifying youth and youth who do not identify with traditional
gender roles. The youth creators will be engaged in co-designing the data
collection approach that will be used with K-4th grade visitors to the Denver
Botanic Gardens, pulling from mixed-methods qualitative approaches such as field
observations, focus group discussions, and creative embedded data collection
(e.g., interactive experiences built into the digital aspects of the exhibits).
Data generated from this study will allow the mixed-generational team to gain
insight into what aspects of the youth-designed exhibits impact the K-4th grade
learners and how. Impact of the co-design work on the youth creators will be
assessed via pre/post science identity surveys, observations made by research
personnel, and focus group discussions. The intellectual merit of this work
rests in both understanding how learners from non-dominant groups can be
impacted by experiencing climate communication exhibits designed by near-peers,
and in the participatory creation of a model for assessing that impact. Results
will be disseminated via a range of science education, informal science
education, and climate communication forums. Broader impacts on learners derive
from the plans to exhibit the interactive trunks at the Denver Museum of Nature
and Science as well as informal learning locations across the Americas.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.