* 2313190
* CSR: Medium: Improving the Interface between Machine Learning and Software Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Shan Lu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Machine-Learning-as-a-Service (MLaaS) is a new software paradigm that gives
developers access to powerful machine learning models trained on massive data
sets without requiring those developers know how to train the models or have
access to the required training data. This approach makes machine learning
accessible to a much wider range of software systems, but it also creates new
challenges. Specifically, there is a tension between the desire to provide a
very general MLaaS interface (to make it as widely applicable as possible) and
the specific needs of individual applications that use MLaaS. For example, many
MLaaS providers offer general object detection models as a service, which can
recognize tens of thousands of different objects in a picture, but most
applications require only a small subset of that capability; e.g., applications
concerned with traffic only care about objects that could appear on a roadway.
This project will explore this tension – to preserve the generality of MLaaS
while improving the robustness, accuracy, and performance of individual
applications that use these services. Specifically, the project will first
create a benchmark suite of real-world applications to drive an empirical study
of the software bugs that arise due to the tension between general MLaaS
interfaces and specific application needs. Based on that study, the project will
create a set of tools that automatically adapt software to fix inconsistencies
and ambiguities that arise due to the use of general MLaaS interfaces in
application-specific contexts. Finally, the project will create methods and
tools for refactoring software to use additional information –including the
MLaaS’s confidence in its results– that is available from MLaaS providers, but
is typically ignored by software applications.

Machine learning is now a major part of software systems that affect our daily
lives, including transportation, medical systems, and even news distribution.
The rise of MLaaS makes it even easier for non-experts to incorporate machine
learning into these software systems, but it also increases the opportunities
for a new class of software bugs and software failures. This project will
identify and categorize the novel class of bugs that can arise from the use of
MLaaS in larger software systems and create tools and methodologies to identify
and fix those bugs. All benchmarks, data, and software tools developed through
this project will be released as open source so that the larger community can
freely benefit from this work. By improving the correctness and performance of
software systems that use machine learning services, this project will not only
make it easier to develop such software, but also improve the quality of
people’s daily lives as the software they use will be more reliable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.