* 2313819
* Global Patterns in Interstate and Intrastate War Since 1750
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Ryan Griffiths, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2026
* USD 442,321.00

Understanding the causes and frequency of war is a central mission in the field
of international relations. However, data-driven work on conflict prior to the
early 20th century is centered on Europe and ignores hundreds of independent
states in other parts of the world. This project will create comprehensive
global data on interstate and intrastate war back to 1750. The project will
research three important questions: (1) Has the frequency of war declined over
time? (2) Are some regions more peaceful than other regions of the world? (3)
Has interstate war declined historically while intrastate war has increased? The
findings will contribute to addressing broader questions such as whether certain
historical regions were more violent and whether wars have become less deadly
over time.

The project has two goals. The first goal is to create a comprehensive
historical and publicly available conflict dataset. The current datasets in the
field need to be improved with respect to temporal reach, regional coverage, the
identity of combatants, and battle deaths. This project will address these
problems by expanding and building out the International System(s) Dataset with
detailed historical data on combatant and battle fatalities for all states since
1750. The second goal is to quantitively examine the relative frequency of
intrastate and interstate war across time and space to test theories on the
onset of war. The results of the project will contribute to scholarship on
understanding the causes of war and long-term historical trends in warfare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.