* 2313079
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Medium: Collaborative Upstanding: Leveraging Conversational AI to Cultivate Constructive Upstanders Among Teens
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Wenting Zou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 09/30/2027
* USD 204,582.00

This project uses artificial intelligence (AI) to guide adolescents to stand up
against bullying in social media. The approach encourages teens to do this in a
safe and effective manner. The rate of cyberbullying in social media among teens
is worrisome, and the potential consequences of cyberbullying can be
detrimental. The prosocial behaviors of bystanders can play a critical role in
combating cyberbullying. Such behaviors may include confronting the bully or
comforting the victim. Reversely, bystandersâ€™ inaction and silence allow bad
actors to feel less inhibited and may result in a downward spiral of increasing
aggression on social media. Using the latest AI technologies, the project aims
to achieve human-AI collaborative upstanding. These AI technologies may include
Chat GPT-3, AI chaining, and other approaches. Using these AI technologies, the
project will provide personalized and empathetic guidance and result in the
development of prosocial bystander behaviors by teens using social media.

The investigators will first conduct empirical studies to identify successful
collaborative upstanding strategies. These strategies will enable teens to
encourage each other to stand up against bullies online. Investigators will also
identify ways teens may fail in this process. Next, investigators will create a
set of AI conversational agents and implement the identified successful
conversational strategies. The system developed will go through an iterative
prototype design process. Then investigators will perform an evaluation and
improvement process to the prototype. Finally, the investigators will deploy and
test the best performing conversational AI system. The project will test with
youth the conversational AI using Social Media TestDrive. This is an online
learning platform used by over 800,000 teens and educators in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.