* 2313449
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Electrospun Nanofibrous Air Filters for Coronavirus Control
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Yun Shen, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2023
* USD 30,896.00

A collaborative team consisting of researchers from The George Washington
University and the University of California, Riverside is developing electrospun
nanofibrous air filters for controlling the transmission of coronavirus,
including SARS-CoV-2. The pandemic of COVID-19 has raised a significant public
health concern in 2020. The spread of COVID-19 is difficult to control, because
SARS-CoV-2 is environmentally persistent and it can potentially be suspended in
aerosols for long-range, airborne transmission and infection. Air filtration is
crucial to control SARS-CoV-2 transmission, however most air filters used in
residential, commercial, and industrial buildings are not effective for
retaining viruses. As personal protective equipment for healthcare personnel or
even the general public, respirators and masks that can effectively capture the
virus are also urgently needed for this pandemic. Electrospinning has emerged as
a novel technology to synthesize non-woven nanofibrous mats, and it is both
industrially viable for large-scale manufacturing and deployable onsite for
small-scale applications by a portable device. The fabricated nanofibrous mats
are ideal for air filtration, because they have a reduced pore size to
efficiently capture the virus, a large porosity to reduce air pressure drop in
filtration, well-controlled properties, and mechanical robustness and
flexibility. This RAPID research project will rationally design and fabricate
novel nanomaterial-based air filters for coronavirus control, understand the
interplay between viral pathogens and nanomaterials in complex environmental
matrices, and initiate a fast response for protecting the public health with
engineering tools. The project will provide training to students in science and
engineering areas and offer them hands-on research experience, and introduce
students from diverse backgrounds and educational levels, particularly those
from underrepresented groups, to cutting-edge research in STEM. In addition, the
project will disseminate the acquired knowledge through education modules,
scientific journals and conferences, and science fairs, which will help increase
the scientific literacy of the general public.

The research team aims to rationally design and fabricate electrospun
nanofibrous air filters that are effective, low-cost, scalable, and easy for
implementation for coronavirus control, including SARS-CoV-2, and to understand
the mechanism of coronavirus removal in air filtration. The researchers will
first develop electrospun nanofibrous air filters with diverse morphologies,
retained charges, and selective binding sites to enhance the capture of
bioaerosols containing coronavirus. Coronavirus removal efficiency under
different environmental conditions will next be evaluated to understand the
performance and robustness of the air filters. Key virus-nanomaterial
interactions will be identified with the aid of both simulation and experimental
tools, which can guide future air filter design and optimization. For this RAPID
project, the researchers will also test the performance of air filters for
removing SARS-CoV-2 in a healthcare facility that houses COVID-19 patients. The
proposed research will contribute significantly to nanotechnology, microbiology,
and environmental engineering, and it can be potentially transformative in the
field of materials at large in terms of multiscale, rational, functional design.
It will not only provide a rapid response to COVID-19 outbreaks and public
health protection, but also be translated into controlling other virulent
pathogens. The project will provide training to students in STEM, particularly
introduce students from underrepresented groups and students from diverse
backgrounds and educational levels to cutting-edge research. Moreover, the
project will disseminate the acquired knowledge to help increase the scientific
literacy of the general public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.