* 2313692
* BMP Signaling and the Robustness of In Vivo Stem Cell Decisions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gregory Reeves, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 601,071.00

Gaining the ability to reproducibly control stem cell differentiation would
advance fundamental knowledge of cell and tissue biology. This would have broad
impacts on society and human health. It is well-known that stem cells make
decisions based on signals they receive from neighboring cells. A quantitative
understanding of this process is required for reliable human control of stem
cell differentiation. However, this crucial piece of the puzzle, in the form of
a predictive mathematical model, is currently missing. To address this
conceptual gap, researchers from Texas A&M University will employ light
microscopy, genetics, and mathematical approaches to quantitatively probe the
relationship between signaling and stem cell differentiation. The goal is to
create a mathematical model of this relationship that can be used to design
efficient and reliable protocols for controlling differentiation.

The research will focus on the Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling
pathway and its role in germline stem cell (GSC) decisions in the Drosophila
ovary. The highly-conserved BMP pathway is one of many major regulators of stem
cell decisions across the animal kingdom, and in Drosophila female GSCs, it is
the central hub in dictating differentiation vs self-renewal decisions. In GSCs
and in differentiating cells, known as cystoblasts (CBs), positive and negative
feedback loops regulate the BMP pathway. The hypothesis is that these feedback
loops enhance the robustness of stem cell decisions, and as such, must be
accounted for when designing protocols to control differentiation. Therefore,
the project will investigate these feedback loops in both GSCs and CBs to
incorporate them into the model. Advanced confocal microscopy techniques, such
as raster image correlation spectroscopy (RICS) and fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching (FRAP), will be used to measure biophysical parameters of the BMP
pathway and to obtain time courses of concentrations of fluorescently-tagged BMP
pathway components. These measurements will be used as model constraints or to
test model predictions. Experiments will be done under wildtype and genetically
perturbed conditions, such as loss of feedback loop components. Precise
perturbations to the pathway will be achieved through optogenetics. The outcome
of the project is expected to be a predictive, mechanistic model of BMP pathway
regulation of stem cell decisions, which will have several positive impacts.
First, due to the high conservation of the pathway, a detailed mechanistic model
impacts the understanding of BMP signaling in other organisms. Second, the
quantitative, mechanistic description of the system will form the foundation for
external manipulation of stem cell decisions, such as designed de-
differentiation. Finally, the results will provide an in vivo complement to stem
cell cultures, and as such, will be a model system to advance knowledge of stem
cell biology within native context.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.