* 2313878
* Modified carrageenan-based nanomaterials as sustainable, immunomodulatory, hemocompatible, and antibactieral biomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2026
* USD 174,032.00

Medical implants, including stents used to open diseased arteries, orthopedic
implants that restore the use of limbs and joints, implanted blood glucose
sensors that help manage diabetes, and many other devices, are primarily
composed of synthetic polymers and metals. Negative biological responses often
occur when these materials are introduced into the body. Many implants fail due
to unfavorable blood-material interactions, inflammation, and infection. Blood
clotting on cardiovascular implants can lead to heart attacks and strokes.
Chronic inflammation around implants can cause non-healing wounds and degrade
sensor performance. Bacterial infection on implant surfaces can be exceedingly
difficult to treat. Patients can be treated with drugs to reduce these risks
(such as anticoagulants, anti-inflammatories, and antibiotics), but these may
have long-term side effects. Instead of treating patients with drugs, blood
reactions, inflammation, and infection should be addressed by developing new
materials that have more favorable interactions in the biological environment.
This research is inspired by biology to develop new materials for biomedical
implants. Living organisms, including animals, plants, fungi, algae, and
bacteria all produce sugar-based, natural polymers called polysaccharides. Some
polysaccharides provide structural support for tissues, while other
polysaccharides govern important biochemical processes or exhibit antibacterial
and antifungal activity, protecting tissues from harmful infections. These
polysaccharides are organized at the nanoscale in living tissues. Algae produce
a class of polysaccharides called carrageenans that are used commercially in
food, cosmetics, and health care products. This research project will develop
modified carrageenans with chemical and nanoscale features specifically designed
to reduce inflammation, modulate blood clotting, and enhance antimicrobial
activity. The use of carrageenans, as opposed to synthetic polymers or
polysaccharides from animal tissues, will provide a sustainable source for
implant materials with inherent anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial activity,
improving outcomes for patients. The research will be conducted in collaboration
with experts from Latin America and is integrated into outreach activities to
youth and the general public in underprivileged communities.

Heparin is harvested from animal tissues and used clinically as an
anticoagulant. Heparin and other sulfated glycosaminoglycans, such as
chondroitin sulfate, have generated significant interest in tissue engineering
for their ability to stabilize growth factors and potentiate other biochemical
functions. Synthetically sulfated/sulfonated polymers (e.g., polystyrene
sulfonate, dextran sulfate) have also been proposed as new biomaterials;
however, they require the use of harsh and toxic sulfation chemistries.
Carrageenans are naturally sulfated polysaccharides, commercially produced for
food, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical uses. They are potential alternatives to
mammalian glycosaminoglycans. However, their chemical modification and
processing into nanomaterials for biomedical applications is unexplored in the
existing literature. This research will produce a library of chemically modified
carrageenans to (i) enable their assembly into nanostructured materials
surfaces, (ii) modulate protein binding and cellular inflammation on surfaces,
(iii) enhance blood compatibility, and (iv) introduce antibacterial activity.
The research is designed to elucidate structure-property-function relationships
of this important class of renewable nano-biomaterials that will be developed to
have immune-instructive properties. The work involves PhD students from a
collaboratorâ€™s laboratory in Latin America and will include outreach with new
programming to engage underserved communities at a public-facing campus recently
opened in the Denver metropolitan area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.