* 2313767
* Collaborative Research: Learning-Assisted Estimation and Management of Flexible Energy Resources in Active Distribution Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hanif Livani, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

This NSF project aims to develop novel learning-based approaches for estimating
the flexibility amount of grid edge resources (GERs), such as solar, solar and
storage, or smart thermostat, and then design equitable resource coordination
and management methods based on multi-agent and distributed optimization
approaches. The project will bring transformative changes to the area of GER
management in distribution electricity networks by combining machine learning
(ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) with the physics-based models of such
resources for estimating geo-spatial flexibility at the grid level according,
and also by developing a multi-time scale distributed optimization method for
GERs coordination to provide grid services. The outcome of this project is
expected to have significant impacts on grid reliability and resilience, while
providing customers with new financial and monetary opportunities. The
intellectual merits of the project include new hybrid physics-based/data-driven
flexibility estimation methods for GERs along with their uncertainties, and
creation of configurable, multi-time scale, distributed optimization for
providing fast and slow grid services according to the customers’ computation
and communication capabilities. The broader impacts of the project include
integrating educating the public through print media, broadcast news, and the
Internet, and providing educational and research opportunities for
underrepresented students.

This project will advance management of flexible energy resources of
distribution grids in the following four directions. The first direction will be
in utilizing generative ML techniques and leveraging spatial, temporal, and
channel-wise information from nearby observable behind-the-meter (BTM) solar and
storage assets to address data gaps. This approach enhances the estimation of
availability and flexibility of these BTM units. The second direction will be in
developing a geo-spatial flexibility estimation method that improves the
characterization of smart thermostat loads. This method combines physics-based
and data-driven models to obtain expected power and energy adjustments and
associated uncertainties. The third direction will be in building a configurable
multi-time scale distributed coordination framework to package BTM flexibilities
as fast and slow grid services. Enabling end-use customers to provide multi-time
scale grid services increases power system resilience and boosts customer
revenue. The final direction will be in facilitating participation of
underserved customers by accounting for their computation and communication
limitations in multi-agent coordination procedure. This advancement will better
distribute societal welfare and unlock potentials of underutilized BTM assets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.