* 2313861
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating High Temperature Deformation Mechanisms in Refractory Multi-Principal-Element Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Irene Beyerlein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2026
* USD 482,041.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMARY

Modern transportation, power generation, space access, and national security all
rely on the availability of materials that can maintain their shape and strength
at elevated temperatures. The development of nickel-based superalloys, which
often contain ten or more elements, are used in jet engines, can withstand
temperatures of over 1,000oC, and allow for gas temperatures in excess of
1,400oC. The development of multiple generations of these superalloys occurred
over many decades but is reaching its limit. Further temperature advancements
would result in better fuel efficiencies, greater thrust, and optimal
performance, but novel approaches to alloy development are required. The use of
refractory elements that have higher melting temperatures and the creation of
equiatomic alloys represent two promising paths forward, but current
understanding of how these new alloys deform at extreme temperatures is
currently lacking. This study combines advanced computational modeling with
novel ultrahigh temperature experiments and detailed electron microscopy to
identify the deformation mechanisms that govern the high temperature strength of
this new class of refractory multi-principal-element alloys. The proposed
collaboration is both rapidly accelerating the rate of alloy discovery while
providing meaningful educational and career advancement opportunities, thus
expanding and enlarging the workforce in automotive, aerospace, and national
defense sectors.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Refractory-multi-principal-element alloys (RMPEAs) hold tremendous potential for
use as structural materials that can operate at ultrahigh temperatures (UHT) and
in the extreme environments required for energy efficient power generation,
hypersonic flight, and space access. Targeted use temperatures cannot be met
with conventional superalloys, and current understanding of the UHT mechanical
behavior of RMPEAs is still in its infancy and represents a critical impediment
to the realization of this new class of alloys. The scientific merit of the
proposed research is predicated on the overwhelming need to predict,
characterize, and understand the deformation mechanisms that govern the
mechanical response of RMPEAs at temperatures approaching 1500oC. The
integration of advanced mesoscale modeling of dislocation dynamics, novel sub-
scale mechanical testing, and detailed microstructural characterization are
being used to gather much needed UHT tensile and creep data to develop a
fundamental scientific description of the ultrahigh temperature deformation of
nearly equiatomic, compositionally complex, multicomponent alloys. Participation
in established programs at Johns Hopkins University and the University of
California, Santa Barbara are providing research experiences for under-
represented high school and undergraduate students, and the proposed
undergraduate student exchanges hold real potential for expanding the pipeline
of STEM graduate students, and in time, STEM leaders and role models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.