* 2313220
* Solar Heliospheric and INterplanetary Environment (SHINE) Workshop, 2023-2027
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Nada Al-Haddad, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2028
* USD 305,160.00

Solar Heliospheric and INterplanetary Environment (SHINE) is an affiliation of
researchers within the solar, interplanetary, and heliospheric communities,
dedicated to promoting an enhanced understanding of the processes by which
energy in the form of magnetic fields and particles are produced by the Sun
and/or accelerated in interplanetary space, and on the mechanisms by which these
fields and particles are transported to the Earth and elsewhere in the
heliosphere. This project continues the highly successful series of SHINE
workshops for the next five years; SHINE workshops have been held annually since
1995 and annually as stand-alone meetings since 1999. The SHINE workshop has a
strong participation by students and post-doctoral researchers, representing
about 30% of the whole participant population. SHINE students supported by NSF
funding have been organizing a student-only student day on the Sunday preceding
the workshop, which will continue with this award. Overall, SHINE provides a
unique opportunity for students to participate and organize a workshop in the
solar, interplanetary and heliospheric communities.

SHINE research focuses in particular upon: (i) the connection between events and
phenomena on the Sun and their relation to solar wind structures in the
heliosphere; (ii) the origin and evolution of the solar wind; (iii) the nature
of turbulence in the interplanetary medium; and (iv) the production and
transport of solar energetic particles from the Sun through the heliosphere. The
goal of SHINE activities is to enrich and strengthen both the physical
understanding and predictive capabilities for these phenomena. Further details
about SHINE can be found at http://www.helioshine.org/. The goals of SHINE are
parallel to those of NSF’s GEM and CEDAR programs. This project will contribute
in creating collaborations between researchers to move towards more advanced
studies of the solar-terrestrial system. These collaborations made possible by
the workshop are expected to improve our present understanding of the basic
physical processes underlying the Sun-Earth system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.