* 2313269
* Molecular Dynamics and Machine Learning for the Design of Peptide Probes for Biosensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

Human breath and skin surface chemistry contain rich mixtures of molecules and
biomarkers that can indicate respiratory infections, diabetes, stress, and other
conditions. Fast-acting sensors for human breath could enable rapid diagnosis of
diseases like future variants of COVID-19, Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV),
cancer, diabetes, and more, through detection of unique chemical fingerprints
for each type of disease. Unfortunately, current sensor technologies are too
bulky, expensive, or unable to distinguish between different illnesses or
conditions. This project will advance the state-of-the-art in biosensing by
designing disease-specific sensor arrays that identify combinations of dozens of
molecules that comprise unique “fingerprints” found in human breath. The project
will employ physics-based models of molecules interacting with the sensor,
state-of-the-art experiments characterizing new sensors, and machine learning
(ML) to analyze and design these sensing devices. Data generated from the
project will allow the team to explore millions of potential “eNose” designs,
creating optimal sensors to detect target diseases. The team will also use the
technical research as a platform to support workforce development and broadening
participation in STEM. The work will lead to the training of a PhD student with
expertise in biosensing, new materials for classroom instruction in emerging
technology, and financial support opportunities for undergraduate summer
research experiences.

Molecular dynamics simulations will explore the physical characteristics of
peptide-based binders of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A high-throughput
simulation workflow will calculate structure/function relationship for hundreds
to thousands of peptide/VOC binding pairs. This data will then be used to
develop a sequence-specific ML model that will permit inverse design of new
sequences with ideal binding properties. The most promising molecules will be
synthesized and tested using analytical tools and transistor sensor chips for
compact eNose systems. This project will synthesize experimental and
computational molecular engineering, deep machine learning, and biological
sensing mechanisms. By combining experimental data, physics-based simulation,
and high throughput ML models, it can, for the first time, assess the true
potential sensitivity and specificity of a multi-disease multiplex sensor. If
successful, this project will advance the field and overcome barriers to the
fast development of bespoke biosensors for various applications with optimized
selectivity and sensitivity. Beyond disease detection, this platform can impact
the field of sensing and separations, for example, in the separation of
molecules or passive detection for security (e.g., chemical/biological warfare
agents). This work also addresses critical knowledge gaps in existing ML tools
for the sequence-level prediction of peptide binders, and the knowledge and data
produced in this study will benefit the scientific community and advance the use
of these methods broadly in molecular data science. New compact, affordable,
noninvasive, and rapid VOC biosensors would create a novel affordable platform
for delivering high-demand tests for blood glucose, pregnancy, infectious
diseases, and general wellness. The technology’s future impact could extend to
healthcare, public health, agriculture, food storage, environmental monitoring,
and defense.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.