* 2313816
* Increasing Undergraduate Student Interpreters' Fluency and Accuracy in Interpreting STEM Content
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Judy Vesel, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,205.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the bioscience
vocabulary knowledge of undergraduate student interpreters to enable them to
interpret biology content fluently and accurately for students who are deaf or
hard of hearing. Due to the lack of postsecondary courses that are delivered in
sign language, the only way for students who use American Sign Language (ASL) as
their primary method of communication to engage fully in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) learning is through use of qualified
sign-language interpreters who can interpret STEM content effectively and
accurately. However, research shows that many sign- language interpreters lack
adequate skills to provide students with full access to STEM content, are unable
to accurately interpret it, and often do not have STEM-related training or
experience. The project builds on outcomes of two previous IUSE: EDU Exploration
and Design projects and addresses this issue. Development activities will result
in completion of a unique Signing Bioscience Lexicon (SBL) for enabling student
interpreters to develop an ASL bioscience vocabulary, videos to aid in use and
understanding of the five principles of fingerspelling, and a set of video
tutorials to equip instructors to incorporate the principles of fingerspelling
into their teaching of student interpreters. Research will involve study of the
materials’ use and effectiveness when implemented at the development site with
Lamar University’s Deaf Studies and Deaf Education undergraduate interpreting
students, and at a second site with students enrolled in Eastern Kentucky
University’s (EKU) Interpreter Training Program (ITP). Outcomes of this project
will be significant in that they will inform direction of subsequent projects,
within and beyond Lamar and EKU, which will include other STEM content areas,
other ITPs, and interpreting students nationwide. This project has the important
and far-reaching potential of not only increasing participation of students who
are deaf or hard of hearing in courses that include STEM content, but also may
be instrumental in encouraging them to pursue STEM careers.

The project has five goals: 1) Create an SBL that incorporates a human signer
rather than an avatar and integrates the five principles of fingerspelling; 2)
Finalize the video tutorials; 3) Implement the materials and conduct a formative
evaluation of use and effectiveness; 4) Make modifications to the materials
based on test results; 5) Disseminate project deliverables and begin working
with sites to integrate them into their interpreting programs. The evaluation
will include two studies, one at Lamar and one at EKU, each of which will be
divided into two phases. Phase One will evaluate whether the SBL helps students
in the mastery of ASL bioscience vocabulary. Phase Two will examine the
effectiveness of the application of the five principles of fingerspelling in
increasing students’ fingerspelling fluency and accuracy and their ability to
interpret a typical bioscience lecture fluently and accurately. Many student
interpreters struggle with fingerspelling, an important component of sign
languages. Their fingerspelling often looks like typing, as they do not know how
to move from one visual phoneme to the next. As more deaf and hard of hearing
students enter advanced STEM programs, one way to remove barriers is to have
highly skilled interpreters who are effective fingerspellers and who can rapidly
and effectively interpret ongoing contexts that include many terms that do not
have established signs. The project has the potential to make bioscience content
more accessible to undergraduates who are deaf or hard of hearing, and thus may
be instrumental in supporting their pursuit of biology (or other STEM) majors
and careers. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.