* 2313791
* Reactive Force Field Design Guided by Energy Decomposition Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Teresa Head-Gordon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,829.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Teresa Head-Gordon and Martin Head-
Gordon of the University of California Berkeley will develop next-generation
force fields guided by new advances in energy decomposition analysis (EDA).
Force fields (FFs) are empirical functions that aim to describe how the
potential energy of a system varies with position of the atoms and molecules
both accurately and inexpensively. Molecular simulations advance by improving
the accuracy of the force field, which is recognized as a difficult yet
essential challenge, which can partly be addressed using EDA. An EDA takes
advanced quantum mechanical calculations on groups of molecules, and distills
their interaction energy into a sum of terms that capture repulsive and
attractive physical driving forces. These terms provide valuable first
principles data to inform the design and parameterization of new force fields.
The research should yield new scientific methods and results on specific
chemical systems. Broader impacts will encompass software dissemination, machine
learning models, high quality data generation, and education, training, and
outreach. Research opportunities will be provided for junior transfer
undergraduates who have more difficulty finding research labs during their
shorter tenure. Development of a Professional Masters in Molecular Sciences and
Software Engineering (MSSE) degree will aid development of a diverse workforce
that is highly prepared for programming, data modeling, and machine learning.

Specifically, the collaborative research team at UC-Berkeley will formulate a
new Gibbs decomposition analysis (GDA) to unravel connections between molecular
driving forces and enthalpy-entropy trade-offs. GDA will be adapted to FF
simulations in order to probe the molecular interactions controlling interfacial
chemistry. For non-covalent interactions, EDA for electrostatic polarization
will be advanced to reveal each fragmentâ€™s energy lowering and orbital
rearrangements. New analysis will be performed to reconcile real space and
Hilbert space measures of charge transfer, and to understand Pauli relaxation.
These EDA advances have the potential to answer basic questions about non-bonded
interactions and help guide the FF development that use charge equilibration to
define polarization and charge transfer. The recent emergence of machine
learning to represent potential surfaces offers a complementary approach to
reactive force field development for chemical bonding. The NewtonNet machine
learning model will be trained with EDA data that can be integrated into force
fields. In summary, the main objectives of these studies are to provide more
powerful EDA tools as well as machine learning models to expand the scope of
advanced potential energy surfaces to non-bonded interactions, reactive
chemistry, and to better interpretation of observables in condensed phase and
interfacial systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.