* 2313755
* ECCS-EPSRC: A new generation of cost-effective, scalable and stable radiation detectors with ultrahigh detectivity
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Quanxi Jia, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,000.00

This is a joint effort between a U.S. University (Buffalo) and two U.K.
Universities (Cambridge and Oxford).Effectively detecting low dose rates of
radiation is critical for improving the safety and capability of non-invasive
diagnostics, including medical imaging, nuclear security, and product
inspection. However, current industry-standard materials (namely amorphous
selenium and cadmium zinc telluride) have limited ability to detect X-rays, such
that the current medical standard X-ray dose rate is a very high value, and this
increases the risk of causing cancer. To improve the safety of medical imaging,
as well as to improve the effectiveness of a wide range of other diagnostics
involving ionizing radiation, it is essential to engineer new materials capable
of detecting lower dose rates of radiation, with stable performance under
operation. The collaborative project between the US team (University at Buffalo)
and the UK team (University of Oxford and University of Cambridge) is to develop
a new generation of cost-effective bismuth-based radiation detectors capable of
detecting three orders of magnitude lower dose rates than the current commercial
standard. The project will directly address the critical challenge of
engineering the materials and the manufacturability for high-performing,
operationally stable radiation detectors. The broader technological impacts of
this project are built on collaborations with industry and a US national
laboratory. Furthermore, the research program is well integrated with education
and outreach programs at all three universities, including: 1) training the
future workforce with multidisciplinary research skills in an international
research environment; 2) implementing cutting-edge research in novel materials
and devices in materials science and engineering curricula through teaching; 3)
disseminating research findings to broader audiences through outreach programs;
and 4) increasing diversity and broad participation of under-represented
minority groups from local communities, contributing to strengthening and
expanding the future STEM workforce in both US and UK and enhancing society
awareness of development of state-of-the-art radiation detection technology.
Significantly improved performance of radiation detectors has recently been
achieved with lead-halide perovskite single crystals. However, the high lead
(Pb) content exceeds the maximum limit set in many jurisdictions (including in
the US and UK), and the facile ionic conductivity in these materials limits the
range of electric fields that can be applied, thus limiting their operational
stability. This proposal will address the challenges of current X-ray detectors,
including the use of toxic elements, limited performance, high manufacturing
costs, and limited charge-carrier transport. Our preliminary results have shown
that BiOI can be the ideal non-toxic alternative to the Pb-based perovskites for
next generation radiation detectors with ultrahigh detectivity because of its
heavy elements, large mobility-lifetime products, and high resistivities. To
transfer this technology to industry and to have an impact on medical imaging
and nuclear security, we will further 1) improve the mobility-lifetime product
to well above 6Â±2 x 10-2 cm2 V-1 s-1 through compositional engineering, 2)
increase the size of the detectors by an order of magnitude (from 5 mm
currently) without compromising on performance, and 3) optimize the device
architecture and imaging performance. The overall aim of this joint research
between US team (University at Buffalo) and the UK team (University of Oxford
and University of Cambridge) is to develop a new generation of cost-effective,
stable and up-scaled bismuth-based radiation detectors capable of detecting
three orders of magnitude lower dose rates than the current commercial standard.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.