* 2313340
* SBIR Phase I: Dynamic OneSource Geospatial Information System for Maximizing Agricultural Yields
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Bishwa Acharya, Earth Mapping International, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,979.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the creation of a dynamic geospatial database that can be
mined to further develop precision models of soil moisture and farm productivity
that will aid small- to medium-sized farms. These farms cover almost 75% of the
operating farmland in the U.S. Large companies in the agriculture industry
benefit from the collection of digital farm data however, smaller farms are
disadvantaged by the inaccessibility of agricultural digital innovation systems.
The availability of timely digital information as inputs to field conditions
will help small- to mid-sized farmers optimize their yields and potentially
generate greater revenue. The proposed database will integrate multiscale and
multivariate imaging and non-imaging geospatial and meteorological data into a
single source. The merging of satellite-based geospatial data with airborne-
geospatial data, a challenging task, will improve the accuracy of earth science
data. Potential applications of the technology include medium- to long-term food
security planning, drought mitigation, soil conservation, diversification, and
expansion of climate-resilient and sustainable farming.

This SBIR Phase I project focuses on developing an integrated, one-source,
dynamic geospatial database as well as precision soil moisture and farm
productivity forecasting models to benefit small- and medium-size farms. The
data inputs include (i) global navigation satellite system observations on a
newly designed geodetic/meteorological network for significantly increased
accuracy; (ii) airborne digital geospatial data from a fixed-wing platform to
capture high precision and resolution nadir multispectral and color oblique
imageries, lidar point cloud data, and data from un-manned aerial systems to
capture seasonal hyperspectral imageries; (iii) satellite remote sensing data
from commercial satellite high-resolution imageries; (iv) weather satellite data
for hourly global precipitation measurements (GPM) fused with multi-satellite
retrievals for global precipitation measurement mission (GPM); and (v)
terrestrial data from existing geographic information systems and meteorological
stations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.