* 2313807
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Creating Persistent Histories through Community Archaeology
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Jonathan Micon, Micon, Jonathan J
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Christopher
Wolff at the State University of New York Albany, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist examining persistent material practices
at the Schenck Site (Fda 14) in the Mohawk River Valley during the initial
colonization of eastern New York State. Using representative samples of material
culture, the proposed research seeks to understand the historically and
culturally contingent processes that led to the acquisition and use of certain
objects and materials in colonial contexts. A major component of this research
includes a three-week field course for six students to learn about research
techniques in archaeology while contributing to scholarly advancements in the
field.

This project seeks to investigate how communities seized upon new opportunities
to diversify their existing material assemblages while continuing to maintain
elements of their traditional identity. It does this through three ordered
objectives: 1) Survey and define the spatial and temporal parameters and
internal features of the pre- and post-contact village components at the Schenck
site (Fda 14) in Upstate New York; 2) Collect representative samples of material
culture from both components to diachronically reconstruct material practices
spanning before and after initial colonial contact; 3) Provide educational
opportunities to six students related to research field techniques and career
trajectories in archaeology. This work builds on previous studies of material
engagements in colonial economies by approaching the adoption of colonial
influences as part of a dynamic yet enduring cultural strategy. It works to
extend these research findings beyond the traditional academic community by
collaboratively incorporating descendant representatives into the planning,
execution, and outcomes of the project at each ordered stage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.