* 2313708
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Emotional Distress as a Mediator of the Threat Sensitivity and Conspiratorial Ideation Relation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Lisa Fazio, Bowes, Shauna Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Lisa Fazio at
Vanderbilt University, this postdoctoral award fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the relationships among conspiratorial
ideation, threat sensitivity, and emotional distress.

Conspiratorial ideation is a pervasive problem in America that is strongly
associated with threat sensitivity, spanning existential, epistemic, and
outgroup threat sensitivity, and emotional distress, spanning anxiety, anger,
and depression. Understanding whether and to what extent threat sensitivity
precedes conspiratorial ideation across the lifespan and levels of prior
commitment to conspiracy theories will shed light on when conspiratorial
ideation starts and how it manifests. Adolescence may represent a “window of
vulnerability” for conspiratorial ideation, and individuals with a strong
commitment to conspiracy theories are most likely to act on their beliefs in
ways that are detrimental to society. Thus, it is crucial to understand
conspiratorial ideation in these populations. Perhaps even more importantly,
examining whether emotional distress mediates the relations between threat
sensitivity and conspiratorial ideation and identifying whether conspiratorial
ideation is related to neural instantiations of threat sensitivity will assist
future research aiming to develop effective and long-lasting interventions for
conspiratorial ideation. The integration of social science, developmental
science, and behavioral neuroscience will provide essential insights into
conspiratorial ideation and how to change it.

Preliminary research suggests that threat sensitivity longitudinally predicts
conspiratorial ideation, raising the important possibility that threat
sensitivity may help explain the emergence of conspiratorial ideation. Yet, the
emotional mechanisms underlying these relations remain opaque, preventing a full
understanding of conspiratorial ideation. As such, this study will uncover
whether emotional distress mediates the longitudinal relations between threat
sensitivity and conspiratorial ideation. In Study 1, the longitudinal relations
between multiple forms of threat sensitivity (existential, epistemic, and
outgroup) and conspiratorial ideation will be examined in 3 samples: non-
conspiratorial adults, adolescents (11 – 17 yr), and conspiratorial adults.
Moreover, different forms of emotional distress (depression, anxiety, and anger)
will be examined as mediators in these relations. There will be 3 timepoints,
with each timepoint being separated by a period of 6 weeks. This study also aims
to investigate whether conspiratorial ideation is related to neural indicators
of threat sensitivity, which will ultimately assist future research aiming to
develop effective and long-lasting interventions for conspiratorial ideation. In
Study 2, a neural instantiation of threat sensitivity will be examined in
relation to conspiratorial ideation in 3 samples: non-conspiratorial adults,
adolescents (11 – 17 yr), and conspiratorial adults. Specifically, late positive
potential (LPP) reactivity will be examined, which is an event-related potential
(ERP) component that is heightened for threatening, but not neutral, images.
Participants will complete self-report measures of conspiratorial ideation,
threat sensitivity, and emotional distress, and they will then complete the ERP
task. The ERP task will be a novel emotional interrupt task. The proposed
research will increase our understanding of the development and maintenance of
conspiratorial ideation and broadly advance knowledge in the social and
behavioral sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.