* 2313900
* Regulation of selective endocytic transport
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Santiago Di Pietro, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 05/31/2027
* USD 949,949.00

This project will investigate the cellular machinery that carries out
endocytosis, a process in which a portion of the cell membrane is pulled into
the cell interior. Endocytosis regulates how cells take up nutrients,
communicate with other cells, and adapt to changes in environmental conditions.
While this research will be performed using yeast, discoveries will be broadly
applicable because the cellular components that mediate endocytosis are
conserved among different species. Studying endocytosis is essential to
understanding how cells function, and this knowledge could have a number of
applications such as improving crop yields and food production. This project
will contribute to supporting diversity in science and education through
training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom
belong to groups underrepresented in the sciences. Both undergraduate and
graduate students who work on this project will be involved in outreach at
elementary schools where young students will perform hands-on yeast experiments
and visualize cellular components using state-of-the-art research microscopes.
The main goal of this outreach activity is to excite young students about
science. Knowledge gained through this research will be published in wide-
ranging scientific journals, presented at both specialized and broad cell
biology conferences, and integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses
taught by the researchers.

During clathrin-mediated endocytosis, branched actin polymerization provides
force needed to drive vesicle internalization. This research will explore three
essential and unresolved questions regarding the regulation of the actin network
during endocytosis. Aim 1 will establish how actin polymerization is initiated
at sites of endocytosis. In particular, Aim 1 will elucidate the molecular
mechanism that controls initiation of each new branch of the actin network. Aim
2 will determine the mechanism by which actin capping protein is recruited to
sites of endocytosis and how two poorly understood protein components of the
endocytic machinery actin network (Aim21 and Bsp1) regulate its function. Aim 3
will define the function of Twinfilin at endocytic sites. While Twinfilin has
long been known as a component of actin networks, its cellular function is
controversial, with recent high-profile articles reaching disparate conclusions.
This project will test the premise that Twinfilin functions downstream of
capping protein as an actin filament uncapping and disassembly factor at sites
of endocytosis. The powerful Saccharomyces cerevisiae system will allow for the
study of endocytosis regulators both in vivo and in vitro. The research will be
multidisciplinary employing yeast genetics, live cell fluorescence microscopy,
electron microscopy and cryo-electron tomography, biochemistry, X-ray protein
crystallography, equilibrium binding assays and kinetic assays, as well as
modeling approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.