* 2313844
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 Great Lakes Bioinformatics Conference (GLBIO)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Serdar Bozdag, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The Great Lakes Bioinformatics Conference (GLBIO) strives to enhance educational
opportunities and research infrastructure throughout the North American Great
Lakes region, to make the region a world leader in bioinformatics and
computational biology. GLBIO began in 2006 as the Ohio Conference on
Computational Biology. In 2010, GLBIO became an official conference of the
International Society for Computational Biology (ISCB), with an expanded
regional scope that included a new name: GLBIO. In 2023, GLBIO will be held at
the McGill University in Montreal, Quebec, Canada between May 15-18, 2023. An
important goal of this annual conference is to foster long-term, collaborative
relationships among computational and life science researchers and educators
from academia, government, and industry. Researchers from all parts of the world
are welcome and encouraged to participate, especially those looking to form
collaborations with labs in the Great Lakes region. GLBIO provides an
interdisciplinary forum for sharing scientific information, including discussing
methods, research findings, and educational experiences regarding computational
investigations of biological problems. The annual meeting includes invited
keynote presentations, oral presentations selected from peer-reviewed full paper
or abstract submissions, tutorials, workshops, special sessions, and poster
presentations. This award will provide travel support for GLBIO 2023 student
participants who attend US universities or are US citizens. Students will be
educated on cutting-edge scientific developments that will drive future
discoveries in the fields of bioinformatics and computational biology. Also,
they will have opportunities to present their work as oral talks or posters, or
to participate in recruiting events with universities or industry partners. By
helping further studentsâ€™ careers and train interdisciplinary scientists, this
NSF student travel grant will benefit global scientific competitiveness of the
US.

Historically, more than half of the GLBIO attendees have been students, over 90%
of whom have been US-based. Through this NSF student travel award, GLBIO 2023
will create a valuable training opportunity for 20 student attendees, by
providing them with a partial funding support to attend the conference (as a
combination of conference registration, lodging, and transportation costs).
Special focus will be on first-time conference attendees who will not
necessarily be presenting their work at the conference, and of the students who
will be presenting their work, on students from historically under-represented
groups, as well as undergraduate, high school, and students with disabilities.
Applications for student travel grants will be solicited as follows. All
students presenting their work at the conference will be sent emails making them
aware of the student travel grant opportunity. In addition, the opportunity will
be advertised on the GLBIO 2023 web site and via conference announcements.
Moreover, outreach to under-represented student groups will be made by
contacting institutions or organizations serving such communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.