* 2313887
* PFI-TT: Cloud-based Route Management Platform for Optimizing Last-Mile Logistics of Electric Truck and Drone Operations
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 01/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable the safe and efficient use
of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs or drones) and electric trucks for last-mile
logistics, a multi-billion global market that accounts for 41% of the total
supply cost and 8% of global greenhouse gas emissions. Specifically, the
envisioned technology allows logistics service providers to establish reliable
and optimized routing plans for a scalable fleet involving electric trucks and
UAVs. The technology being developed in this project has the potential to: (i)
increase the fleet utilization and productivity of last-mile service providers,
(ii) reduce carbon footprint in supply chains, (iii) enhance operational safety
and network communication reliability of drone-based deliveries, and (iv)
decrease operational costs of last-mile logistics. The potential markets for the
technology being developed in the project include many areas, such as medical
delivery, e-commerce logistics, humanitarian operations, emergency response, and
last-mile delivery. The methodological advancements and scientific understanding
derived from this project can benefit policymakers, researchers and
practitioners and strengthen the economic competitiveness of the United States.

This project is developing and validating a cloud-based route optimization
platform for electric trucks and UAVs to enable safe and efficient last-mile
operations. A key technical challenge addressed in this project is the joint
consideration of operational (i.e., optimizing vehicle’s route plan) and
networking (packet forwarding strategy for communication among vehicles and
ground servers) decisions for UAV and electric truck route management. The
research objectives include the development and validation of (i) new
optimization models and heuristic methods to efficiently solve the electric
truck and UAV routing problem, (ii) new dynamic routing models that integrate
machine learning and optimization for handling stochastic elements, while
accounting for airspace and road network management, environmental factors and
network communications, and (iii) network protocol design that features
artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled algorithms for UAV trajectory planning
based on awareness of environmental conditions. The project involves a modular
strategy, thereby allowing the route planning algorithm to be scalable for any
delivery methods (electric truck-only distribution, direct drone delivery, and
hybrid truck-drone operations). The innovation in this project is evaluated
based on field experimentation and pilot testing of a minimum viable product
(MVP) in collaboration with multiple industrial partners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.