* 2313956
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Neurolinguistic Mechanisms of Grammatical Processing across Different Dialects
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Zachary Maher, Maher, Zachary K
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics programs. The
goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to
be an important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Janet van
Hell at the Pennsylvania State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating neurocognitive processing of
dialect variation. Everyone experiences grammatical diversity associated with
different language varieties, also known as dialects. For example, in many
varieties of English, "was" is used regardless of whether the subject of the
sentence is singular or plural (e.g., "They was happy"). Most speakers of
English from the United States recognize such patterns and appear to adjust to
dialect differences with minimal difficulty, but little is known about how this
process unfolds in real time in the brain. This project provides one of the
first accounts of how listeners adjust to grammatical differences between
dialects, building from previous neurocognitive research focused on language
processing across different accents and languages. We predict that people will
adjust their expectations of grammar based on the dialect they hear, but their
exact strategy will depend on their own experience with a given dialect. To test
this hypothesis, we will complete a series of experiments using neurocognitive
(EEG) methods that measure ongoing brain activity. Participants will hear
sentences with regularized subject-verb agreement ("They was happy") spoken by a
variety of speakers with accompanying images. Event-related potentials (ERPs) in
response to regularized subject-verb agreement will be compared across
participants with different linguistic backgrounds. Following this,
monodialectal participants will complete a training study to determine how
increased exposure affects real-time neurocognitive adjustment to grammatical
rules. In a final study, we will test how listeners adjust to dialect shifts
within a speaker, testing the hypothesis that listeners who are exposed to both
English language varieties would expect a given speaker to shift between
grammatical systems in socially conditioned ways. This project places diversity,
particularly linguistic diversity, at the center of theorizing about human
cognition. Moreover, it could inform applied questions regarding situations
where cross-dialect communication poses a burden to minoritized speakers, such
as the education system, where minoritized students are often expected to learn
in an unfamiliar dialect, and the criminal justice system, where dominant
speakersâ€™ lower comprehension of minoritized dialects may contribute to biased
judgments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.