* 2313061
* OAC Core: Towards Zero-Carbon Data Movement at the HPC and Cloud Data Centers with GreenDataFlow
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tevfik Kosar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,276.00

As commercial and scientific applications generate data at increasingly high
rates, the carbon footprint associated with data movement is becoming a critical
concern, particularly for High-Performance Computing (HPC) and Cloud data
centers. While there is substantial research focusing on power management
techniques at the hardware level and lower networking stack layers during data
transfers, little attention has been paid to energy-saving measures at the
application layer for computing systems such as servers, HPC centers, and Cloud
data centers during network data transmission. The existing strategies in this
realm are either prohibitively expensive, impractical in the short term, or
sacrifice performance in pursuit of increased energy efficiency. This project
develops an innovative application-layer solution, which is cost-effective,
practical for immediate deployment, and importantly, does not compromise
performance while boosting energy efficiency. It possesses the ability to
adaptively fine-tune several application-layer and kernel-layer transfer
parameters, thereby guaranteeing efficient utilization of computing and
networking resources. This, in turn, minimizes data transfer energy consumption
without undermining end-to-end performance. This revolutionary approach to
energy-efficient data transfers underscores the innovation and transformative
potential of this project. The models, algorithms, and tools developed within
this project are poised to augment performance and reduce power consumption
during end-to-end data transfers, potentially saving gigawatt hours of energy
and contributing millions of dollars in savings to the US economy. Furthermore,
this project seeks to permeate research insights across all tiers of education.
The well-structured research activities promise to benefit for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students alike, fostering their academic growth and
nurturing future scientists in this critical field.

This project develops novel application-layer models, algorithms, and tools for
(1) prediction and tuning of the best cross-layer transfer parameter combination
for energy-efficient and high-performance data transfers at the HPC and Cloud
data centers; (2) a deep reinforcement learning-based approach that can adapt to
the dynamically changing conditions in a wide range of network and end system
configurations; (3) accurate estimation of the accompanying network device power
consumption due to changing data transfer rate on the active intra- and inter-
data center network links and dynamic readjustment of the transfer rate to
balance the energy vs. performance ratio; and (4) a suite of service level
agreement based energy-efficient transfer algorithms to the HPC administrators
and Cloud service providers for dynamically adjustable performance and energy
efficiency goals. The evaluation and validation of the proposed models and
algorithms are performed in realistic scenarios in collaboration with the HPC
Center at Texas Tech University and the Distributed Cloud Management group at
IBM. The research outcomes of this project will fill a significant gap in the
data transfer energy efficiency in HPC and Cloud data centers. This project's
eventual goal is to translate the research activities into robust, production-
quality software libraries that will reduce the carbon footprint of data
movement for a range of user communities dealing with large amounts of data. The
project will enable wider broader impacts through the development of graduate
and undergraduate curricula, K-12 outreach programs, summer boot camps, the
recruitment of minority groups, and broadening participation in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.