* 2313039
* Collaborative Research: OAC: Approximate Nearest Neighbor Similarity Search for Large Polygonal and Trajectory Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sushil Prasad, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 364,985.00

Similarity searches are a critical task in data mining. Nearest neighbor
similarity search over geometrical shapes - polygons and trajectories - are used
in various domains such as digital pathology, solar physics, and geospatial
intelligence. In digital pathology for tumor diagnosis, tissues are represented
as polygons and Jaccard distance - ratio of areas of intersection to union - is
used for similarity comparisons. In solar physics for predicting solar flares,
the query object and the dataset is made up of polygons representing solar
events. In geospatial intelligence, similarity search is used to geo-locate a
shape or a contour in global reference datasets. The current literature, while
rich in methods for textual and image datasets, is lacking for geometric
datasets. This project will develop scalable similarity search systems on
polygonal and trajectory datasets. It will produce benchmark datasets of
polygonal queries and responses for the research community and inform the data
mining techniques which employ similarity primitives. It will help introduce
student projects for courses on parallel, distributed, high performance, and
data intensive computing, data mining, and spatial computing. This will also
train PhD students, including those at a Hispanic Serving Institution. Given the
ever increasing size of datasets, exact nearest neighbor searches requiring a
scan of the entire dataset quickly become impractical, leading to approximate
nearest neighbor searches. Traditional methods, such as using trees, suffer from
the constraints of dimensionality. Approximate similarity search is required for
scalability in processing large numbers of queries, index construction over big
spatial data, and to address the dynamic nature of data itself. This project
will explore approximate similarity search algorithms based on product
quantization and locality sensitive hashing (LSH) techniques for 10-100 billion
scale datasets. It will result in (i) new methods for creating robust signatures
of geometric data, based on comprehensive exploration of the
performance/accuracy tradeoffs among different encoding schemes, informed by
spatial properties of the data and requirements of relevant distance metrics,
(ii) scalable coarse quantization techniques to hierarchically organize the
polygonal datasets into neighborhoods by preserving hyperspace locality
properties, leading to product quantization based scalable systems, and (iii)
LSH-based techniques focusing on designing LSH functions for Jaccard distance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.