* 2313322
* PlantSynBio: Integrate Natural Product Biosynthesis into the Global Metabolic Network
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Zhen Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to identify how natural product biosynthesis interconnects
with the global metabolic network, using cardiac glycoside biosynthesis in the
foxglove plant as an example. This project has broader implications for
developing stress-resistant crops in agriculture and advancing the development
and biomanufacturing of natural products that can be used to improve human
health. Given the public knowledge of the foxglove’s medicinal use, this
research will be leveraged to engage the public, especially underrepresented
women in STEM, through activities tailored for each age group. This project will
establish a hands-on workshop through the annual event founded by the American
Association of University Women in Buffalo. This research will also recruit one
undergraduate student each year through the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation summer program. This project will support the training of one
Ph.D. student not only as an outstanding researcher but also as an enthusiastic
STEM advocate.

Unlike most central metabolic pathways with a linear architecture, many plant
natural product pathways are highly networked. One prominent example is the
biosynthesis of cardiac glycosides in foxglove plants. The overall objective of
this project is to elucidate how the biosynthesis of cardiac glycosides
interconnects with the global metabolic network. Preliminary results led to the
hypothesis that the foxglove plant synthesizes cardiac glycosides through a
metabolic network intertwined with other steroids in the primary metabolism.
This project will test this hypothesis by integrating cardiac glycoside
biosynthesis into the global metabolic network using both computational and
experimental approaches. This project is expected to reveal quantitative
insights into how carbon and electrons flow from the central metabolism to
cardiac glycosides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.