* 2313313
* BRC-BIO: Model-driven discovery and characterization of the metabolism of pigment-producing microalgae at genome-scale
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cristal Zuniga, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 502,991.00

Photosynthetic organisms, including microalgae, can produce high-value pigments
by consuming light and carbon dioxide, the most abundant greenhouse gas in the
atmosphere. Microalgae have a complex and very active metabolism; they are
responsible for approximately 20% of the total photosynthesis on earth. However,
the lack of understanding of microalgal metabolism has limited the ability to
use these organisms to their full potential to address environmental, food, and
health challenges. This research project focuses on developing computational
tools to understand the light metabolism of the marine microalga Dunaliella
salina and the freshwater microalga Haematococcus lacustris. The genome
sequences of these microalgae will be used to build two knowledgebases that will
be converted into metabolic models to further understand and control the
necessary metabolic requirements to promote accumulation of pigments,
specifically carotenoids. By increasing the fundamental understanding of the
biology of these microalgae, the research will enable new light-driven solutions
to sustainability challenges. For this dual experimental and computational
project, a diverse research team will be formed that includes graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 researchers. Students will engage in learning, teaching,
and training in computational biology, nurturing the next generation of
computational biologists who will develop future tools for biosustainability and
the bioeconomy.

Systems biology approaches have resulted in genome-scale computational models
that accurately represent the metabolism of microorganisms. When applied to
photosynthetic microorganisms, metabolic models offer the potential to exploit
natural metabolic robustness and diversity to develop biotechnological
processes. Of special interest in microalgae-based biotechnology is the
production of pigments. Microalgal species such as Dunaliella salina and
Haematococcus lacustris contain extraordinary genetic capabilities to produce
carotenoids for a wide range of biotechnological applications. In this project,
two genome-scale metabolic models will be built, one for the halophilic
microalga Dunaliella salina and another for the freshwater microalga
Haematococcus lacustris. The models will serve as knowledgebases that allow the
evaluation and prediction of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus pathways under
different conditions (e.g., nutrient inputs, uptake capabilities of new
metabolites, and different light sources). Available multi-omics data and
genomic information will be used to validate the content of the metabolic
models. These models will be applied to study microalgal pigment production
under stress conditions, providing insights into innovative culture conditions
to maximize productivity. Overall, this research will guide the development of
new culture strategies to improve pigment production in these biotechnologically
important organisms. This hybrid experimental and computational project will
further the establishment of a research program in computational biology of
microalgae at San Diego State University to develop robust light-driven
bioprocesses for improved growth and pigment production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.