* 2313456
* Accurate Atomic Structure and Symmetry Determination  of New Hybrid Improper Ferroelectric Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Trevor Tyson, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 639,112.00

Non-Technical Abstract.

Ferroelectric materials comprise a $7 billion market owing to their unique
properties (a spontaneous electric polarization), and find use in many
applications such as medical imaging for disease diagnosis, large-scale storage
of information such as in data centers, or in high-density energy storage for
solar or wind farms for times when these forms of energy are not available. The
most common ferroelectric materials utilize elements that are difficult to
obtain in nature and/or are toxic. Fortunately, the number of ferroelectric
systems has been expanded significantly with the discovery of hybrid improper
ferroelectrics, which can be composed of readily available, cheap elements and
have low toxicity. The goal of this work is to determine what the atomic
structures of these materials are under high pressure, as new unique ones can be
created which will have high technological applicability for information storage
or energy storage. Graduate and undergraduate students are involved in all
levels of this work, including sample preparation, laboratory and synchrotron-
based measurements, modeling, and data analysis. Under the direction of the
research team and graduate students, Newark-area high school students from
under-represented groups are being trained in a seven-week summer research and
teaching program on material preparation and advanced materials
characterization. It includes a one-week workshop for high school teachers to
enable them to implement components of the program into their laboratory
experiments. The education and research is a collaboration between the New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Rutgers University, the University of Michigan,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, and the SEED program for high school students (American
Chemical Society).

Technical Abstract.

Ferroelectric materials are essential to high-density data storage and are used
in solid-state drives, but basic physics requirements for the known materials
have limited the chemical and structural space available for the development of
new ones. Recently, this space has been significantly expanded with the
discovery of hybrid improper ferroelectrics, which have multiple nonpolar
distortions that stabilize a polar ferroelectric state. External conditions can
stabilize new phases. To fully exploit this new class of ferroelectrics, their
full pressure- and temperature-dependent phase diagrams are needed. To develop a
detailed understanding of structural changes in the general class of transition
metal oxide-based hybrid improper ferroelectrics, single-crystal diffraction
measurements as a function of pressure and temperature are being carried out.
The derived detail structure is being used to inform density functional theory
(DFT) calculations by constraining the crystal structures investigated
computationally. Newly discovered phases are being prepared as metastable forms
and integrated into ferroelectric-based devices for improved performance. The
societal impact of the proposal will come from broadening the range of oxides
available for applications in data storage devices and enabling the use of
nontoxic earth-abundant materials systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.