* 2313292
* Conference:The 2023 Polymath Jr Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Adam Sheffer, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 47,728.00

The Polymath Jr is an online program that provides hundreds of college students
the opportunity to participate in mathematical research. This highly inclusive
program allows each participant to choose how much they want to get out of the
program by selecting how much time they want to dedicate. The program presents a
variety of research projects in many branches of mathematics. Each project is
mentored by a professor and graduate students. The program supports students who
might otherwise have no opportunity to explore their mathematical potential. The
participants learn how mathematical research is conducted, and many participants
also publish papers in research journals. The program helps participants explore
various other engagement opportunities in mathematical research.

The 2023 Polymath Jr program will include research projects in number theory,
combinatorics, topology, algebra, probability, complex analysis, machine
learning, math education, and more. We focus on problems that consist of
separate parts at different levels of difficulty. The staggered projects allow
supporting groups of students with varied mathematical backgrounds. The program
also includes a component for training graduate students to mentor undergraduate
research projects and run research groups.

Program website is at https://geometrynyc.wixsite.com/polymathreu

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.