* 2313521
* WHOI: MISO Facility: Oceanographic Instrumentation  Expanding and Enhancing Imaging and Sensor Capabilities to Support Seafloor Sampling and Observations for Oceanographic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Daniel Fornari, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 118,474.00

The Multidisciplinary Instrumentation in Support of Oceanography (MISO) Facility
at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) has provided routine access
to deep-sea imaging, lighting, power and sensor instrumentation for over two
decades. This capability to support US and international academic oceanography
across many disciplines has included equipment used successfully on over 75
research cruises since 2002. A key component of MISO Facility support has been
the design, development and implementation of robust deep-sea imaging
capabilities that have been used on a wide array of deep-submergence vehicles
(Alvin, PISCES, ROV Jason, AUV Sentry, ROV Hercules, ROV DR-2, ROV Sebastian,
ROV Aegir6000), towed deep-sea imaging systems (i.e., the MISO TowCam system,
seafloor time lapse systems developed by the MISO Facility, and seafloor
sampling systems such as box corers and multicorers. The OI Program recommends
funding to purchase the following components required to assemble autonomous,
self-recording, high-resolution deep-sea camera systems:

1) Six (6) Deep-Sea Power & Light DigiSeacam housings $73,800 2) Two (2) Hero11
multi-camera module systems $11,028 3) DSPL LED SeaLite 2050 deep-sea lights
$11,645 4) Subsea Cabling $7,000 Materials and Supplies $9,070 IDC $5,931
$118,474

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.