* 2313957
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Investigating the Link between Moral Curiosity and Moral Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Jordan Wylie, Wylie, Jordan
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Liane Young
and Gregg Sparkman at Boston College, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating moral curiosity. This project
seeks to develop a foundational understanding of moral curiosity, its function
in daily life, what makes it a unique motivating force, and whether it supports
learning about ideas and those people whom we wish to avoid. Further, this
project examines which parts of the brain support this powerful drive. This work
will advance our understanding of our moral psychology, and it has implications
for understanding the mind more broadly by asking whether we seek out bad and
unusual people and things to learn what not to do. Further, in exploring the
potential links between learning and moral curiosity, this project will also
help us understand whether this kind of curiosity can be leveraged as tool for
change—by helping to inform interventions to encourage positive social behavior.
This project will advance the field of psychology by helping us better
understand the roots and consequences of a common experience in life. Further,
this work will also support diversity in science by supporting the work of an
underrepresented scholar. The results of this project enrich theory across
relevant disciplines, and they will play a crucial role in developing a richer
understanding of how and why we learn about bad people, ideas, and problems in
our society.

This project takes an interdisciplinary approach to characterizing an
undertheorized aspect of moral life: immorality is often fascinating. To date,
research on interest in immoral agents has largely focused on their role in
entertainment or our judgments about them. Few empirical studies have sought to
understand the allure of the immoral within the context of moral cognition and
even less on what functional utility such a preference may have. This project
will be the first to systematically examine 1) what motivates moral curiosity,
2) what utility it has for learning about the self, others, and broader society,
and 3) whether, alongside neural regions that support reward processing and
memory, the Theory of Mind Network specifically plays a role in supporting this
kind of curiosity. In doing so, this work will advance our theorizing about
moral cognition and help to make sense of what a preference for badness and
atypicality in the moral domain reveals about our moral minds. Using a variety
of methods including brain imaging, survey research, and behavioral experiments,
and integrating theory from philosophy, social and media psychology, and
neuroscience, the goal of this project it to unveil the unique role moral
curiosity plays in shaping our understanding of ourselves, others, and the world
around us. Further, this work marks a significant first step to deriving and
testing interventions aimed at the promotion of prosocial behaviors and norms by
better understanding what prompts individuals to formulate new moral concepts
and evaluations. The award will also support an early career, underrepresented
scholar, thus enhancing diversity in science. This work, along with the
materials, methods used, and the findings will be widely disseminated in their
relevant platforms or outlets. This project reimagines curiosity for immorality
as a useful feature of moral cognition, not a bug: Moral curiosity may
ultimately serve a vital role in individual learning and learning about
society’s ills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.