* 2313137
* Collaborative Research: RI: Medium: Informed, Fair, Efficient, and Incentive-Aware Group Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Grant Schoenebeck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 574,681.00

In our fast-paced and increasingly online world making fair, equitable, and
informed decisions is both more important and harder than ever. In situations
where a group must come to a consensus, in the presence of varied and rapidly
changing information, achieving fairness and equity becomes even more difficult.
In response, this project will combine research from social choice theory and
information elicitation to create a new research direction called informed group
decision making. This new research area extends current models and mechanisms of
group decision making by explicitly accounting for the role that information has
on agents' final decisions. The final goal is to develop new models and methods
that can be used to incentivize individuals to ensure group decisions achieve a
desired outcome. This research promises cross-institutional, educational, and
societal impacts and will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in computing research, train highly qualified professionals, and engage students
from underrepresented groups to pursue studies in computing-related fields.

This research consists of three dimensions for foundational research and one
direction for bridging theory and practice. Dimension 1: Representation aims to
develop novel models for combining agents’ subjective and objective preferences,
information, and responses to queries. Dimension 2: Aggregation aims to
introduce novel efficiency and fairness criteria for informed group decision
making, and design novel mechanisms to achieve them for truthful, cooperative
agents. Dimension 3: Incentives aims to address agents’ incentives in informed
group decision making by proposing novel equilibrium concepts, conducting
analysis of agents’ behavior, and designing novel incentive-aware mechanisms. To
bridge theory and practice, the models, algorithms, and mechanisms developed in
this project will be deployed, validated, and refined at the open-source Online
Preference Reporting and Aggregation (OPRA) system via various educational and
outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.