* 2313288
* Expanding the silverside system to quantify how climate gradients determine co- and countergradient adaptation strength in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Hannes Baumann, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 472,593.00

Many species have evolved adaptations to latitudinal climate gradients and
studying these sheds light on how species will evolve in response to global
climate change. To investigate adaptation in Chilean silversides, offspring of
wild fish from four locations along the Chilean coast are being reared at four
common temperatures. Differences in growth rates, vertebral number, and mercury
uptake among populations from different latitudes indicate genetic differences
due to local adaptation. The research team is integrating these Chilean
silverside data with prior data from northern hemisphere silverside species to
better understand the relationship between climate gradient strength and
adaptation strength. This project provides training for two graduate students
through a US-Chile graduate cross-cultural exchange. The research is being
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses taught in Chile and the
research team is sharing the results with the public through a website and
magazine articles.

This project advances understanding of two forms of local adaptation, co-
gradient variation (CoGV) and counter-gradient variation (CnGV), which underlie
adaptation to large-scale, latitudinal climate gradients. Using a common garden
experiment, the team is examining the relationship between temperature and
genetic variation in Chilean silversides. Newly-fertilized offspring obtained
from wild founders at four locations along the Chilean coast are being reared at
four common temperatures to a common juvenile size. Differences among
populations in trait measurements (growth capacity, vertebral number, and total
mercury concentration) to test the hypotheses that 1) growth capacity increases
with temperature and latitude (CnGV) and 2) vertebral number increases with
latitude (CoGV). These data are being integrated with existing evidence from
northern hemisphere silverside species to determine if there is a relationship
between CnGV/CoGV strength and latitudinal gradient strength.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.