* 2313787
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Documenting Dialect Divergences Across Space and Time
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mirella Blum, Blum, Mirella L
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics programs. The
goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level
scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and
government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of
established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent
research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments
of the scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in
its research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to
be an important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laura
McPherson at Dartmouth College, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the diversity of linguistic tone and
patterns in tonal evolution. The goal of the project is to apply these questions
to a typologically unusual language. Few languages exist that possess all of the
elements of the the target language sound system, and in even fewer do the
elements function independently. Where other languages might use affixation to
express lexical or grammatical distinctions, the target language's way of doing
this is almost entirely suprasegmental (not having to do with the segmental
sounds of consonants and vowels). A phonation contrast (whether the voice sounds
creakier or breathier) and tone contrasts (the pitch melody of a given word)
function independently in this language but are linked in almost every other
language. The target language also exhibits features previously theorized to be
impossible. For example, there are three degrees of vowel length (short, long,
and overlong), and contrastive tonal alignment (a word’s meaning can be changed
by the time point at which a vowel’s phonetic fall in pitch begins). This
project focuses on undocumented dialects of the target language; the goal of the
project is to describe their tone systems and investigate grammatical phenomena
in which tone is involved. The project will also ultimately lead to comparative
studies: investigations into how these dialects are similar and dissimilar to
one another, and how they might have evolved from a common ancestor. Careful
documentation of many dialects of a typologically unique language will
contribute to understanding of the possible range of tonal phenomena in human
language and deepen knowledge of highly complex tone systems.

Most previous research on tone in the target language has focused on single
dialects of the language, but the tone systems can differ considerably across
dialects. This project will document the range of tonal behavior and phenomena
by analyzing the tone systems of several undocumented or under-described
dialects from multiple dialect clusters, forming hypotheses about how the tone
systems evolved and diverged from one another, and collecting data that can be
used for in-depth studies of tone in each dialect and for cross-dialect
comparison. Primary research methods include the collection of controlled
datasets and analysis of recorded spontaneous speech. The project also promotes
accessible remote methodologies for conducting linguistic fieldwork.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.