* 2313727
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and controlling force generation by a centrin-based contractile system
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Jerry Honts, Drake University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2027
* USD 187,892.00

Force generation underlies many of the processes most associated with life:
movement, growth, and reproduction. The ultrafast contraction of the ciliate
Spirostomum ambiguum represents the most powerful biological force generation in
nature. This extreme movement is thought to be driven by a contractile protein-
based network known as myonemes, which is poorly understood. The project will
combine experiments and computational modeling to elucidate the mechanism of
myoneme contraction with a view toward revealing new principles of biological
force generation. The findings will set the stage to engineer force-generating
systems for synthetic cells, for example to control cell shape and movement. The
team was established at a 2019 NSF Ideas Lab on building synthetic cells as part
of the Rules of Life initiative. The Broader Impact of the work includes its
intrinsic nature in revealing the mechanistic details of what may be the most
powerful biologic motor known. Additional activities will include the
multidisciplinary training of high school, undergraduate, graduate students, and
post-doctoral scholars. A permanent exhibit on “Seeing Cells” at the Marine
Biological Laboratory (MBL), where 1000+ scientists and members of the public
visit each year, will also be expanded upon. A theme of the exhibit is that a
given function in a cell can be accomplished through different mechanisms in
different types of cells. The project will catalyze new discussions on this
theme, the design of synthetic cells, and their possible impact on society, and
ideas from these discussions will be incorporated into the exhibit and
translated to an online format to reach a wide audience.

Myoneme contraction is triggered by calcium, and myonemes are composed of
centrin EF-hand proteins and Sfi1 scaffold proteins. In contrast to the well-
studied ATP-driven actomyosin contractile system, little is known about how
myonemes generate force. Studies at multiple scales will produce quantitative
integrative models that explain how molecular conformational changes produce
force in the whole organism. A key advance enabling the studies is the team’s
reconstitution of calcium-induced contraction by filaments composed of only
centrin and Sfi1 in vitro. The project will test the hypothesis that specific
conformational changes of myoneme proteins at the molecular level are triggered
by calcium to drive the ultrafast contraction at the millimeter scale in this
organism. The aims are to 1) determine the factors that modulate assembly and
force generation in vitro, 2) elucidate the structural bases of contraction at
the molecular level, and 3) determine how the interplay of the myoneme network,
calcium dynamics, microtubules, and their surroundings produce ultrafast
contraction of the whole organism. In the long term, this work will enable novel
understanding of an independent biological mechanism for ultrafast force
generation, which can be harnessed to manipulate biological materials, both in
vitro and in vivo.

This project was co-funded by the Molecular Biophysics and the Systems and
Synthetic Biology programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.