* 2313967
* Developing the Acceptance of Climate Change Scale for Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Emily Holt, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2026
* USD 299,768.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing educators with a
new survey to uncover the many aspects of climate change acceptance in
undergraduate science students. Many Americans, and specifically undergraduate
students, accept that global climate change is occurring; however, no clear
definitions of climate change acceptance currently exist in the literature.
Therefore, this Engaged Student Learning: Level 1 project intends to address the
question of what aspects of climate change students are accepting and which
aspects may be obscured by current surveys. Climate change education in science
fields (e.g., biology, chemistry, geosciences) can identify common student
alternative conceptions, help students link climate change to their everyday
lives, and foster climate literacy and knowledge. Evidence from research on
other socioscientific issues (i.e., evolution education) suggests that
understanding and acceptance are tied together in unpredictable ways. Although
current scales exist to measure climate change acceptance, this project aims to
develop a new survey (i.e. Acceptance of Climate Change Scale (ACC)) to capture
its complexity that is specifically designed for undergraduate science students.
The narrowness of existing scales likely leads to inaccuracy in capturing the
many aspects of climate change acceptance and may subsequently lead to
unreliable data which may misinform instruction. This project will produce a
novel survey that examines aspects of undergraduate science students' acceptance
of climate change with the goal of increasing the effectiveness of climate
change education for undergraduate science students. The broader significance
and importance of this new survey is that it will lead to recommendations about
which climate change topics to include in undergraduate science curricula to
address acceptance, and it will represent a new survey that can be used by
science education researchers to facilitate new work asking questions about
students’ climate change acceptance. Overall, development of this new survey
will support NSF’s mission of preparing a STEM-literate public that is ready to
support and benefit from the advancement of science and develop shared metrics
for use across science fields.

The central goal of this project is to develop a new survey, the Acceptance of
Climate Change Scale (ACC). To meet this goal, the project has three subgoals:
(1) Define acceptance of climate change for undergraduate science populations;
(2) Follow established practices to develop the Acceptance of Climate Change
Scale (ACC); (3) Validate and pilot the ACC and use the ACC to measure science
undergraduate students' acceptance of climate change through a quantitative
study. The scope of the project includes undergraduate science student (biology,
chemistry, and geoscience) populations within the US. The first steps in
developing the ACC will be to identify and compile definitions of acceptance or
rejection of climate change. Second, knowledge generated from the first steps
will inform the development of the ACC. After initial field testing of the ACC,
the ACC will be administered to students in science courses across the
disciplines of biology, chemistry, and geosciences at a wide range of higher
education institutions across the US to increase the generalizability of the
tool and to quantify students’ acceptance of climate change and factors that
relate to this acceptance. The five-stage development process of the ACC will
follow accepted standards for educational and psychological testing, including
item creation, expert review, think-aloud interviews, item revision, and
retesting. Further, psychometric analysis of the new survey will rely on these
standards for testing the validity (e.g., content, internal, concurrent, and
convergent validity) and reliability (e.g., internal reliability of instrument,
replication of testing nationally) of the ACC. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.