* 2313826
* Predictions of Properties of Matter using Physics-Based Force Fields Derived from First Principles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 176,629.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Krzysztof Szalewicz of
University of Delaware will perform quantum-mechanical investigations of
clusters of molecules, molecular condensed phases, and biomolecular systems. The
properties of such systems are governed by intermolecular (van der Waals)
forces: depending on the distance between two molecules, they will either
attract or repel each other, a physical law that Richard Feynman considered to
be the biggest finding of humanity. Szalewicz and coworkers have developed
methods for computing intermolecular forces that are not only among the most
accurate and computationally efficient ones, but also provide researchers with a
unique ability to interpret properties dependent on intermolecular forces in
terms of the four fundamental physical mechanisms: the electrostatic, exchange-
repulsion, polarization, and dispersion interactions. Since direct quantum-
mechanical calculations are limited to molecular assemblies with a hundred or so
atoms, Szalewicz’s group will develop machine learning methods of extrapolating
quantum results to condensed phases. The importance of this work stems from its
ability to predict properties of matter from first principles, i.e., deriving
them from equations of quantum mechanics, for arbitrary molecular materials. One
example would be the reliable predictions of crystal structures. Computational
design of crystals is of significant importance for pharmaceutical,
agrochemical, semiconductor, and energetic materials industries. This research
in the Szalewicz group is expected to have broad scientific impact on fields
ranging from materials, biomolecular, and atmospheric science to metrology,
molecular spectroscopy and scattering, and astrophysics. Broader impacts of this
research will include training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates
with diverse backgrounds, extensive collaborations with other research groups,
organization of conferences and workshops to disseminate knowledge, and in
making developed software available for use by other researchers.

The methods that the Szalewicz group will develop under this award utilize
symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) based on monomers described by
density-functional theory (DFT), an approach denoted as SAPT(DFT). Machine-
learning methods for the generation of force fields derived from SAPT(DFT)
calculations will be extended to enable treatment of molecules with soft
internal degrees of freedom. These force fields will be used for several systems
of current experimental, observational, or technological interest, in particular
for predictions of crystal structures from first principles, including difficult
cases with polymorphism related to varying conformations of monomers. Other
developments of theory will include work on improved DFT methods that can be
paired with accurate dispersion energies and extensions of machine-learning
force-field generation methods to three-body nonadditive interactions. There is
potential for scientific broader impact in better understanding intermolecular
interactions, in significantly advancing electronic structure methods and force-
field development techniques, and in crystal structure predictions. It is
expected that, in general, these studies will contribute to a better physical
understanding of the properties of molecular materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.