* 2313733
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: SPRF: Contested Spaces and Spectrums of Resistance
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Tsim Schneider, Curran, Joseph B
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This award was provided as part of the NSF Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Tsim
Schneider at the University of California Santa Cruz, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating how local
Indigenous groups navigated contested spaces in the inland Southern California
borderlands. Specifically, this proposed project seeks to illustrate the
resilience of Indigenous communities and spectrums of resistance around
peripheral mission satellite campuses, known as asistencias or estancias.
Following the work of Indigenous scholars and others, we envision an Indigenous-
centered community archaeology project to better understand spectrums of local
resistance, resilience and survivance at asistencias/estancias. The proposed
archaeological study seeks effective local engagement by consulting with Tribal
community partners in the coproduction of knowledge. Thus, this archaeological
study will adhere to the goals and needs of Tribes and build from ethnographic
and archival research.

The proposed archaeological study seeks effective local engagement by consulting
with Tribal community partners in coproduction of knowledge. This project will
be conducted over three phases. Each phase will be implemented in collaboration
with Tribal community partners to prioritize the goals and needs of Tribes. The
first phase would potentially include archival investigations to document the
establishment, activities associated within, and the Indigenous/colonial
interactions at asistencias. Contingent on the goals of the Native American
community partners and the results of Phase 1, the second phase would consist of
minimally intrusive archaeological investigations of the Asistencia San
Bernardino de Sena in Redlands, California. These investigations involve near-
surface and surface collection protocols such as pedestrian survey, a metal
detector survey, a ground penetrating radar survey, and a catch-and-release
study to identify and document architectural features, activity areas, and other
relevant spaces. In consultation with Native American organizations, the third
phase will consist of museum study analysis of extant collections from the San
Bernardino County Museum to determine the presence of artifacts associated with
Native peoples at the asistencia. This phase will also utilize a geographic
information system (GIS) to analyze data and findings from the other phases
reconstructing Indigenous history and resilience at the San Bernardino de Sena
Asistencia. This project would work closely with Tribal organizations and
volunteers from local historical communities to record evidence of ranching
activities, identify the barracks/settlements of Indigenous labor, ascertain
areas or features of the Asistencia and surrounding locale that might be
associated with specific tribes/groups, and document evidence of Indigenous
subsistence and technology. In addition, a GIS will be utilized to reconstruct
the landscape and document the multiple attempts at settlement in the valley in
relation to the Asistencia illustrating how Indigenous spaces still remain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.