* 2313283
* Body-worn camera metadata
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Soumendra Lahiri, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan F. Hirsch
* 07/31/2025
* USD 110,330.00

Community trust is essential to effective policing. At all levels of government,
the United States has made significant investments in police body-worn cameras
(BWCs) as a way to build this trust. These cameras are a powerful technology
capable of capturing and storing interactions between an officer and members of
the community. They therefore promise unprecedented levels of police oversight.
However, BWCs must be manually activated, and officers sometimes fail to
activate them, even in situations where department policies dictate that they
should have. This may undermine the effectiveness of BWCs, especially if non-
activation is or appears to be an intentional strategy for officers to avoid
oversight. It is therefore crucial to understand when and why officers activate
BWCs, to study the consequences of non-activation, and to develop policies that
can encourage more widespread activation.

This study will take an innovative approach to existing police data in order to
identify policing events recorded by a BWC. Policing events include calls for
service, investigatory stops, arrests, and uses of force. The key information
comes from metadata associated with each BWC recording. Metadata include the
time of activation and the identity of the officer wearing the camera. By using
probabilistic matching techniques to link metadata to records of policing
events, the researchers can create the crucial BWC activation label. This study
will use publicly available data from Chicago, which adopted BWCs starting in
2016. The first stage of research will focus on learning what characteristics of
a policing event predict non-activation. These observations can then inform
theories about why officers sometimes fail to activate. In the second stage,
researchers will develop and test theoretical models of the environments and
incentives faced by police officers when they make activation decisions. These
models can provide insight into why BWC activation is not universal and how to
get it there. The third stage of the research will use additional data on court
cases and police misconduct investigations to learn how BWC activation, or lack
thereof, affects the outcomes of those proceedings. To control for selection in
BWC activation, we will use the quasi-experimental variation produced by
supervisor assignments and Chicago’s gradual rollout of BWCs across police
districts. Beyond a general understanding of BWC activation, this project has
potential for broader impacts in the form of actionable insights about the
Chicago Police Department and greater interdisciplinary collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.