* 2313981
* A Synthesis of Approaches to Equity, Belonging, and Broadening Participation in Museums and Makerspaces
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Fatima Brunson, Children's Museum of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 12/31/2025
* USD 494,861.00

Despite a long history of considering and attempting to address issues of
diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion, visitor-serving organizations
such as museums, botanical gardens, and zoos tend to serve disproportionately
white, able-bodied, and high-income audiences. Traditionally, efforts to address
this challenge have focused on reducing barriers (cost, transportation, etc.) in
order to get more people to participate in informal science learning
experiences. In recent years, the field has begun to call for equity-oriented
and anti-oppressive approaches that question not only who participates but how
informal science learning can be re-designed to center the needs and interests
of people whose experiences are marginalized in STEM fields. While this shift is
promising, the learning tends to be isolated in identity-focused silos. For
example, people addressing racial inequities are not often engaged with research
about making informal science more accessible for people with disabilities. In
this project, the Children's Museum of Pittsburgh in partnership with
EdTogether, Spelman College, and the Warner School of Education at the
University of Rochester will bring together these distinct domains of learning
by working with youth and practitioners to conduct a systematic review of equity
and belonging work in informal science learning. The review will generate
insights about how project teams talk about and enact equity and belonging in
their work and the project will produce resources that will support future
projects to move beyond simplistic definitions of identity in order to
holistically embrace learners' needs.

This project will use a six-step synthesis process to review approximately 7,000
empirical sources about equity and belonging-focused informal science efforts in
museums, makerspaces, botanical gardens, zoos, and other visitor-serving
institutions. The research questions will investigate the implicit and explicit
philosophies of equity and belonging in the field; the extent to which the field
enacts anti-oppressive practices; the ways in which projects blend multiple
anti-oppressive practices; and how equity and belonging-focused work has varied
over time and context. This project will be a collaboration among established,
professional researchers and participants in a Co-Research Fellowship program
through which youth and adult practitioners will inform and engage in all stages
of the research. Co-Research Fellows will also be co-producers of the project's
efforts to initiate change to deepen the ways informal science integrates anti-
oppressive lenses. This includes a charrette through which informal science
professionals will consider the ways they can integrate the project learnings
into ongoing structures for change; a journal article; conference sessions; and
a practitioner-oriented mini-book that will share insights and tools for
conducting integrative anti-oppressive work in the informal science field. The
project's evaluation will offer guidance about how co-research can challenge
notions of who can do research; extend visitors' and practitioners' exposure to
existing informal science learning research; expand co-researchers' STEM and
advocacy skills through participation in and decision-making about research; and
enhance the relevance and validity of the research process and findings through
alignment with practitioner and visitor needs.

This Synthesis project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice
that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM;
(b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.