* 2313772
* Closing the energy balance gap at scale
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Stefan Metzger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 841,228.00

Land surface conditions are known to impact weather and climate. The exchange of
moisture, energy, and gases between the surface and atmosphere depends on the
types of surfaces (e.g., water, forest, grassland), vegetation, soil conditions,
and more. To study these exchanges, scientists have set up instrumented towers
to measure various properties at different heights to get a sense for how the
land surface and atmosphere are interacting. However, the heterogeneous
conditions of the land surface in many locations makes interpreting this data
difficult. This research project will attempt to use an advanced numerical
approach to provide a method to better determine the space and time variations
of surface-atmosphere fluxes with quantified uncertainties and low bias. A
successful project would have implications for ecology, hydrology, Earth system
modeling, natural climate solutions, and oil and gas industry emissions.
Multiple students and early-career scientists would be involved in the work and
the research team plans outreach to enhance public understanding of Earth
systems.

The overarching goal of this project is to improve approaches to understanding
the magnitude and drivers of regional-scale surface-atmosphere fluxes of energy,
water, and carbon through development of a holistic scaling approach benchmarked
within a large eddy simulation (LES) model and applied to a dense network of
eddy covariance flux, boundary-layer profile, and surface property observations.
The research team will evaluate the Environmental Response Function (ERF) to
test how a comprehensive scaling approach of all energy balance components can
both resolve the known bias in flux measurements and improve model-data
benchmarking with flux tower data. The technique will be compared to LES and
spatial eddy covariance approaches and be applied to an extensive dataset of
eddy covariance tower and airborne fluxes and other data collected during the
Chequamegon Heterogenous Ecosystem Energy-balance Study Enabled by a High-
density Extensive Array of Detectors (CHEESEHEAD-19) field campaign. Three main
hypotheses will be tested:

1. Energy balance closure improves when evaluated over a space-time scale that
is consistent with spectral gaps in underlying surface variability and overlying
meteorology. 2. Consistently scaled turbulent heat fluxes, net radiation, soil
heat flux, and associated storage terms in air, soil, and biomass will improve
energy balance closure compared to the average energy imbalance at eddy
covariance tower sites. 3. A restricted set of land surface and atmospheric
variables related to energy transport and land surface thermal and ecosystem
heterogeneity can scale eddy covariance fluxes using ERF-Virtual Control Volume
in ways that increases consistency with modeled, atmospheric inverse, and
inventory-based, including of carbon.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.