* 2313219
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The effect of Long Term Migration on Community Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Robin Beck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 31,500.00

This project explores the impact of immigration of politically stratified groups
on local non-stratified communities during the precolonial period and focuses on
the processes under which these interactions occurred. Migrations have occurred
throughout human history and were as important in the past as they are today,
particularly with concerns such as cultural identity, interactions between
groups of people, land, and security. Along with the movement of people come not
just practices and ideas, but physical bodies and objects that occupy area and
space differently. The results of such massive social and cultural changes occur
throughout time and space all over the world, with archaeological interest
particularly focused on changes in political institutions and subsistence
patterns. However, these archaeological studies in the past have often assumed
that changes occur ubiquitously and unilaterally. This assumption minimizes the
autonomy and agency of the local populations who are acting, interacting, and
reacting to these changes and to the immigrant populations. This study examines
one such shift that highlights and provides a case-study for these large-scale
changes which in this case was characterized by an increase in population,
sedentism, agriculture, trade networks, shared iconography and ideologies,
intensified political stratification, intensified monumental construction, and
the emergence and peak of chiefdoms and chiefly centers.

This case relates to the impact of immigration on these local non-stratified
communities and how they adapted with the arrival of the earliest agricultural
peoples. The researchers focus on two archaeological sites in the same region
.By focusing on evidence for local and regional-scale transformations, this
project provides unique insights into the social and political processes and
practices that defined the spread of the agricultural lifeway. The researchers
evaluate several interrelated domains of archaeological data including
subsistence, crafting, site organization, and regional organization from these
sites before, during, and after evidence of agriculture appears. One goal is to
determine whether local people welcomed this new practice or actively resisted
doing so. By integrating data from archaeological excavations, radiocarbon
dating, botanical analyses, and museum collections this project permits the
researchers to evaluate different possible models. By producing a more complete
record of social and cultural practices the project informs the broader study of
processes involved and variation in changes to complex socio-political phenomena
such as practices of agricultural intensification and social inequality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.