* 2314493
* Phonetic studies of Hawaiian speakers and learners
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Oiwi Parker Jones, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 328,617.00

The revitalization of Modern Hawaiian since the 1970s-80s has led to a thriving
community of Hawaiian speakers today, with a robust system of pre-K-12 Hawaiian-
medium education, as well as university and teacher training programs in the
Hawaiian language. Despite the critical mass of speakers and availability of
historical language and speech materials, phonetic research on Hawaiian is
underrepresented. This project examines the sound system of the speech of three
groups of speakers: (1) the growing community of Modern Hawaiian speakers in
Hilo, (2) adult students who are intermediate-level learners of Modern Hawaiian
in Hilo, and (3) pre-revitalization Hawaiian elders interviewed in the 1970s-80s
on the radio program Ka Leo Hawai'i (KLH). To establish the phonetic properties
of the language being acquired by children and adult learners, the team first
examines the acoustic properties of proficient adult speakers of Hawaiian. They
then turn to assessing adult language learners, with an aim toward identifying
sounds which may be more challenging for this group. This project contributes to
the phonetic documentation of the Hawaiian language, including work with
language teachers and other community members to create pedagogical materials.
The project also contributes to ongoing work in the development of automatic
speech recognition (ASR) for Hawaiian. The advancement of ASR helps to alleviate
the shortage of Hawaiian transcribers, who play a critical role in US
educational, government, and entertainment contexts.

The current research focuses on the realization and acquisition of Hawaiian
sounds including oral and glottal stops in multiple prosodic positions, the
vowel length distinction in Hawaiian, and the [w~v] variants of /v/. Since
previous research on oral and glottal stops examining the KLH interviews
indicated that their realization affected by prosodic considerations, the
elicitation materials in this study manipulate where the stops occur with
respect to (lexical) word position, prosodic word position, and syllabic stress.
Studying the role of prosodic and word-internal metrical structure in
conditioning the phonetic realization of Hawaiian sounds contributes to a
growing literature regarding how multiple levels of phonological structure
interface with phonetic implementation. These studies also allow for an
examination of whether second language learners are sensitive to these fine-
grained phonetic properties. In addition to the production studies, a perception
study investigates what voice quality information is used in perceiving word-
initial glottal stops. A final component of this research is a continued study
of the speech of the KLH speakers from their recorded interviews, focusing on
the implementation of the vowel length distinction in Hawaiian, and on what
factors condition variation in the pronunciation of [w~v] variants of /v/. The
outcome of these studies contributes to the design of instructional materials
and videos regarding the acquisition of sounds that may present a challenge for
adult learners of Hawaiian.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.