* 2314158
* Developing a Diversified STEM Education Trajectory: Community College STEM Participation via Conference Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Homar Barcena, CUNY Kingsborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2028
* USD 548,665.00

Early exposure to research has been shown to be formative to a student’s
decision to pursue STEM, yet research experiences are not readily available to
community college students. Community college students constitute one-third of
U.S. undergraduates and consist of larger portions of underrepresented
communities, a potential pipeline for a STEM workforce that reflects the
diversity of the local community. This project will develop co-curricular
programming that acclimates community college students to STEM and the academic
process. A cohort of first year students will be recruited each semester, over
five years, to a workshop series that provides academic guidance, mentorship,
exposure to STEM research, careers, and community-building activities. Students
who demonstrate promise at the end of the semester will be invited to attend a
national conference.

This project will recruit first-year community college students to attend STEM
conferences to explore how their interactions with the scientific community at
large impact academic trajectory. The project will investigate how identifying
as a scientist early on plays a role in student persistence and retention in
STEM. Informed by Social Cognitive Career Theory, the project will take an
action research approach to adapt programming to the needs of the cohort to
account for variabilities in college preparedness and education loss due to the
pandemic. Student mindset will be determined by surveys and interviews, so that
programmatic evaluation leads to informed decisions in a timely manner. The
longer-term effects of the program will be assessed by student output such as
participation in research programs, extra-curricular work, transfer to STEM
baccalaureate programs, testimonials, and other indicators of student
trajectory. The proposed study will generate discipline-based research specific
to community colleges, lending insight on how underrepresented students find
their way to STEM research. This project aims to show how underrepresented
students from community colleges can start to identify as scientists by
capitalizing on their curiosity and love of learning. Findings will be
disseminated in research conferences and papers. This project has implication
for using conference participation to promote equity and will be a driver for
diversifying the STEM workforce.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF’s
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.