* 2314670
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The behavioral ecology of children's signals of need
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Edward Hagen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 38,250.00

Children require essential benefits from parents and other caregivers, such as
food, care, and protection, which they often attempt to elicit with cries and
other signals of need. Although infant cries have been studied in several
populations, the full range of potential child signals of need, which likely
extend beyond cries, has never been investigated in children of all ages, nor is
it known how often parents respond favorably or unfavorably to these signals.
This project helps fill this gap by collecting observational, self-report, and
experimental data on child signals of need and parental responses to them. It
also investigates if childrenâ€™s self-endangering behaviors, such as running
away, are signals of need. In addition to training a graduate student in mixed
methods data collection and analyses, the research provides information that can
enhance child well-being. The researcher intends to publish the results in peer-
reviewed journals and share the data and findings with child welfare
organizations.

This project will be conducted in an island community among two populations that
differ in culture and socioeconomic status, both of which are experiencing rapid
change due to increased tourism and immigration. Daily surveys are used to
examine how often children signal need, how they do this, how parents respond to
such signaling, and how children respond to parental responses. Researchers are
also replicating an experimental vignette study on adolescent and young adult
self-endangering behaviors that tests the hypothesis that these are credible
signals of need. By providing information from two populations on 1) the
frequency and costliness of signals of need across development and 2) the extent
to which those signals receive positive or negative responses from caregivers,
this project provides insight into why children differ in their signaling
behavior and why parents might respond positively or negatively to indications
of child need.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.