* 2314253
* SBP: Collaborative Research: Improving Engagement with Professional Development Programs by Attending to Teachers' Psychosocial Experiences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Stephanie Fryberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 364,801.00

As the U.S. student population grows more diverse, longstanding disparities in
educational opportunities and outcomes persist. Efforts to remedy these
disparities often use focused professional development (PD) to support educators
in more effectively teaching diverse students. PD covers a wide array of topics,
such as culturally responsive instruction, inclusive practices for students, and
strategies for engaging students who have experienced adversity. What unites
these diverse PD approaches is an intentional and explicit focus on
understanding the issues facing students with diverse experiences and needs, and
on equipping educators with skills to overcome these challenges and support
student success. While focused PD is in high demand, little is known about its
effectiveness. Many focused PD programs have little to no effect, and some may
be counterproductive. For example, these programs can create a sense of
psychological threat among educators, leading to feelings of being excluded,
judged, or disadvantaged. These outcomes can result in resistance and backlash
that undermine program goals.

For focused PD to be successful, it needs to attend to educators' experiences.
This project conducts studies that examine how three common sources of
psychological threat in focused PDs (identity, culture, and pedagogy threats)
shape how educators engage with and use focused PD content in their classrooms,
and how this use improves studentsâ€™ academic experiences and performance. Two
studies use focus groups and survey designs to examine these issues among a
national sample of educators who have participated in a wide variety of focused
PD experiences. Three additional studies use randomized controlled experiments
to test strategies for mitigating identity, culture, and pedagogy threats among
educators. Together, this work provides insight for creating focused PD
environments where all teachers feel valued, equipped to engage with challenging
ideas, and capable of growing their classroom skills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.