* 2314530
* Conference: CAS - Climate: Resilient Supply of Critical Minerals, Rolla, MO, August 9-10, 2023
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Michael Moats, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,989.00

In 2019, the Department of State fulfilled a 2017 Presidential Executive Order
and identified 35 "critical minerals" that are vital to the U.S. economy and
national security. The newer 2022 list includes 50 critical minerals and the
U.S. remains import reliant for most of these commodities. Removing materials
from the critical minerals list requires a multi-disciplinary approach that
encompasses mineral exploration, material flow analysis, sustainability, mining
methods, public policy, mineral economics, extractive metallurgy, and production
process. To provide a platform for stakeholders from academia, the private
sector, and government agencies that represent these disciplines, Missouri S&T
University will convene an in-person workshop on “Resilient Supply of Critical
Minerals’ on the university's campus in Rolla, MO, on August 9-10, 2023. Themed
topical sessions will discuss the resilient supply of critical minerals from
cross-disciplinary, convergent perspectives, including mineral exploration and
source diversification, mineral processing and recycling, policy making, and
resource sustainability. National leaders in their respective fields will give
keynote presentations, followed by TED-style talks, panel discussions, and
breakout sessions. The breakout sessions will be structured for
interdisciplinary engagement, to provide a convergent perspective that includes
economic, technical, social, and policy aspects. Research road maps will examine
and evaluate the concept of criticality and recognize the cross-disciplinary
nature of techniques required to enhance supply resilience. The workshop
findings will be summarized and disseminated in a workshop report.

The in-person format of this workshop will help to develop and nurture personal
relationships between participants from academia, government agencies, and the
private sector – thereby facilitating multi-disciplinary collaborations in
critical minerals research. Increasing critical mineral supply chain resiliency
remains important to the U.S. economy and defense. Existing research has yet to
span fully the multi-disciplinary nature of approaches available to enhance
supply chain resilience. Geologic, mining engineering, metallurgic, economic,
environmental, and social components associated with critical minerals are
usually discussed separately with little convergence among the different fields.
This in-person workshop will address this gap by providing a platform for
engineers, geoscientists, economists, and political scientists from industry,
academia, and the government that rarely meet otherwise. The workshop organizers
will prepare a comprehensive report that can be used to inform decision-making
in pursuit of increasing supply chain resilience, ranging from mineral
exploration, separation, and recovery to environmental and social impacts, as
well as political processes. The workshop will help nurture an emerging national
community with a wide range of expertise in critical mineral supply resilience,
spanning academic, industry, and government entities. Travel grants,
particularly for students and early-career researchers, will help build a
community that spans generations and ensure the meeting's lasting impact. The
development of a healthy and active critical mineral community is pivotal to
national security and the economy because the U.S. is currently import-reliant
for most of the commodities on the critical minerals list. This workshop will
develop and publish roadmaps for guiding efforts to gradually decrease import
reliance for individual critical minerals, thereby strengthening the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. Further, this workshop will generate insights into
how U.S. universities can meet the projected future demands for the nation's
critical minerals workforce, particularly in rural areas which are most likely
to contain undiscovered resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.