* 2314669
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence Chain
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Navid Sabbaghi, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a safety net for those individuals and organizations that would
like confidentiality and protection when working with cryptocurrency. With this
safety net, more cryptocurrency owners would feel comfortable entering the
market, expanding the platform beyond the 1 billion members expected by 2023.
Current blockchain participants have opened their identities and transactions
for the world to see even though they risk the dangers that come with that
transparency. Even participants that have not disclosed their wallet identities
have found their true identities to have been compromised and have faced
threats. When an owner conducts a large cryptocurrency transaction, the risk of
damage due to exposure can be high whether it be for individuals or businesses.
For those market segments, confidentiality - as a service enabled by this
technology - would help lower the risk of exposure and thus reduce damage
substantially.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a technology platform to
enable confidentiality and transaction monitoring as a service for blockchain
systems with the goal of reducing transaction costs and enhancing auditability.
The core technology that undergirds the platform combines a machine learning
algorithm with secure encryption techniques. This platform will satisfy
regulatory requirements and provide safety as well as confidentiality for
blockchain users and platforms. The approach uses machine learning,
optimization, and encryption techniques to mask transactions and to provide
confidentiality while also using machine learning algorithms to discern when
suspicious activity is happening on the transaction graph. The privacy-
preserving machine learning techniques have never been used in production in the
context of blockchain. Intellectually, the algorithms enhance the understanding
of the effectiveness of machine learning techniques on encrypted data. The
technology will reduce financial crime while preserving confidentiality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.