* 2314212
* Attribution of industrial-era glacier retreat, globally and in the high northern latitudes.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Gerard Roe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2026
* USD 524,823.00

This research aims to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the human
contribution to the industrial-era retreat of mountain glaciers around the
world. The result will be a stronger foundation for future assessments by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Although glacier retreat is
widely touted as some of the clearest evidence of the impacts of anthropogenic
climate change, formal scientific statements attributing the cause remain
surprisingly weak. Hesitancy to make stronger statements stems from: i)
uncertainty about the natural variability of glaciers; ii) the potential retreat
of glaciers from a preceding Little Ice Age; and iii) a dearth of specifically
targeted research on a global scale. The research will apply a previously
developed attribution methodology to newly available global datasets of glacier
geometry, combined with reconstructions and numerical simulations of the climate
of the past millennium. The results will be immediately impactful for
researchers working on high-mountain surface processes and hazards, ecologists,
and all those who study and interpret periglacial environments; including
sociologists, geographers, and economists who study societal impacts. The
current unclear attribution of glacier retreat is also playing a role in
precedent-setting lawsuits seeking to establish the legal principles of climate
justice, to which the work contributes.

The IPCC needs new research in order to update its assessments, and so to cement
prior analyses (or disprove them), it is proposed to: i) use multi-century
ensemble simulations from ~20 global climate models to properly initialize
simulated glaciers to a pre-industrial climate, and to provide pairs of
simulations with-and-without anthropogenic forcing; ii) use real glacier-
catchment geometries and flowlines obtained from the Open Global Glacier Model
initially with ~50 globally dispersed glaciers, with subsequent expansion to a
larger network; and iii) use process-based numerical models of flowline glacier
dynamics. This will put theoretical and synthetic analyses onto real landscapes
and ice-flow dynamics, in combination with a full range of estimated natural
climate variability. The research will maintain a particular focus on
anthropogenic attribution for glaciers in the northern high latitudes, which
experience large natural climate variability; strong low-frequency variability;
a later emergence of the signal of anthropogenic climate change; a strong
response to solar and volcanic forcing; and in maritime settings, large
variability in wintertime mass balance.

This award is co-funded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics, Arctic
Natural Sciences, and Climate and Large-scale Dynamics programs, which cross the
Division of Earth Sciences, Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences, and
Polar Programs at the NSF.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.