* 2314578
* Conference: International Conference on Approximation Theory and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Marian Neamtu, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 05/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The “International Conference on Approximation Theory and Beyond” will take
place at Vanderbilt University May 15-18, 2023, and will bring together
researchers and graduate students for extensive discussions on Approximation
Theory. Approximation Theory has emerged as an interdisciplinary research area
with significant impacts on various fields. Applications areas at the conference
will range from computer-aided geometric design to image and signal processing,
geophysical and medical modeling, and data science. This conference will help
identify emerging trends and opportunities for future research that will likely
impact these application areas in addition to other applications in science,
engineering, and information technology. Additionally, the conference aims to
promote the career development of graduate students, early-career
mathematicians, women, and minorities, and aim to provide a platform for their
integration into the scientific community.

The field of Approximation Theory provides common links and tools across the
mathematical sciences, natural and life sciences, and engineering. Its
importance has grown considerably in recent years with new developments and
broad applications through wavelets, frames, radial basis functions, spline
functions and more. The goal of the conference is to highlight computational
mathematics in this area and its connections to interdisciplinary research
areas. The conference will focus on the latest state-of-the-art developments in
learning theory with application to signal/image processing, computer-aided
design, manufacturing and related areas. The insights gained from the
discussions and presentations at the conference will likely lead to new research
directions and opportunities, ultimately resulting in the development of
innovative solutions to important problems in diverse areas of science and
technology. The conference website is located at
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/nashville2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.