* 2314118
* Microauscultation devices via acoustic coupling with near-field light-matter interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Donald Sirbuly, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Sound waves are crucial in communication and imaging, including medical
ultrasound, sonar, and seismography. Auscultation—listening to the sounds of the
body—is one of the first things a physician does to assess the health of a
patient. Heart activity, blood flow, and pulmonary gas exchange all have unique
sounds that to a trained physician’s ear can be used to quickly identify
problems in bodily functions. It is also conceivable that cells, bacteria, and
viruses all generate distinct acoustic signals. Being able to eavesdrop on this
acoustic world would not only be a significant scientific breakthrough but would
also transform our ability to monitor our health, diagnose disease, particularly
at an early stage, and help answer fundamental biological questions. However,
detecting the subtle acoustic signatures from small biological objects while
surrounded by a cacophony of other sounds will require a new approach to
listening: devices that can approach the size of the sound source, have
exceptional sensitivity over a broad range of acoustic frequencies, and have a
strong directional and distance-limited sensory capability. Current
mechanoelectrical stethoscopes and hydrophones are not engineered to push the
limits of auscultation nor be scaled down to operate extremely close to acoustic
sources. To address these shortcomings, this proposal seeks to engineer small
nanoscale fiber optics that can efficiently convert weak sound waves into an
optical signal that can be measured with a photodetector or camera. The working
principle of the design involves metal nanoparticles decorating a soft polymer
coating that moves in response to extremely low amplitude sound waves, creating
a modulated optical signal unique to the detected acoustic signature. This
project will have a major impact on student learning, achievement, diversity,
and inclusion. For example, “Summer of Nano” workshops will be developed to
increase underrepresented minority student enrollment numbers in STEM degree
programs at UC San Diego, and other higher education institutes, by galvanizing
cross-border relationships between UC San Diego and Mexico as well as local San
Diego high schools. Through teaching about how diverse, cross-disciplinary
science can be used to accelerate scientific discovery and innovation, this
project will also be pivotal in recruiting and retaining underrepresented
minority students in engineering degree programs at UCSD.

This proposal aims to design, fabricate, and evaluate acoustic-to-optical
nanoscale transducers that leverage strong near-field plasmon-dielectric
coupling effects to detect and interpret sound signatures never heard before by
other local nano-ears. Impedance-optimized acousto-compressible polymer
nanofiber cladding layers will be synthesized that enable strong, acoustic
modulation of plasmonic nanoparticles embedded in, or attached to, the polymer
layer. It will be demonstrated that these cladding layers can be tuned to be
modulated by weak sound waves in the optical near field with a broad range of
frequencies and amplitudes. Through laser Doppler vibrometry and high-speed
digital holographic microscopy, the acoustic resonance and response of the
plasmomechanical transduction mechanism will be fully correlated to the cladding
deformation studies, providing a deep understanding of how to leverage various
parameters (light wavelength, nanoparticle size/shape, polymer
composition/thickness, etc.) to control the performance and response of the
nanofiber microauscultation devices. The directional response pattern and
frequency-dependent sensitivity will be quantified using custom lithium niobate
transducers, which will help fill the intellectual gap on how the acoustic near
field couples to the far field, and it will be demonstrated that the nanofiber
microauscultation devices are sensitive enough to detect and transduce acoustic
signatures from nanobiomechanical systems (e.g., genome ejection from viral
capsids) for the first time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.