* 2314708
* Disability DCL: Transforming the Chemistry Experience for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students via the Design, Implementation, and Evaluation of a Descriptive Sign Language Lexicon
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Christina Goudreau Collison, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 379,407.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the classroom
experience for Deaf and Hard of Hearing (D/HH) students in their undergraduate
chemistry courses. Importantly, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM and contribute to creating a more diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. One of the greatest challenges for D/HH students
pursuing STEM careers is the lack of formalized STEM sign terminology. Thus,
improving the chemistry classroom culture to become more inclusive and welcoming
of D/HH students through formalized sign incorporation is central to this
project. The innovative project aims to develop and implement chemistry signs
that intuitively convey the concepts and terms in order to: (i) increase
cognitive and affective gains among D/HH students in a variety of chemistry
courses, (ii) improve D/HH classroom culture and inclusion practices when the
faculty and interpreter teams facilitate STEM sign incorporation, and (iii)
improve standardization and propagation of chemistry terminology within the D/HH
community. The projectâ€™s success will afford a greater understanding of the
manner in which science is taught to D/HH students and potentially inform
education practices for auditory learners.

The project intends to address the challenges associated with learning chemistry
as a D/HH student, particularly as it pertains to the lack of a formalized sign
lexicon in chemistry courses. The goals of the project will be to: (1) develop
sign lexicons for general, organic, and biochemistry courses that intuitively
convey the concepts and terms taught in these courses; (2) sustain a method for
continual use of the new chemistry signs among D/HH students and interpreters;
(3) distribute the newly developed signs to D/HH students, instructors, and
interpreters in the STEM community; and (4) evaluate and assess the
effectiveness of efforts as they relate to D/HH student success, self-efficacy,
science identity, and sense of belonging while enrolled in the chemistry course
sequence. A combination of quantitative and qualitative assessment tools will be
used to address both formative and summative evaluation and assessment
activities. The results of the project will be disseminated broadly to enhance
scientific and technological understanding via workshops, peer-reviewed
publication, conference presentations, and the ASLcore website. The NSF IUSE:
EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.