* 2314628
* Quantifying long-term aeolian abrasion rates on hard rock surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Nathan Brown, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 261,593.00

In arid regions, on Earth and on other planets, wind-blown sand erodes and
reshapes landscapes. On human timescales, this erosion can be immeasurably
small, so it is unclear how long it takes to form these landscapes. This project
will use two recent advances in geochemical measurements to measure erosion
rates on southern Californian ventifacts, boulders which are eroded by sand
blasting during windstorms. Based on these measurements, this project will
investigate whether a past shift in climate produced different ventifact erosion
rates. These measurements will also test whether erosion by wind-blown sand
depends on rock type or height above the ground surface. Several reference rocks
will be manually eroded at a known rate and then measured to test whether the
predicted erosion rates based on geochemical measurements match the actual,
known erosion rates. Finally, this project will create 3-D digital models of all
ten studied ventifacts and make them freely available to educators everywhere
with an accompanying teaching module. These boulders are rare and difficult to
access, so creating photorealistic educational models dramatically increases
access to these fascinating geological features. A limited supply of 3-D
printed, handheld models will also be provided at no cost to interested
classrooms and printing instructions will be posted online.

The project goal is to quantify the spatial and temporal evolution of aeolian
abrasion rates across the surface of ventifacts using recent advances in
optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) and cosmogenic, in situ 10Be and 14C
methods. Rates will be measured on lengths ranging from several mm to tens of cm
and timescales from decadal to multi-millennial. This project involves five
major research tasks: (1) field campaign to two sites in southern California;
(2) in situ cosmogenic 14C-10Be exposure age and erosion rate analysis (1 paired
14C-10Be sample per ventifact, totaling 10); (3) OSL depth profile erosion rate
analysis of ventifacts (10 OSL depth profiles per ventifact, totaling 100) and
manually eroded rock cylinders (3 erosion rates per lithology and 10
lithologies, totaling 30); (4) generation of digital 3-D models from field
photographs of 10 ventifacts using structure-from-motion photogrammetry and
handheld educational models from 3-D printing along with an accompanying
educational video; and (5) presentation of results at conferences and in peer-
reviewed journal articles. Project results will demonstrate, for the first time,
that luminescence measurements can accurately recover hard rock erosion rates on
a mm-scale. Measured rates will benchmark existing but empirically untested
abrasion mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.