* 2314693
* Law and Social Science Fellowship and Mentoring Program on Law &amp; Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jothie Rajah, American Bar Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 104,381.00

Law and social science scholars are studying important questions that highlight
the difference between what the law says and how it works, particularly those
differences that worsen established inequalities within society. However, while
the work is critical, there are obstacles that discourage new scholars from
entering this relatively small field. One such obstacle is that entering the
field of law and social science requires crossing traditional disciplinary
boundaries. But because the field is relatively small, there are only a few
research institutions with a concentration of specialists. This can make it
risky if not impossible for graduate students or recent Ph.D. holders who are
not at institutions with established interdisciplinary programs to pursue this
kind of work. They often lack either the training or support to undergo this
critical work.

The Law and Social Science Fellowship and Mentoring Program on Law & Inequality
aims to develop a small cohort of two carefully chosen doctoral scholars and one
postdoctoral scholar focused on law and inequality through critically important
and specialized support from a robust intellectual community within the American
Bar Foundation in Chicago, IL. Applications will be open broadly and across
disciplines to any advanced Ph.D. student or those who have recently completed
their Ph.Ds. Selections will be based on candidate’s scholarly potential in the
field of law and social science, commitment to conducting research on law and
inequality, academic achievement, and contribution to diversity of the field.
During this time, they will be able to focus on their research and professional
development. Members of both the American Bar Foundation and the Law and Society
Association research communities will provide advice and guidance to these young
scholars as they navigate academic spaces and challenges. Effective mentoring
and being part of an interdisciplinary academic community can broaden the
perspectives of graduate students and recent Ph.D. holders and provide them with
the necessary training and support to succeed as scholars. A package of
financial support permits fellows to take full advantage of the education,
training, and mentoring at the heart of this program. Once established, these
fellows will soon not only make significant contributions to the field, but they
will also become mentors to their own students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.