* 2314465
* Chirality-Induced Spin Selectivity in Biology:The Role of Spin-Polarized Electron Current in Biological Electron Transport &amp; Redox Enzymatic Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Vladimiro Mujica, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2026
* USD 414,130.00

Charge transport is a fundamental process in biological systems, it underlies
cell activity and metabolism. The research involved in this project aims to
expand our understanding about how electrons, the charge carriers, travel long
distances in biological materials that are very poor conductors, as opposed to
home or industrial electrical wires. It also focuses on a specific kind of
enzymatic process where enzymes accelerate the chemical reactions involved in
processes where biomolecules are oxidized or reduced, that is lose or gain
electrons, a fundamental step in cell functionality. In this project, electron
transport in biomolecules is studied through a synergistic theory-experimental
effort which relies on advanced peptide synthesis and protein engineering and
the measurement of currents at the single-molecule level. This research is
relevant for our understanding of biological and cell function. Also, it
advances our knowledge regarding fundamental aspects of electron transport in
right-handed and left-handed molecules, which are pervasive in biological
system. The investigation can also be of importance in the areas of sensing and
molecular quantum information. A postdoctoral fellow will be receive cross-
training by interactions with international collaborators. This project will
create a link between academia and industry by delivering fundamental knowledge
for sensor and diagnostic platforms.

This project will study the role the electron spin-polarization generated in a
chiral peptide matrix has on two remarkably efficient redox-based processes in
biology; (1) the long-range electron transport and (2) the redox enzymatic
reactions, both mediated by redox cofactors. These two aims will be achieved by
first investigating the spin-polarization mechanisms of the electric current
flowing through bespoke helical peptides, which constitute the main building
blocks of the chiral matrix surrounding redox cofactors. Second, evaluating the
impact of the above helix-induced spin-polarization in the electron transport
efficiency of a model redox cytochrome. And third, evaluating its impact in the
reaction rate of a redox enzymatic processes. The study will be carried out at
the single peptide/protein level of resolution using a unique approach that
combines advanced single-molecule conductance characterization with peptide
synthesis and protein engineering. The single-peptide/protein method to measure
molecular conductance is carried out in a precisely controlled nanoscale
electrode-electrode gap of an electrochemical scanning tunnelling microscope,
which allows operation in physiological conditions. This biophysical approach
integrates an atomistic computational modelling of electron conductance of the
entire single-molecule device, including both the molecules and the contacts.
This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
where NSF funds the US investigator and BBSRC funds the UK partner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.