* 2314260
* STEMcyclists: Black and Brown Youth Transforming Science and Engineering via Bikes
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Noemi Waight, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,320,366.00

The bike is an engineering system centered on a transparent technology that
promotes freedom of movement and thus has the potential to democratize mobility
and access. As an accessible technology it allows for tinkering, redesigning,
repairing, customizing, re-mixing, repurposing, building, and re-building. This
project uses bikes and biking to introduce STEM content and experiences to
traditionally underrepresented youth (grades 9-10) by having them participate in
place-based informal learning activities. The researchers along with community
organizations work together to plan and facilitate a summer institute and cohort
sessions during the academic year. The youth will engage in STEM learning in
their community by creating and contributing knowledge that informs their own
learning in topics like science, engineering, and biomechanics.

The goal of this project is to use bikes and biking learning experiences to
advance STEM, human-centered engineering, and science frameworks through the
assets of an urban, community-based youth organization. The project will impact
96 students in grades 9 and 10 in an urban setting. Data will be collected
before, during, and after summer and fall/spring sessions over the course of
three years. The main data sources will be observations of, and videorecording
of all sessions; semi-structured interviews with youth, peer mentors,
instructors, team members and community partners; and, youth produced project
artifacts, and planning and design, modules, and institute artifacts. This
asset-based approach will be accomplished through four overlapping foci: (a)
applying the STEM processes (engineering design principles and scientific
practices) of rebuilding bikes; (b) understanding the biomechanics of bikes and
biking; (c) using the bike as a medium to experience and uncover STEM phenomena
in the community; to (d) transform youth STEM identities. This project will get
youth interested and engaged in STEM by having their understandings represented
based on how they engage with and apply engineering principles to rebuild bikes,
the actual bike rebuild, youth discussions as well as interactions with peers
and instructors/facilitators.

This Type 4, Integrating Research and Practice, project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that:
(a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's
role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational
success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d)
foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and
empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve
community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's
engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes. The project is co-
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.