* 2314982
* Examining the Potential and Limits of Rubrics as Tools for Racial Equity in Graduate Admissions:  A Sequential Mixed-Methods Inquiry
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Julie Posselt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 09/30/2027
* USD 625,523.00

How universities make the decisions that affect access to higher education are a
root cause of racial, gender, and socioeconomic inequalities in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Particularly given changes to
the legal landscape for considering race in admissions, it is urgent to develop
tools that reduce racial bias in admissions decisions. More higher education
institutions are adopting rubrics in admissions, particularly as test-optional
and test-free become the new normal, and research suggests that rubrics reduce
K-12 teacher racial bias and improve diversity in faculty hiring. However, there
is little evidence about how rubrics should be designed or implemented in
graduate admissions. Two types of evidence are needed in particular: 1)
Generalizable data about the usefulness of rubrics in a variety of disciplinary
and institutional types and 2) Lived experiences about the feasibility of
rubrics and the underlying assumptions they prompt when evaluating applicants.

The goal of this project is therefore to expand the evidence base about rubrics
in graduate admissions to include multiple data types and multiple levels of
analysis. It has a sequential mixed methods research design involving a large-
scale experiment and qualitative research with members of established, national
research-practice partnerships. Specifically, it aims to advance knowledge about
the potential and limits of evaluation rubrics for racial equity in STEM PhD
admissions at three levels: 1) whether and how rubrics affect racial biases at
the individual level; 2) what standard practices organizations use for selection
and how they navigate barriers to using rubrics; and 3) the cultural values
about excellence that often drive individual judgment and organizational
practices. The project is significant as the first experimental study of how
rubrics can be designed and used in STEM PhD programs. It aims to inform
discussion and practice in adjacent evaluation contexts, including fellowships/
scholarships, awards, hiring, and tenure/ promotion.

This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.