* 2314195
* Co-Designing Media to Foster Joint Peer-to-Peer Engagement, Promote Engineering Learning, and Expand Reach to Young Children
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Jessica Andrews, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 11/30/2025
* USD 2,150,688.00

Successful peer-to-peer practices in informal science learning (ISL) are often
not well defined, but further investigation has the potential to help uncover
how to motivate and scaffold children's joint learning in science and
engineering. Team Hamster!, a PBS KIDS interactive digital series that helps
youth think creatively and use engineering skills to solve problems with
everyday tools, will be used to achieve the goals of this project. One goal is
to investigate how engineering media can be intentionally co-designed with
children from diverse, economically disadvantaged backgrounds in order to foster
peer-to-peer engagement and learning. These naturally occurring, peer-to-peer
interactions could be investigated to determine which hold the most potential
for fostering learning in science and engineering. Additionally, this project
seeks to provide a new standard for how producers can co-create media that
reflects the interests, habits, and lived experiences of the children they aim
to serve. Given the media habits of today's children, who often view videos,
play video games, and discuss strategies and preferences with their friends and
siblings, Team Hamster!'s 35 million digital game plays and 55 million video
views can have a significant reach and impact on the youth who are served.

The project uses a participatory co-design approach with four groups of
collaborators: youth, media designers, youth development experts, and STEM
experts. There will be an impact study utilizing an experimental-control/pre-
test-post-test design, with equal groups of approximately 120 children and their
caregivers. Data from technology probes will be analyzed to create profiles of
youth usage, with a focus on peer-to-peer engagement. Research will be used to
address these questions: 1) What peer-to-peer joint media engagement practices
are most promising for fostering engineering learning and exploration among
diverse, economically disadvantaged 5 to 7 year-old children, and how might new
design features of digital games and supporting videos promote these practices?
2) What design features of digital games and supporting videos best promote
media-based peer-to-peer engagement around engineering learning and exploration?
3) To what extent do the digital games developed through this project foster
engineering learning and exploration? 4) What are best practices for developing
a participatory co-design process, occurring both online and in person, that is
centered on the creation of digital game features and supporting videos that
expand the reach of digital engineering games?

This Type 5, Research in Support of Wide-reaching Public Engagement with STEM,
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers
informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote
personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in
scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and
enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM
learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science
communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM
processes. The project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts, and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.