* 2314721
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How do perceptions of neuroplasticity impact mental health care?
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Matthew Hiller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,154.00

Recent decades have witnessed an explosion of new mental health treatments.
Physicians vary in the extent to which they adjust their practices to
incorporate these novel treatments, with decisions based on a number of factors,
including individual training, patient and physician characteristics, and how
research evidence is interpreted. One interesting concept associated with uptake
of novel mental health therapies is neuroplasticity: the brain’s ability to
change in response to therapeutic interventions. This doctoral dissertation uses
the concept of neuroplasticity to investigate how physicians’ explanatory
frameworks impact and are impacted by the availability of novel mental health
therapies. It contributes to science and technology studies, medical
anthropology, and studies investigating how science and medicine are put into
practice. It trains a graduate student in scientific cultural anthropology
theory and methods, involves dissemination to academic, medical, and public
audiences, and enhances undergraduate curricula.

The investigators conduct long-term ethnographic research involving participant
observation and interviews of care providers and patients, including shadowing
researchers and participating in training sessions regarding the use of novel
therapies. Specifically, the investigator queries how understandings of
neuroplasticity shape the uptake and delivery of novel therapeutic agents and
how patient and physician characteristics impact understandings of
neuroplasticity and medical practice. This timely project informs important
theoretical issues in cultural and medical anthropology that have translational
significance for healthcare delivery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.