* 2314724
* Multicomponent diffusion in silicate melts using eigen-component approach
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2026
* USD 311,933.00

This project will investigate diffusion of all major oxides (defined to be more
than one weight percent) in dry natural silicate melts using a new approach. In
the past, researchers could only successfully and quantitatively study the
diffusion of oxides in natural silicate melts with monotonic, or flat,
concentration profiles. But what about oxides with non-monotonic profiles? The
goal of this project is to develop an easier way to quantify diffusion of all
major oxides in dry silicate melts. One application of the new method will be
the modeling of the mixing of two magmas. Preliminary results show that such
mixing may result in unexpected high concentrations of some metals. Such high
concentrations may lead to ore formation. Hence, one of the practical
applications is to explain previously unexplained ore formation, and to predict
possible locations of ore deposits. Other applications of the new method include
more accurate quantification of crystal growth and dissolution rates. This
research will also solve a major theoretical problem in high-temperature
geochemical kinetics.

This project will investigate multicomponent diffusion in dry natural silicate
melts using eigen-component approach. Multicomponent diffusion in silicate melts
is fundamental to mass transport in igneous processes and is also one of the
most difficult experimental and theoretical problems facing geochemical
kineticists. Multicomponent diffusion is often encountered in natural silicate
melts but not treated due to the level of difficulties in terms of both theory
and especially experiments. This team has extracted a diffusion matrix in
basaltic melts at three different temperatures, and roughly verified that the
diffusion eigenvector matrix in basaltic melts is roughly independent of
temperature. They now hypothesize that the diffusion eigenvector matrix is also
roughly independent of melt composition in dry melts. They are now further
improving the eigenvector matrix and hope to verify that the eigenvector matrix
is invariant with composition. In the eigen-component approach, plots of
“concentrations” of eigen-components (rather than oxide wt% or mole fractions)
versus distance will be made. If their hypothesis is correct, then using the
eigenvector matrix, all eigen-component plots would be monotonic, and diffusion
eigenvalues (i.e., diffusivity for the eigen-components) will be obtained from
fitting the eigen-component profiles. If some eigen-component plots in some
experiments show nonmonotonic profiles, within the framework of our hypothesis,
it would mean inaccuracy of the eigenvector matrix, and hence the need to
improve the eigenvector matrix. To complete the investigation of multicomponent
diffusion in a melt, a couple of well-designed experiments at each temperature
and pressure will be enough to determine all eigenvalues, and hence the full
diffusion matrix. This team's hypothesis and new approach will contribute to the
fundamental understanding of diffusion in natural silicate melts. The success of
the proposed work will remove one difficult problem from the list of geochemical
kineticists and allow future geochemists to realistically predict diffusion-
controlled processes, such as magma mixing, mineral growth and dissolution, and
post-entrapment interaction between a melt inclusion and its host mineral. They
will build and publish an online resource to compute multicomponent diffusion
profiles. This would enable interested students and scientists to use
multicomponent diffusion in their research of geological problems. This planned
online calculator will help facilitate the use of their results by the
petrological and geochemical community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.