* 2314338
* Fundamental Studies on the Regulation and Interaction of Ceramides in Cellular Senescence and Cell Death
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Gunes Atilla-Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2027
* USD 953,119.00

Mammalian cells produce many types of lipids with different functions. As major
components of biological membranes, lipids form barriers that define boundaries
for cells and their internal compartments. Lipids also participate in distinct
roles that signal essential cellular processes, such as cell division and
programmed cell death. These functions can depend on the cellular localization
of individual lipid types and other biological molecules with which they
interact, as well as their cellular locale. Within this context, this project
will apply biochemical, chemical biological, and analytical approaches to
investigate the role of a specific lipid group (ceramides) in cellular
senescence, a process that is defined by the cessation of cell division. The
outcomes are expected to reveal novel fundamental biochemical mechanisms that
regulate lipid function in cellular senescence and to have important
implications for broader understanding of the role of ceramides in biological
processes. The results should also be generalizable to other cell types. In
addition, the project will provide for training of a globally competitive
workforce across the educational spectrum, including participation of students
from groups underrepresented in STEM and teachers in research and scientific
inquiry.

Previous studies showed that ceramides are involved in apoptosis and replicative
senescence. Replicative senescence is a state of cell cycle arrest that occurs
when cells reach their proliferative capacity. It is a fundamental cellular
process linked to organismal aging and wound healing, distinct from apoptosis.
The pro-apoptotic activity of ceramides is well-studied; however, how ceramides
function in replicative senescence remains unknown. The goal of this proposal is
to elucidate the biochemical mechanisms that regulate the production, cellular
localization, and function of ceramides in replicative senescence. To achieve
this goal, proteins that interact with ceramides will be identified, the
functional consequences of these interactions will be investigated, and
biochemical mechanisms that regulate ceramide levels in senescence will be
determined. The project will use an experimental design comparing senescent cell
line models to investigate specific mechanisms by which ceramides are involved
in replicative senescence. Further, for the first time, the study integrates
multiple imaging, lipidomics, and perturbation-based methods to comprehensively
resolve the regulation, trafficking, and protein interactions of ceramides at
the organelle level during senescence. The knowledge obtained from this project
will open the door to novel studies investigating the impact of cellular locale
on the function of lipid species in cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.