* 2314309
* I-Corps: Microfluidic Electrospray Thrusters for Small Satellite Propulsion
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Manuel Gamero, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new electric propulsion system for small satellites. Networks
of satellites are used to predict natural disasters more accurately, provide
better communication, and guide autonomous vehicles as well as for many other
applications of global interest. Profitable missions need a propulsion system to
perform orbital maneuvers, such as final orbit insertion, attitude control for
precision pointing, and drag compensation to extend the lifetime of the mission
or deorbit the satellite at the end of the mission, a requirement that will soon
be enforced to ensure space sustainability. There are very few propulsion
systems available for micro satellites (satellites under 100 kg). Electrospray
thrusters, unlike other electric propulsion systems, can operate efficiently
with only a few watts of power, which makes them very suitable for
microsatellites (under 100 kg). At the same time, the same system can be scaled
up and used for larger satellites (100-400 kg). The industry is shifting to
serial manufacturing and a fast-paced, low-cost oriented vision to fulfill the
demand. This technology has the potential to meet the strict time, cost, size.
and performance requirements.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an electric propulsion
system for small satellites. The system will provide the spacecraft with primary
propulsion and attitude control to perform a wide range of orbital maneuvers.
The modular approach ensures a fit with the new space industry, where
constellations of satellites require systems that can be easily integrated into
their platforms and that meet the low-cost and quick time requirements.
Electrospray thrusters accelerate droplets and ions through an electric field,
producing thrust. The thrust produced by one emitter is very low, in the order
of 0.5 µN, therefore, hundreds of emitters must operate simultaneously to
provide enough thrust to perform orbital maneuvers. This project develops a
process to manufacture arrays of emitters using microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) technology. The emitter arrays can be arranged in modules of arbitrary
sizes to meet specific thrust requirements and benefit from the advantages of
MEMS manufacturing. These emitters are internally wetted, which means that the
propellant flows through a capillary and it is anchored at the emitter head
during operation, a desirable feature that is not found in other types of
electrospray emitters, such as porous emitters or externally wetted emitters.
This design may have better performances than other approaches because the
emitters are coupled with a network of microfluidic channels that provide the
necessary hydraulic resistance for correct operation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.