* 2314099
* Bio-Mediated Technique to Control Phase Changes of Porous Media in Seasonally Frozen Ground
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Tejo Vikash Bheemasetti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,174.00

This award will develop a bio-mediated technique to reduce freezing and ice lens
formation in soils using antifreeze proteins (AFPs) from psychrophilic (cold-
loving) microorganisms. The moisture in the seasonally frozen ground, when
subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, can develop large ice lenses that degrade the
performance of civil infrastructure and affects land surface characteristics
such as radiation balance and latent heat exchange. A significant amount of
rehabilitation efforts, chemicals, and conservative design approaches are
currently used to maintain cold-region infrastructure in serviceable conditions.
Our solution is to extract AFPs from psychrophiles and use them to change the
freezing characteristics of water in soil to prevent the formation of the
detrimental ice lenses. The research will be complemented by establishing an
educational and outreach program to engage undergraduate students in convergence
research on bio-inspired solutions to complex engineering problems and
incorporate cold-region bio-geotechnics in the curriculum.

The goal of this project is to investigate, optimize, and develop a bio-mediated
sustainable approach to control the phase change transformations of the pore-
water present in the porous media of seasonally frozen ground. The growth of
ice-lenses in porous soil media is a complex thermomechanical process that
depends on freezing rate, heat extraction, the equilibrium of thermal,
mechanical, and chemical forces, and effective stress on soil skeleton. We will
investigate the following specific objectives: (1) characterize the antifreeze
properties of moderate to hyperactive AFPs from different psychrophiles; (2)
investigate the bio-treated soilsâ€™ thermal characteristics including thermal
hysteresis, phase changes, freezing point and evaluate corresponding ice
inhibition, ice shaping, and ice recrystallization activities; and (3) evaluate
the resiliency of the bio-mediated technique to freeze-thaw cycles and
investigate the strength and deformation characteristics of the untreated and
bio-treated soils. This project will advance the knowledge base in applications
of AFPs, ice mechanics, and soil-ice interfaces to enhance resiliency of cold
region infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.