* 2314696
* Tariffs and Economic Development in the USA: New Evidence from a New Dataset of US Product-Level Tariffs, 1789 - Present
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Christopher Meissner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2026
* USD 582,266.00

This award funds an innovative research on the role of tariffs played in the
transformation of the US economy from an agricultural economy to an industrial
one in the 19th and 20th centuries. At the heart of this project is the
compilation of a new open-access database of US tariffs since 1789 for every
product covered by US tariff laws. The database will be easily accessible and
searchable using any text editor or a spreadsheet application and it allows
users to trace product-level tariff protection for the US economy since 1789.
The researchers will use this data set to investigate several trade-related
questions, such as why different products attracted different tariff structures,
what role tariffs played in the transformation of the US economy from an
agricultural economy to an industrial economy, and how tariff policies affected
congressional politics in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Having a
comprehensive open-access data of tariff rates will allow US consumers,
producers, and policy makers to better understand how tariff policy has evolved
over time. The data will also help users evaluate the economic impact of tariffs
on consumers and producers and thus the wellbeing of Americans. Since current
policies are a function of past policies and experience, this database will be
an important input for anyone thinking about the future of American trade
policy. The results of this research will inform tariff and other trade
policies.

This award funds and important and innovative research on the history of US
tariff policy. The central part of this research project is to compile a large
database of product-level tariffs from 1789 to 1988 and merged it with the
post-1988 tariff data. The data will be a user-friendly text-based database of
all US import tariffs and users will be able to find the statutory tariff rate
for each tariff line since 1789 as well as track tariff rates by SITC (revision
2) code as well. The researchers will use this dataset to study the political
and bureaucratic determinants of tariff rates in the early US republic (1789 â€“
1861). In addition, the research will study the incidence of tariff rates by
focusing on the progressivity and regressivity of tariff rates. The researchers
will also explore the connection between industry level productivity growth,
structural change, and tariff policy using novel identification strategies to
reveal causal impacts of tariff policy on these outcomes. The results of this
research will inform not only academic interpretations of US trade policy but
also help policy makers to better understand the aggregate and distributional
impacts of American trade policy. The results of this research will provide
inputs into more efficient trade policies thus increase economic growth, broaden
consumer and producer choice, and thus improve the wellbeing of Americans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.