* 2314850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acculturation and Mental Health among Immigrant Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Allison Hopkins, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 28,202.00

Acculturation refers to the processes and consequences of cultural change from
exposure to a new society. Recent studies show that immigrants in the U.S.
actively construct, negotiate, and achieve their own success frame of becoming
American within their ethnic communities. In this context, individual
Americanization is influenced by immigrants’ own socioeconomic contexts and
trajectories in relation to their ethnic communities. This research studies how
immigrants define acculturation at an ethnic community-level, and in what
context their struggle to be in accordance with the success can affect their
mental health. In addition to training a doctoral student in cultural
anthropology, this research sheds light on the relationship between the
multifaceted experience of immigrants results and health disparities, the
results of which will be disseminated broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences. This project also broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups.

This doctoral dissertation project incorporates participant observation, semi-
structured interviews, and surveys to examine: 1) whether there are different
patterns in the ways immigrants perceive and achieve the shared success frame of
“becoming American” in their ethnic community; and 2) whether the different
patterns explain variations in mental health among immigrants that cannot be
explained by linear acculturation scales alone. The project contributes to the
greater understanding of the dynamics and consequences of migration, by shifting
attention toward the lived experience of the individual and how the interlocking
relationship between culture and social structures results in immigrant health
disparities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.