* 2314270
* Collaborative Research: Improved Understanding of Subduction Zone Tsunami Genesis Using Sea Floor Geodesy Offshore Central America
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Timothy Dixon, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2026
* USD 106,613.00

Subduction zone earthquakes can cause tsunamis, a deadly natural disaster. In
the last two decades tsunamis generated near the land-ocean boundary have caused
a quarter of a million fatalities (the 2004 Sumatra event, Earth’s deadliest
recent natural disaster) and losses more than $200 billion (Japan’s 2011 event,
one of the most expensive natural disasters in history). A similar event is
likely to hit the US Oregon-Washington coast sometime in the future.
Unfortunately, the ability to forecast these catastrophic events is not very
good. This project will deploy and test several types of instruments for
measuring small motions of the seafloor that may be earthquake precursors. The
results will be used to improve forecasts and understanding of subduction zone
earthquakes and tsunamis.

The project will deploy new, cost-effective state-of the art sea floor geodesy
equipment offshore Central America, in two transects sampling adjacent segments
of the subduction zone. The two segments contrast in important geological and
geophysical characteristics, providing a unique opportunity for hypothesis
testing of the role of megathrust properties in tsunami generation. For example,
is accumulation of shallow slip deficit in the near-trench region of subduction
zones a necessary condition for a subduction-related tsunami? The question can
be answered by comparing strain rate profiles in two adjacent offshore segments
of the Central America subduction zone that contrast in earthquake
characteristics, locking behavior, and tsunami history. The seismogenic zone
offshore the Nicoya peninsula of Costa Rica has not produced a significant
tsunami in recorded history despite frequent M 7.2 – 7.8 earthquakes, while the
one to the north offshore Nicaragua and El Salvador generated tsunamis in 1992
and 2012. Assuming slip deficit accumulation is a necessary condition for
tsunamis, the project would expect to observe no slip deficit in the offshore
region of northern Costa Rica but observe a shallow slip deficit (locking?) in
southern Nicaragua, indicating the potential for another tsunami there in the
next few decades. One subtlety is the possibility of stress shadow effects,
whereby up-dip sections of the forearc are not frictionally ‘locked’ but rather
‘ride along’ with deeper locked asperities on the plate interface, accumulating
a partial slip deficit despite being frictionally stable. The trench-
perpendicular geodetic transects should allow assessment of this possibility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.