* 2314773
* Analyzing Language in Comparative Courts: A Multi-User Database of Judgment Texts in Appellate Courts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Susan Johnson, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 75,445.00

The rule of law and precedent are communicated to court audiences – including
policymakers and the public whom they serve – through written opinions.
Understanding opinion writing practices and language offers insight into judges’
motivations for arriving at particular decisions. Judicial scholarship has long
focused on the outcome of the case – who won and the resulting policy of a
decision – but less on its accompanying language. However, language matters in
understanding the rule of law. Furthermore, communicative elements in a written
opinion, such as its emotional tone, persuasiveness, and authenticity, provide
crucial information concerning judges’ goals, preferences, and the intensity of
their beliefs on difficult legal questions. This project offers a new theory of
judicial behavior by exploring language, writing styles, and communicative
elements used in court opinions of three important High Courts. These courts
practice the common law legal tradition of following precedent, as does the
United States, yet all operate with different processes and bases for their
rulings. Across diverse judicial cultures and settings, scholars can assess how
the rule of law and judges’ beliefs are revealed in opinion language,
challenging underlying assumptions of judicial behavior in courts that have
traditionally been viewed as less political. The project advances scholarly
debates on how opinion language takes shape and how it may be informed within
different court settings; it also informs policymakers concerning the
politicization of courts generally.

This research offers an opportunity for scholars, policymakers, and
practitioners to link existing judicial databases with fully searchable text
data across multiple High Courts. The database provides a significant supplement
to the existing High Courts Judicial Database, resulting in coverage of these
High Courts across a fifty-year period. Creating a valuable resource for
academic, student, and professional audiences and enabling research on a variety
of legal policy topics, the data provide a unique opportunity to generate
insight from a comparative perspective and to apply it to understand the rule of
law in democracies which share similar court features. The full-text opinion
database will offer a source for scholars and graduate students to tailor
research questions to examine judicial behavior, legal language, and courts as
institutions from a multitude of perspectives. These data provide substantial
promise for future investigations beyond this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.