* 2314868
* ACED Fab: Co-Design of Novel Electronic-Photonic Systems for Energy-Efficient Coherent Optical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Samuel Palermo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Dramatic improvements in datacenters and high-performance computing systems’
interconnect bandwidth-density and energy-efficiency are necessary to support
advances in machine learning, artificial intelligence, sensor systems, and 5G/6G
workloads. However, there are fundamental limitations to scaling data rates in
conventional intensity-modulated direct detection (IMDD) optical links due to
the extreme baud rates, i.e. changes in signals per second. Coherent optical
interconnects offer a potential solution, as they modulate both the amplitude
and phase of the optical carrier and utilize dual polarization (DP) operation to
allow for a dramatic increase in bandwidth-density per wavelength. While
coherent optical links are spectrally-efficient, key challenges include limited
silicon photonic modulator bandwidth, high-power transceivers due to independent
design of the photonic devices and front-end circuitry, sensitivity to photonic
device fabrication variations, and high-power receiver-side optical carrier
recovery that is commonly performed in a complex digital signal processor (DSP)
block. This proposal addresses these important issues by co-designing high-
bandwidth photonic devices and advanced-node CMOS front-ends that can adapt to
variations in optical device performance and by utilizing a power-efficient
receive-side carrier recovery scheme based on a dual-loop optical phased-locked
loop (OPLL). The proposed technology will enable energy efficient coherent
optical transceivers that will allow dramatic scaling in datacenter traffic
capacity to support the unprecedented growth in networked devices driven by
emerging applications such as connected automobiles, for example.

This proposal’s research goal is to develop a coherent optical interconnect
architecture with novel high-bandwidth quadrature modulators with thin-film
LiNbO3 (TF-LN) Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZMs) and quadrature demodulators with
graphene photodetectors. Co-design of energy-efficient CMOS transmitters with
dynamic voltage frequency scaling (DVFS) with efficient switching regulators and
energy-efficient CMOS receivers with DVFS, adaptive bandwidth front-ends, and
auto-tuned quadrature demodulators will be fabricated to accomplish this goal.
In addition, an optical phase-locked loop (OPLL) based carrier recovery scheme
with wide-range electronic voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO) tuning will be
developed. Applying the proposed technology will revolutionize the future of
both datacenter and high-performance computing systems due to its ability to
offer low-latency interconnects without error coding. This project will involve
an interdisciplinary team of 2 Texas A&M University (TAMU) students and 3-4
National Chung Hsing University (NCHU) students. Two sets of prototypes will be
implemented using two advanced CMOS processes, a silicon photonic process, and
custom-fabricated thin-film TF-LN integrated circuits. Project outreach
activities include exchange and visiting activities where TAMU and NCHU students
work together face-to-face on-site during critical IC design phases and also
participate in joint workshops, interactions with high school teachers via the
Enrichment Experiences in Engineering (E3) program and introducing basic
research concepts to PK-12 students through the Spark! Program. Project results
will be broadly disseminated by inclusion in the syllabus and website of a new
graduate course entitled "Coherent Optical Systems", the development of online
modules for academia and industry, and through publication in national and
international journals and conferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.