* 2314937
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biocultural Responses to Forced Resettlement
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Matthew Velasco, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 37,107.00

Throughout history, empires have adopted resettlement policies that forced their
subjects to leave home and begin new lives in faraway lands. Forced or coerced
migration remains a reality for many people today. The marginalized status of
resettled peoples can make it difficult to study their experiences in both the
present and the past. In ancient empires, most written accounts of resettlement
come from the wealthy and powerful elites who wished to present their actions in
a positive light, and forced relocation rarely leaves a clear material signature
for archaeologists to study. Often, researchers have overlooked such basic
questions as: how did people who were resettled adjust to their new reality?
What challenges did they face? To what extent was resettlement violent?
Bioarchaeology, the study of human remains from archaeological sites, provides
methods and tools to gain insight into the daily life experiences of people
relocated by states and empires. Since this is a doctoral dissertation research
project this grant furthers the student’s academic and intellectual development.
The project includes outreach to the local community.

This project uses bioarchaeology to study the life experiences of one resettled
community which was part of a larger process in which as many as 4,000,000
people were moved. The investigators collaborate with archaeologists to excavate
parts of an associated cemetery. They employ bone geochemistry to identify who,
among those buried in the cemetery, were most likely migrants in order to
compare them to non-migrant individuals from the same site. They study
indicators on the bones of excavated individuals to see if migrants experienced
violence or high rates of disease, and if they changed their diets or forms of
body adornment to conform to their new region. Comparing migrants to locals
reveal what tactics were used to control resettled subjects and how resettlement
shaped overall life experiences. The design of this project allows it to serve
both scientific knowledge and practice by facilitating an international
collaboration between women in scientific archaeology and promoting scientific
understanding of state-directed resettlement within and beyond the Inka case
study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.