* 2314303
* CAREER: High fidelity numerical simulations of turbulent flow separation at high Reynolds numbers with passive scalar transport.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Guillermo Araya, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 317,277.00

The proposed research will provide foundational knowledge on an issue in fluid
dynamics that is not well understood: flow separation and its association with
heat and contaminant transport. Flow separation occurs when fluid flow past an
object (e.g., wing of an aircraft) abruptly "detaches" from the surface. A
swirling motion, called wakes or vortices, is then formed in the separated
region which result in increasing the fluid drag force on the object. Flow
separation is unwanted and can seriously reduce performance of engineered
devices such as aircraft and turbines. The use of high-resolution numerical
simulations will permit the advancement of more efficient turbulence models.
Such models will facilitate the development of flow, heat, and contaminant
transport control tools to mitigate unwanted flow separation effects. The
proposed research and educational objectives will be carried out at a Hispanic
Serving Institution, located in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The educational
component of this project promotes the use of high-performance computing,
computational thinking, and modeling. Such concepts will be introduced to
undergraduate and graduate courses using flipped classroom concept. The post-
processed data and resulting codes will be made accessible to the public for
analysis and validation. Additionally, a computing and visualization facility
will be developed as a tool for research, learning, and outreach in departmental
Summer Camps for K-12 students and teachers.

The principal aim of this study is to numerically elucidate the details behind
passive scalar phenomena during boundary layer separation, resulting from the
two most frequent causes of flow detachment: streamwise and wall-curvature
driven pressure gradient, in combination and isolated forms. The study will
cover nearly the entire spectrum, particularly in the near wall region, where
experimental techniques and turbulence models exhibit severe limitations. By
identifying and tracking Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) and exploring the
relationship between LCS kinematics and passive scalar fields, it may be
possible to accurately explain the separation process. These research efforts
will apply the use of tremendous computational resources, requiring state-of-
the-art petascale, parallel and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) programming.
Specific objectives include i) perform Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) of
spatially-developing turbulent boundary layers under strong deceleration at
experimental Reynolds numbers, ii) understand the transport phenomena in the
separation process by means of low/high order statistics analysis and create an
LCS data bank along with iOS/Android apps for augmented/virtual reality, iii)
develop a unique data-driven modeling of sub-grid scale (SGS) in Large Eddy
Simulation (LES), focusing on the uncharted area of passive scalar. This project
is jointly funded by the Fluid Dynamics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.