* 2314912
* The geography of responses to heat risk: linking decision maker and public perceptions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Olga Wilhelmi, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 481,187.00

Extreme heat continues to negatively affect the health and wellbeing of millions
of people globally. The way people and policy-makers perceive heat risks is
likely to influence their protective responses to extreme heat. In this project,
the investigators will assess how populations perceive heat risks and engage in
response behaviors and will situate these against how policy and decision makers
understand their constituents’ perceptions and behaviors. By doing so, the
investigators will bridge the gap between how extreme heat risk and heat-
protective behavioral response options are being perceived by the public and how
they are perceived and managed by decision makers. This project contributes to
broader efforts to build resilience to extreme heat by local and regional
governments. New knowledge generated in this project has the potential to
improve heat governance, inform heat warnings and risk communication, and design
more effective public health interventions. The project includes research to
help those who are most vulnerable to heat and other types of weather hazards as
well as the decision and policy makers responsible for reducing these systemic
vulnerabilities.

This project contributes to theoretical and methodological advances in geography
and behavioral sciences and their intersection in a risk context. By collecting
and downscaling representative survey data to determine geographic variations in
heat response combined with decision-maker surveys to better understand their
perceptions and beliefs about their constituents, the investigators will examine
risk perceptions and responses to heat across different levels of heat
governance. This project will integrate emerging quantitative techniques for
spatial analysis and modeling of representative social survey data from national
to local scales with surveys of policy and decision-makers. The investigators
leverage the strengths of representative survey data and small-area estimation
using multilevel regression and poststratification to produce national, state,
and local estimates of public perceptions and responses to heat risk. This
approach provides a baseline from which to understand how decision- and policy-
makers responsible for heat governance understand their own constituents’
perceptions and responses and incorporate them into heat planning and response
efforts. Two workshops and one symposium gather researchers and stakeholders to
synergize learning and ideas across research projects on human and geographic
dimensions of extreme heat.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.