* 2314237
* Fostering Black and Latinx student STEM efficacy, interests, and identity: A participatory study of STEM programming and practices at one community-based organization
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Nielsen Pereira, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2028
* USD 788,916.00

Black and Latinx people are underrepresented in the STEM workforce. This project
examines how curricula and practices in a culturally situated, community-based
youth development program nurture and support the STEM engagement of Black and
Latinx boys and girls. Often research supporting out-of-school-time (OST)
activities in STEM and traditionally underrepresented youth takes place in newly
created learning environments. However, this program goes to where the youth are
already, the Downtown Boxing Gym. Building knowledge and understandings on the
inclusion of arts into gender-based STEM research could have implications for
the future of OST research and programming. The project will explore how out of
school learning spaces can broaden participation of Black and Latinx youth in
STEM focused learning opportunities. Participants in this project are 170-250
youth, ages 8-18, who are involved in the Downtown Boxing Gym in Detroit,
Michigan.

This project utilizes a mixed methods approach to collecting and analyzing
survey data, interview data, and video data using thematic and interaction
analyses. The goals of the project are to: (1) examine how youth learn STEM in
informal environments; (2) advance the knowledge base of informal STEM learning,
and (3) increase belongingness, broaden participation, and support learners'
participation in and understanding of STEM practices utilizing a student- and
practitioner- driven approach. During the school year, the program is offered
twice a day, five days each week, for one hour, and during the summer five days
a week, four hours a day. The program curriculum is collaboratively created by
staff and students and may include topics and activities such as: 3D modeling,
video game coding, environmental analysis of wildlife, chemistry, artificial
intelligence/facial scanning, and robotics programing/construction.

This Type 4, Integrating Research and Practice, project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that:
(a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's
role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational
success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d)
foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and
empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve
community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's
engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.