* 2314653
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Learning Without Formal Education
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Barry Hewlett, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 31,500.00

Humans are remarkably adept in adapting to diverse natural and social
environments. This is made possible in large part by their capacity to learn
from others. Furthermore, human adaptation arises in contexts without formal
education. In many societies where education arsies informally, children acquire
critical skills and relevant knowledge rapidly and beginning at an early age.
This project examines from whom and how children and adolescents learn complex
skills and knowledge in contexts lacking formal education. The study considers
how a childâ€™s age, gender, cultural ideas about what children can and cannot do
at particular ages, and cultural values impact from whom and how children learn.
The research project disseminates its findings to academics, policymakers, and
the general public to expand the understanding of the diverse ways by which
children learn and how these insights might be incorporated into formal
education systems. The project also provides research and training opportunities
to graduate students in scientific cultural anthropology.

Specifically, this doctoral dissertation project weighs theoretical debates
about learning without formal education in culturally distinct neighboring
communities within contexts in which intercultural marriages are commonplace
versus rare. It addresses whether these contexts affect whether knowledge is
transmitted from parent to child, from peer to peer, or from unrelated teachers.
It further tests whether learning is biased according to content, commonness, or
to prestige of the teacher. The investigators use a variety of semi-structured
parental and child interviews as well as behavioral observational techniques to
provide systematically acquired qualitative and quantitative data to address
theoretical debates that are frequently abstract. In doing so, the research
project contributes to a key area of scientific anthropological inquiry that
currently lacks sufficient empirical evidence to weigh among alternative models
of social learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.