* 2314560
* Collaborative Research: Embedded Mechano-Intelligence for Soft Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kon-Well Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 454,020.00

This collaborative Foundational Research in Robotics (FRR) project will create
soft materials with integrated sensors, interconnections, logic circuits, and
actuators. These materials will enable the development of soft robots with
perception, processing, and responsiveness distributed throughout their
structures. These capabilities will be demonstrated by a soft robotic platform
that can recognize and sort simple objects by their shape, size, and weight,
using only these novel materials and without requiring any additional sensing or
computing. This soft material-based manipulator will be the first step towards a
new class of soft robotic components that can coordinate and intelligently
engage with objects in their environment, for a range of practical purposes.
Such devices represent a major step for the field of soft robotics and will
broadly advance the future of motion control systems, autonomous haptic devices,
self-aware sensor-actuator networks, and more. Potential impacts may be felt in
societally important application areas such as manufacturing, transportation,
and biomedical devices. The research will be coupled with an extensive outreach,
education, and mentoring program that integrates the research concepts into
classroom and engagement activities among multiple diverse student groups.

The research goal of this project is to establish a fundamental synthesis of
material and functional components in soft matter to embody intelligence,
endowing robots with new capabilities that will significantly enhance their
autonomy as compared to the current systems that heavily depend on add-on
hardware. The new system will require less electric power and have faster
reactions and better survivability than current systems. This project will
culminate in a soft robotic sorting manipulator that autonomously detects
physical characteristics of items and positions those items into proximity with
objects having similar features. This goal will be achieved by a novel
integration of embedded mechano-intelligence and field-responsive polymers.
Together, these constituents will process information regarding item shape and
weight and will trigger reconfiguration of the manipulator so as to position the
items into distinct categories. By requiring only a low-voltage input to
function, the embedded mechano-intelligence employs only the necessary
computational power and eliminates conventional controllers and failure-prone
electrical wiring in soft materials. The field-responsive polymers will be used
in conjunction with principles of elastic stability theory to minimize the
actuating authority required to reconfigure the load-bearing manipulator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.