* 2314294
* PFI-TT: Cost-Effective OLED-based Infrared Sensor for Commercial Implementation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Do Young Kim, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This project is jointly funded by PFI Program, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop cost-effective and high-
resolution sensors using an innovative semiconductor structure called organic
light-emitting diode (OLED). Currently many inexpensive silicon-based image
sensors are used in various consumer cameras, but these are limited to what the
human eye can see. Indium Gallium Arsenide (InGaAs) based infrared image sensors
do not have this limitation, but these are expensive and lack resolution
quality, preventing them from being implemented into household products. Until
now, there has been no affordable infrared sensor technology suitable for a wide
range of commercial applications. The proposed cost-effective OLED-based
infrared sensor technology will eliminate all of these limitations, making
implementation of this technology into household products possible.

The proposed project aims to develop an innovative OLED-based infrared sensor
prototype using the unique optical readout integrated circuit (ROIC) integration
approach. Unlike traditional InGaAs-based short-wave infrared (SWIR) image
technology with prices of $10,000 and more, and limited pixel resolution of
about 1 megapixel, the proposes OLED-based infrared sensor structure will make
these cheaper (< $500) and high-resolution (> 100 megapixels). The infrared
sensors will have unique features to achieve these goals: (1) epitaxial-free
colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) will be used as the SWIR sensitive material, and
(2) the SWIR-to-visible up-conversion OLED with CQDs will directly convert SWIR
images to visible images. In this unique SWIR image sensor structure,
inexpensive off-the-shelf visible image sensors will be used for optical
readout. This revolutionary SWIR image sensor will be fabricated by simply
stacking a SWIR sensitive OLED only optically (not electronically) on an
inexpensive image sensor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.