* 2314307
* Voces de Esperanza (Voices of Hope): An Exhibit and Framework for Supporting Climate Change Conversations with Latine Audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Cecilia Nguyen, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,999,483.00

This Integrating Research and Practice project leverages museum exhibits as
unique family learning spaces to promote community engagement in critical
climate change conversations. Most science centers have not been adequately
equipped to help diverse learners engage in climate change conversations, in
part because tested climate communication approaches have not included
culturally-specific strategies. This project will develop an exhibit design
framework to specifically address that need. Through equitable, culturally-
driven co-development and evaluation strategies that include Latine(x/o)
community members in all aspects of project development, this project will offer
Latine(x/o) youth and families opportunities to build awareness of and skills in
climate change conversations that can foster climate actions in their
communities. AB Cultural Drivers (ABCD) and Oregon Museum of Science and
Industry (OMSI) will collaborate with community members through a Colaborativo
(a community collaborative), formed through partner organization, Adelante
Mujeres. Together they will work toward the development and evaluation of a
500-800 sq. ft. bilingual (Spanish-English) museum exhibit, document and develop
resources to help others in the informal science learning (ISL) field co-create
and co-evaluate learning experiences, and co-develop an exhibit design framework
that forefronts Colaborativo processes and identifies culturally-specific
strategies to support climate conversations, especially among Latine(x/o)
exhibit visitors.

Knowledge-building evaluation will investigate Colaborativo processes, exhibit
design for climate conversations, and the visitor experience at the exhibit. All
evaluation questions, outcomes, methods, and interpretations will be selected
with the Colaborativo, with support from evaluation team members. Leveraging
existing expertise and experience in community based participatory research, the
team will use, and document for others to use, project management and navigation
structures that help community groups form, be creative, and exercise their
power to achieve results. The project will explore Colaborativo members' sense
of belonging and leadership and project team members' understanding of practices
that foster belonging for community partners and members. Methods for
Colaborativo processes may include journaling, photovoice, and interviews that
could be qualitatively coded for themes. The exhibition will integrate prior
science communication research in climate anxiety, hope, and belonging which
include well-tested approaches to starting climate change conversations and
keeping them open. Drawing on participatory popular education and community
based participatory research activities, the Colaborativo will shape learning
experiences for the participants. Evaluation for exhibit experiences will likely
explore perceptions of personal and community climate change relevance, skills
for engaging in climate change conversations, and climate action communication
skills to inform exhibit development through front end, formative, remedial, and
summative phases. Methods may include 100 naturalistic observations, 100
interviews, and video observations of 25 families, and participants will be
recruited from regional Latine(x/o)-focused organizations. The resulting
resources for public and professional audiences will be informed by
Colaborativo-led review that includes all project team members and external
review from project advisors. Resources for community members will illustrate
and support climate change conversations, and be developed to capture interest--
a graphic one-sheet, a facilitation guide, and a video guide. In addition to the
exhibit design framework, resources for professionals are expected to include
toolkits for others to use to implement a Colaborativo approach, infographics,
and videos to summarize project findings for the ISL field.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.