* 2314275
* Developing Sustainable Ecosystems that Support Women Transitioning from Incarceration into Technology Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hyunjin Seo, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,086,078.00

Structural inequities contribute to the disproportionate incarceration of Black
and African American women, as well as women from the working class. This
project will work toward redressing these inequities through developing and
researching an ecosystem designed to support formerly incarcerated women's
transition into careers that require technology-based skills or computational
thinking. This ecosystem will be comprised of partnerships among workforce
agencies, libraries as informal learning institutions, community-based
organizations, and universities in Kansas and Missouri. In the context of these
partnerships, library practitioners, specialists in computer science education,
and formerly incarcerated women will refine an existing hybrid program, which
includes both digital platforms and in-person learning at libraries, and which
teaches vital technology skills that support women's transition into the
workforce. Justice-impacted women, who participated in previous iterations of
this program, will act as peer mentors to new cohorts of women during the last
few months of their incarceration, as well as through the first years of their
workforce transition. Research will explore whether and how different elements
of the ecosystem enhanced the capacity of participating organizations to provide
sustainable supports that effectively fostered employment while reducing
recidivism. Because many contemporary occupations require a range of technology
skills, this project will advance knowledge and practice regarding
institutionalized supports that benefit women and their dependent children
through enhancing capacity to obtain secure employment.

Formerly incarcerated women, employment navigators from workforce agencies,
library practitioners, and university researchers will iteratively improve an
existing program designed to foster the workforce re-entry of justice-impacted
women. New features of this existing program include peer mentors and an
ecosystem approach that considers local labor markets and provides corresponding
employment resources. Research will explore whether and how the partnerships
contributed to the organizations' net capacity to provide employment-focused
technology education programs for women transitioning from incarceration, in
addition to whether and how participation in the ecosystem shifted the practices
of individual library practitioners, employment navigators, and peer mentors.
Research will also identify the major components of a sustainable ecosystem that
supports employment-focused technology education among justice-impacted women.
To achieve these research purposes, the project team will generate data such as
pre- and post-surveys of over 600 participating women, in addition to interviews
with a sub-sample of women; pre- and post-interviews with library practitioners,
employment navigators, and peer mentors; observations of in-person and digital
educational sessions; and focus groups at co-design sessions. Longitudinal and
constant comparative analyses of these data sources will generate empirically
based and actionable insights regarding how relevant agencies can partner
together to foster sustainable systems that effectively support formerly
incarcerated women's transition into a technology-based workforce. Results will
be shared widely through a project website, library association meetings,
professional journals in technology education and research, and workforce
services networks. This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects
that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM
learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and
educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific
discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the
theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f)
improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the
public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.