* 2314893
* Identifying Systemic Racism in Mathematics Teacher Education:  Building a Cross-Site Community with Preservice Teachers of Color
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Peter Eley, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2028
* USD 343,789.00

This project will make significant contributions to racial equity in STEM by
identifying and describing forms of systemic racism inherent in mathematics
teacher education programs (MTEPs). Racialized mathematics teaching practices
are systemic in elementary mathematics classrooms, and the impacts of systemic
inequities in K-12 mathematics education both deter students from diverse
backgrounds from becoming interested in math, reducing their likelihood of
engaging in STEM; and affect students’ identities by devaluing or erasing their
diverse cultural backgrounds and perspectives. Since teachers are the key to
ensuring racial equity in classrooms, identifying racialized mathematics
experiences must begin with mathematics teacher education programs. In this
innovative study, a project team comprised of mathematics teacher educators of
color (MTECs) will collaborate with 12-15 Preservice Teachers of Color (PTOCs),
in authentic partnership, from three unique MTEPs (at an HBCU, an HSI, and a
PWI) to form a cross-site Critical Mathematics Professional Learning Community
(CMPLC). By documenting PTOCs’ racialized mathematics experiences across three
sites, the project will: (1) gather fundamental knowledge on the racialized
mathematical learning and teaching experiences of PTOCs, (2) build knowledge of
racialized mathematics experiences and their overall impact on the preparation
of PTOCs, and (3) inform teacher education programs across content and contexts.
As Black and Latinx scholars with extensive experience in teacher education, the
project team conceptualized this creative project to illuminate new ways of
nourishing and affirming PTOCs’ racial identities and cultural strengths in
mathematics teacher education.

The project team will collaborate with participating PTOCs to analyze data
generated from focus groups, individual interviews, CMPLC conversations,
journals, and field notes using interpretative phenomenology analysis, case
study methodology, and thematic analysis. Participating PTOCs’ students,
especially the culturally and linguistically diverse students in their
classrooms, will benefit from this project by receiving increased opportunities
to learn mathematics in ways that bolster their STEM identities. The project
will fill a gap in the research literature by: (1) increasing the knowledge on
the mathematics teacher preparation of PTOCs; (2) centering the voices and
experiences of PTOCs and mathematics teacher educators of color in a cross-
racial and cross-cultural project; and (3) bringing unique perspectives to the
design, implementation, evaluation, and dissemination of findings about both our
own experiences and those of PTOCs, as a PI team composed entirely of MTECs. By
attaining a deeper understanding of PTOCs’ mathematics learning experiences, we
advance racial equity by exposing racist teaching practices that disadvantage
historically marginalized students and identifying changes in teacher education
that will identify and address practices that obstruct racial equity in STEM.

This collaborative project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education
activity (EHR Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice
projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the
improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with
NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate. The
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program contributed to the funding of this
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.