* 2314915
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Collaborations for Equity in Marine and Climate Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Chrystal George Mwangi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,524.00

Marine and climate sciences (MCS) scientists play an important role in society
because of their focus on both local and global issues affecting the environment
and people. Yet MCS are some of the least diverse STEM disciplines, including
limited change in the number of Black, Indigenous and People of Color (BIPOC) in
MCS over the past 40 years. Climate and culture in MCS have been identified as
actively contributing to the low participation and retention of BIPOC
individuals in the disciplines and their disparate academic and professional
outcomes, through gatekeeping, professional barriers, and other obstacles. The
purpose of this research project is to examine how Woods Hole Collaborative
Network (WHCN) researchers and administrators advance collaborations for equity
in MCS and what processes are employed for developing equity-driven and anti-
racist educational collaborations, infrastructures, and pathways. Project
outcomes will span individual, institutional, and disciplinary level
transformations. This research project will investigate the WHCN, a multi-
organizational collaboration between six predominantly white institutions
located in Woods Hole, Massachusetts. The project focuses on three questions:
(1) What features among the WHCN promote or inhibit institutional and
disciplinary transformation? (2) In what ways has the WHCN pursued equitable
collaborations and how has their collaboration evolved over time? (3) What
effective and ineffective features of the WHCN’s initiatives can inform MCS
collaborations? Drawing from nearly 20 years of WHCN’s programmatic efforts,
researchers will utilize an instrumental case study to center the context and
processes of a bounded case, with organizations (e.g., institutions) and
individuals (e.g., students, scientists, and affiliated staff) as units of
analyses. An instrumental case aligns with the project’s goal to develop a model
that maps the process and infrastructure for transformation. The research design
includes: (1) BIPOC storytelling and standpoint centering through qualitative
interviews and qualitative network mapping with Woods Hole-affiliated BIPOC
students, scientists, and alumni; (2) organizational and historical analysis
through observations of WHCN initiatives, historical analysis of WHCN’s
development, and analysis of student data, documented policies, activities,
goals and procedures related to WHCN; and (3) model development, which will
reflect a replicable and scalable model for equity-centered support in STEM
collaborations.

This collaborative project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education
activities (EDU Racial Equity). The program supports research and practice
projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the
improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with
NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Funds for EDU Racial Equity are pooled from programs across EDU
in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and
development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.