* 2314813
* NSF ACED: ROOTS: Real-time Optimization Of Transceiver Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jeffrey Walling, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Future wireless systems such as those proposed for the sixth generation of
wireless networks (6G) will expand upon our present networking capability and
provide for new and emerging services such as augmented/virtual reality, remote
surgery, sensing, and imaging of our environment. This will require new wireless
circuits and systems that are more precise than those required for previous
generations of wireless networks. The goal of this research is to use machine
learning to continuously improve the precision and accuracy of wireless circuits
and systems. This can enable wireless devices to operate more efficiently and
provide more robust wireless connectivity. The proposed investigation will also
provide insight into embedding machine learning directly with RF transceiver
hardware. This research that is focused on the investigation of CHIPS will
result in the design of novel integrated circuit and integration techniques that
are promising for 6G. In addition to the scientific outcomes of the
investigation, this proposal involves international collaboration between
universities in the United States and Taiwan. The educational objectives will
cross-train 4 Ph. D. and 4 M.S. students between the partnering universities in
both countries. The investigators also plan curriculum development for their
undergraduate and graduate courses in circuits and systems design and plan to
involve undergraduate students from their courses at earlier stages of their
educational development in the research associated with the proposal.

The objective of this proposal is to investigate the use of machine learning to
continuously calibrate and optimize millimeter wave (mmWave) transceiver
hardware. This is warranted because the projections for 6G expand the use of
mmWave and near-THz spectrum, which require circuits and systems that can
operate flexibly and with better linearity across wider instantaneous bandwidth.
Commercially produced transceivers now use 100s-1000s of bits for trimming and
calibration; however, many of these trims are only performed at the initial
programming of the integrated circuit on automated testing equipment. This
creates a large calibration and optimization space that this project will use to
investigate continuous background optimizations using a local, efficient
neuromorphic compute-in-memory system. As part of the program, highly trimmable
digital transmitters will be integrated with a low-power calibration receiver
that will be used to estimate transmitter parameters. The outputs of the
receiver will be input into a neuromorphic computing accelerator with compute-
in-memory (CIM) that will be running calibration/optimization algorithms that
control the transmitters trimming and calibration bits. The project has two
phases. In the first phase, the transceiver circuits and neuromorphic computing
accelerator will be designed separately and characterized. They will be co-
packaged for initial investigation of the interface between the systems. In the
second phase, the experimental findings from phase one will be used to guide
integration in phase two. The phase two demonstration experiment includes a
fully integrated system and experiments on system optimizations to improve the
system efficiency and linearity. The findings from these experiments will
provide relevant information to scale designs for future systems that add
complexity including multiple-input, multiple-output systems for wireless
beamforming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.