* 2314339
* Collaborative Research: Self-regulated non-equilibrium assembly of chiral colloidal clusters via electrokinetic interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ning Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 222,243.00

Non-technical abstract

Autonomous motion and transport of microscopic objects are essential for
maintaining the bioactivities of all living species. Although natural systems
have evolved to possess extremely delicate biochemical motors, the development
of synthetic motors lags way behind in complexity and efficiency. This research
aims to provide the fundamental knowledge necessary for developing new types of
synthetic microrobots driven by non-invasive alternating-current electric
fields. In particular, the research team investigates the interplay between two
types of electric-field-induced solvent flow surrounding microscopic particles.
Precise control of such kind of particle interactions provides a new mechanism
for cargo capture, transport, and delivery by the colloidal micromotors in a
lab-on-a-chip device. Moreover, the organized structures formed by those
micromotors are excellent building blocks for making functional materials that
exhibit exotic optical properties for applications in superlenses, cloaking
devices, and molecular sensing. In addition, this award also plans to develop
hands-on learning modules to engage underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.

Technical abstract

This project aims to answer a fundamental question in colloidal physics: what is
the nature of the electrokinetic flow around a charged dielectric particle near
an electrode when subjected to a perpendicularly applied alternating-current
electric field? A series of recent experiments strongly suggest that the
classical theories on electrohydrodynamic flow and induced-charge electroosmosis
flow are insufficient to capture the propulsion and non-equilibrium assembly of
charged dielectric particles because it only considers the electroosmotic flow
originating from the electrode. Instead, this project investigates the impact of
the concentration polarization of the electric double layer around the charged
particle on a new type of electrokinetic flow (the concentration-polarization-
induced electroosmosis) via complementary experimental and theoretical studies.
In addition, the hydrodynamic interactions originating from multiple types of
electrokinetic flow are exploited to achieve the self-regulated out-of-
equilibrium assembly of multiple colloids into uniform clusters with complex
symmetries. Finally, perturbation theory and Brownian dynamics simulations are
used to investigate the role of hydrodynamic interactions in the assembly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.