* 2314068
* PFI-TT:  Development of Blue Phosphorescent OLEDs with Improved Lifetime and Efficiency using Plasmonic Electrodes for Portable Displays
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Deirdre O'Carroll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve the efficiency and
operational lifetime of organic light-emitting diode (OLED) displays used in
portable electronic devices. The project will enhance scientific and
technological understanding of the barriers to obtaining efficient, durable blue
light emitting OLEDs and address these issues using advanced photonic materials
that are compatible with current OLED manufacturing methods. The innovation has
the potential to improve the battery life and reduce the cost of use of portable
electronic devices (e.g., cell phones, smart watches, tablets, headsets) by
reducing the power consumption of the display and by improving its operational
lifetime. Through the project work, prototype OLED devices will be demonstrated
that contain novel electrodes that are compatible with chip manufacturing
processes currently used by OLED display manufacturers. The project will train
two graduate students in advanced photonic materials science and research
translation to a commercial prototype.

The proposed project will integrate plasmonic metasurfaces into the back silver
anode electrode of top-emitting phosphorescent blue OLED devices with the aim of
demonstrating superior stability and efficiency compared to current blue OLEDs.
The low stability and efficiency of the blue component of light emission in OLED
displays is a significant problem that OLED companies are interested in solving.
The proposed technology, which uses plasmonic metasurface electrodes, increases
the photostability of high-efficiency blue phosphorescent OLED materials by a
factor of up to 3.5 compared to those same materials without our technology. The
plasmonic metasurfaces accelerate the recombination rate of blue OLED phosphor
emission, which improves photostability by minimizing triplet annihilation
events. Additionally, the technology will improve OLED efficiency by increasing
light extraction because the metasurfaces reduce coupling to guided plasmonic
and photonic modes within the OLED layers. This PFI-TT project will enable
prototype devices incorporating plasmonic metasuraces to be demonstrated in the
state-of-the-art top-emitting OLED device architecture. The top-emitting device
architecture is particularly important to companies developing the next
generation of OLED displays, as it has better color quality and enables smaller
pixels and denser pixel integration compared with bottom-emitting OLEDs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.