* 2314214
* Conference: 2023 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on the Science of Adhesion; South Hadley, Massachusetts; 23-28 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Kevin Turner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 03/31/2025
* USD 19,500.00

This award provides support for 30 students and postdoctoral associates and ten
early career researchers to participate in the 2023 Gordon Research Conference
and Gordon Research Seminar on the Science of Adhesion. The meeting will be held
at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts, US, from July 22 to 28,
2023. This award aims to increase the participation of students and postdoctoral
associates as well as early career researchers from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. Support provided by this award will facilitate the
participation of a diverse cohort of students and early career researchers from
a broad range of institutions and disciplines. Adhesion science is
interdisciplinary, and participants from multiple fields will be supported. The
engagement of students and early career researchers in this meeting will help to
ensure continued innovation in adhesion science and engineering.

The Gordon Research Conference and the affiliated Gordon Research Seminar on the
Science of Adhesion bring together a community with expertise and interests in
interfacial and surface phenomena with an emphasis on the relationship between
mechanics, materials, chemistry, and structure of systems where adhesion plays a
controlling role. The 2023 meeting will focus on advancing our ability to
understand and control adhesion across length scales for a broad set of
applications. The meeting will include discussions of advances in understanding
adhesion and interfaces in soft, structural, and biological materials.
Interfaces with deterministically controlled adhesion are crucial in a range of
applications, including medical devices, robotics, human-machine interfaces, and
sustainable materials.

This project is jointly funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures
(MoMS) Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(CMMI) and the Biomaterials (BMAT) Program in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.