* 2314522
* Building a parsed historical corpus to investigate word-order change and variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Sapp, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 457,997.00

Living languages change over time in a number of areas, including not only
vocabulary and pronunciation, but also sentence structure. Historical
linguistics is concerned with documenting these changes and seeking explanations
for them. Changes in sentence structure often occur over an extended period of
time, including a period in which there is variation between various grammatical
patterns for expressing a basic notion. The only evidence for these changes
before the introduction of sound recording consists of written documents.
However, gathering sufficient evidence from written documents for a rigorous
scientific investigation of variation and change in grammatical patterns in the
history of a given language requires the examination of a large, parsed corpus â€”
a collection of texts that is divided into sentences, clauses, and phrases. This
project builds a parsed electronic corpus of a single language, covering
multiple centuries, geographical areas, and text genres. This allows for the
investigation of grammatical change and variation in the history of the language
as well as comparison with similar developments in related languages. The corpus
is publicly available for any researcher to use, and outreach to universities
and high schools promotes public awareness of the use of science and technology
to explore questions about the structure of language. The development of the
corpus also contributes to the training of the next generation of researchers in
linguistics including a postdoctoral researcher, graduate students, and
undergraduate students.

This project builds a 1.4-million-word syntactically parsed electronic corpus
including 165 texts spanning the years 1050-1950 and ten dialectal regions, and
a range of text genres. This requires substantial extension of existing
annotation schemes based on previous syntactically parsed corpora to accommodate
a broader range of syntactic phenomena, while also keeping the annotation scheme
as comparable as possible with those used in the handful of syntactically parsed
historical corpora of other languages. This project involves manual annotation
of texts, correcting errors that arise in automatic part-of-speech parsing,
disambiguation of many sentences, and cross-checking for accuracy of syntactic
annotations. The resulting annotated corpus fills a gap among the set of parsed
corpora the world's languages and is available free of charge to researchers
around the world, together with documentation on the use of the corpus. The
empirical data generated by this project informs research on the mechanisms and
spread of typological change over time across closely related dialects. The
corpus can be used to investigate phenomena not only in the domain of syntax,
but also in the interfaces between syntax and other components of grammar. Given
the broad range of texts in the corpus, these phenomena can be examined
synchronically, diachronically, sociolinguistically, and in comparison with
other languages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.