* 2314210
* Thermal Emission beyond the Conventional Kirchhoff's Law
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bo Zhao, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 351,337.00

Thermal radiation is constantly exchanged between objects around us. The two
fundamental properties to characterize the ability of an object to emit and
receive thermal radiation is the emissivity and absorptivity, respectively.
Kirchhoff’s law of thermal radiation, proposed by Kirchhoff in 1860, is
considered to be the first of the laws of thermal radiation. Kirchhoff’s law
establishes the fundamental equivalence between absorptivity and emissivity, and
for over 150 years, it has been widely used in measuring and computing
emissivity of thermal emitters. However, the validity of Kirchhoff’s law is not
a requirement of thermodynamics, and it breaks down for nonreciprocal thermal
emitters. Despite the great benefits of nonreciprocal thermal emitters in solar
energy, heat rectification and circulation, the understanding of nonreciprocal
thermal radiation is lacking. This project aims to demonstrate a new theory
valid for all thermal emitters, including nonreciprocal ones. We refer to this
theory as the generalized Kirchhoff’s law. Through the project, an integrated
research/education program will be established at the University of Houston by
creating new career opportunities for underrepresented groups and involving
minority and female students as undergraduate and graduate research assistants.
The PI will partner with Children's Museum Houston to create educational videos
related to thermal science.

From symmetry analysis, thermal emission processes in a thermal emitter could
be directly connected to the absorption process of the adjoint system of the
emitter. The goal of this project is therefore to develop a new generalized
Kirchhoff’s law based on this overlooked connection. To do so, the project will
directly demonstrate the breakdown of conventional Kirchhoff’s law through
numerical modeling and experimental measurement. The same procedure will be
applied to showcase the validity of the new generalized Kirchhoff’s law. There
is a long-standing debate on whether the validity of Kirchhoff’s law is
fundamentally backed up by thermodynamics or not. The result of the project will
shed light on this fundamental question. Another merit of the project is
establishing a theoretical modeling method for directly simulating nonreciprocal
thermal radiation, providing a coherent theoretical framework to understand
nonreciprocal thermal radiative heat transfer in far and near fields. Lastly,
the new generalized Kirchhoff’s law will provide the missing metrology technique
for studying nonreciprocal thermal radiation. The program will provide a new
paradigm for understanding thermal radiation that is beyond the description of
traditional Kirchhoff’s law, creating a new frontier in the thermal radiation
field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.