* 2314719
* Collaborative Research: Catalyst Free Activation of Peroxydisulfate under Visible Light to Degrade Contaminants in Water: Elucidation of Kinetics and Mechanism
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xingmao Ma, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 280,000.00

Organic micropollutants (OMPs) have become major threats to human and ecosystem
health in the United States and worldwide. Many OMPs are not efficiently removed
by conventional water treatment processes. Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs)
such as the commercial UV/AOP process are increasingly being utilized as a final
treatment barrier to remove OMPs in advanced water reclamation and reuse plants
in the United States and worldwide. In a typical UV/AOP process, UV-C light (254
nm in wavelength) is combined with an oxidant (e.g., hydrogen peroxide) to
generate OH● free radicals that can destroy and mineralize OMPs including
personal care products, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, herbicides, etc. Recently,
AOPs based on sulfate radicals (SO4●-) have gained worldwide popularity due to
the higher redox potential and longer lifetime of SO4●- radicals compared to
those of OH● radicals. Sulfate radicals are typically generated on site by
activating one of two common precursors: peroxymonosulfate (PMS) and
peroxydisulfate (PDS) using a catalyst or photolysis. Recent studies have shown
that PDS can be activated by visible light without using catalyst thereby
providing new opportunities to develop more cost-effective AOPs for large-scale
water treatment and wastewater reclamation. The overarching goal of this project
is to advance the fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of sulfate radical
generation from PDS by visible light activation and determine the efficacy of
this sulfate radical-based AOP to degrade and mineralize different classes of
OMPs. The successful completion of this project will generate new fundamental
knowledge to guide the design and implementation of sulfate radical-based AOPs
for the removal and destruction of OMPs from wastewater and contaminated
drinking water sources. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of one undergraduate and
two graduate students at Texas A&M University and one graduate student at the
University of Cincinnati.

Sulfate radical (SO4●)-based advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are
particularly attractive due to their larger redox potential and much longer
half-life (30-40 microseconds) compared to those of hydroxyl radicals (OH●, 20
nanoseconds). In addition, the low bond dissociation energy of the O-O bond in
peroxydisulfate (PDS), a primary precursor of SO4●-, suggests that activation of
PDS is feasible by visible light without a catalyst. However, the practicality
of a catalyst-free and visible light activated PDS AOP depends on the quantum
yield of SO4●- and the properties of OMPs, which have been shown to promote the
formation of other radical species including OH●, superoxide (O2●), and singlet
oxygen (1O2) in aqueous solutions containing anions (chloride, carbonate, and
phosphate) and natural organic matter. To address these challenges, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose to carry out a fundamental
study of the kinetics and mechanisms of degradation of six (6) target OMPs with
distinctively different molecular structures using a catalyst free and visible
light activated PDS advanced oxidation process. The specific objectives of this
research are to 1) measure the quantum yields of activated PDS by visible light
at three monochromatic wavelengths; 2) identify and quantify reactive species in
a broad spectrum of light to establish the potential advantage of visible light
activation of PDS over UV light activation for the generation of SO4●- radicals
; 3) determine the degradation kinetics of six (6) target OMPs under different
environmental conditions; and 4) combine and integrate multiple experimental
assays/tools (e.g., colorimetry and electron paramagnetic resonance
spectroscopy) to elucidate and confirm the primary and secondary reactive
species responsible for contaminant degradation in sulfate radical-based AOPs.
The successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to guide the design
of more cost-effective and sustainable AOPs for water treatment and wastewater
reclamation. To implement the education and training goals of the project, the
PIs propose to leverage existing programs at Texas A&M University (TAMU) and the
University of Cincinnati (UC) to recruit and mentor undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups to work on the project. In addition, the PIs plan to
integrate the findings from this research into existing environmental
engineering graduate/undergraduate courses at TAMU and UC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.