* 2314322
* Conference: Prosodic and psycholinguistic connections in verb-initial languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Kristine Yu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 42,609.00

Some languages around the world have the special linguistic property of being
verb initial in word order, e.g., “Read Maria the book” rather than “Maria read
the book". In fact, languages belonging to a diverse variety of language
families are verb initial. Better understanding the commonalities and
differences between languages that are typologically similar yet unrelated can
advance linguistic theory. To foster this understanding, this special session on
prosody and psycholinguistics in verb-initial languages is held during the
annual meeting of the Austronesian Formal Linguistics Association. The special
session brings together researchers who work on verb-initial languages in
Austronesian and other language families, creating a space for scholars who do
not normally collaborate to share ideas and perspectives, and to develop new
collaborations. It also introduces researchers working on understudied verb-
initial languages to current methods and theories in prosody and
psycholinguistics, with the aim of encouraging future work on a larger pool of
languages. In addition, the conference and special session feature work by
junior scholars and scholars from underrepresented communities.

This project supports the special session “Prosodic and psycholinguistic
connections in verb initial languages” to be held at the annual meeting of the
Austronesian Formal Linguistics Association. The conference regularly sees
approximately 40–60 attendees (faculty, postdocs, graduate and undergraduate
students) from around the world. The special session is designed to bring in
researchers who work on prosody and psycholinguistics in verb-initial languages
to help advance theoretical work by creating a space for scholars who do not
normally collaborate to share ideas and perspectives. The special session
fosters discussion of the commonalities in the comprehension and production of
verb-initial languages and the prosody of verb-initial languages. These
discussions lead to studies that, in turn, inform existing theories of sentence
processing and prosody, which have been developed primarily based on verb-medial
and verb-final languages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.