* 2314616
* Predicting the spread and impact of transmissible vaccines
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Scott Nuismer, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 664,468.00

Infectious diseases that normally thrive in wild animals occasionally make the
leap into the human population. For instance, rabies virus infects and kills
tens of thousands of people each year when wild animals carrying the virus bite
humans and transmit the virus to them. Other viruses that occasionally leap from
animals to humans are even more dangerous because they can also transmit from
human to human and thus potentially seed epidemics or pandemics. Unfortunately,
we do not yet have effective solutions in place to stop these infectious
diseases from spilling over into the human population. Instead, our current
approach to these animal diseases is reactive, and focuses on medical treatment
of humans who have become infected and corralling human outbreaks before they
can spread and become full blown epidemics or pandemics. A promising solution to
this challenging problem is the development of wildlife vaccines that can spread
themselves from one animal to the next. By self-disseminating, these vaccines
magnify the spread of immunity within the wild animal population and reduce or
eliminate the risk of spillover into the human population. Although multiple
self-disseminating animal vaccines are being developed, we do not yet have the
mathematical, statistical, and computational tools we need to critically
evaluate their performance and thus make informed decisions about their possible
use. Work on this project will develop these quantitative tools and enable
candidate self-disseminating vaccines to be critically evaluated before they are
used. In addition, this project will train first-generation college students
from rural backgrounds to use mathematical and computational models to evaluate
and optimize emerging biotechnologies critical to the future of the US economy.
Student recruitment will be facilitated by offering competitive financial
support that relieves pressure to abandon research experiences in favor of
traditional employment. Finally, this project will continue development of a
website that explains self-disseminating vaccines to the public, disseminates
relevant research results, and examines the state of this emerging technology.

Before making the decision to conduct even small-scale field trials, the
likelihood that a self-disseminating vaccine will improve human health should be
quantified. This requirement poses a formidable technical challenge because data
on the behavior of the vaccine within the target animal population cannot be
collected prior to release. This project will overcome this technical challenge
using mathematical models of recombinant vector transmissible vaccines that can
be parameterized using a combination of field and laboratory data. Specifically,
mathematical models will be developed that integrate the age structure of the
reservoir population and the explicit pattern of vaccine shedding from animals
infected with vaccine. These models will take the form of a system of partial
differential equations. Field data will come from trapping studies of the
reservoir animal that record the age of each captured animal and whether it was
infected by the vector virus used to construct the candidate vaccine. Laboratory
data will describe the temporal pattern of vaccine shedding from reservoir
animals experimentally infected with the vaccine. Approximate Bayesian
computation will be used to parameterize the models and a stochastic simulation
framework developed for predicting the outcome of a proposed vaccine release. By
repeatedly simulating a vaccine release for models parameterized by drawing
randomly from the posterior distribution, this framework faithfully integrates
reservoir ecology, randomness in biological processes, and uncertainty in
parameter estimates. The methodology developed by this project will be applied
to a prototype self-disseminating vaccine for Lassa virus but will be broadly
applicable to self-disseminating vaccines developing for a range of animal
reservoirs.

This project is jointly funded by the Population and Community Ecology (PCE)
Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Mathematical Biology Program in
the Division of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.