* 2314018
* PFI-TT: Using waste plastics from regional manufacturing to create new building material
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Thomas Moran, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create pathways for using waste
plastic from manufacturing in the production of new facade products for the
construction industry. Only 8% of plastic discarded in the United States is
recycled today, pointing to a clear need for end-of-life solutions to divert
plastic waste from landfills or natural ecosystems. This research aims to
commercialize a novel technology for forming architectural panels from mixtures
of waste plastics. Given changing energy codes in the architecture and
construction industry, exterior walls are being built with a continuous layer of
insulation covered by finish panels known as rainscreens. This shift is quickly
expanding the market for rainscreen panel products. Moreover, new sustainability
mandates to reduce the carbon footprint of buildings are incentivizing
architects and builders to choose building materials with recycled content. The
patented technology featured in this proposal not only enables high percentages
of recycled content in each panel, but it also yields varied patterning from
panel to panel, recalling the authentic look of natural stone and distinguishing
this panel product from competitors.

The proposed project addresses key hurdles to producing a consistent
architectural product that meets performance and life safety codes while
sequestering unwanted post-industrial waste. Focusing on regional waste streams,
the research aims to evaluate the viability of thermoplastics generated by a
major automotive company’s assembly plants for use as feedstock for the panel
forming technology. Differential industry standards regulating automotive
components and building components require a thorough review of the material
compositions in the available waste streams. However, similar requirements for
flame spread, smoke propagation, and UV resistance suggest a high potential for
creating a new value chain between automotive waste and façade construction
industries. Testing samples will validate whether new mixtures can meet
necessary standards for bringing the technology to the next phase of
commercialization. Through this project, the development of a viable mix of
materials with recycled thermoplastics will advance research and development of
panels for facades into lightweight, low-carbon, durable and safe products.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.