* 2314417
* Swimming the Chaotic Seas: Invariant Manifolds, Tori, and the Transport of Swimmers in Fluid Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kevin Mitchell, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The dynamics and control of self-propelled bodies, from swarms of autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) and fish schools to populations of swimming bacteria,
are of great interest to biophysics and engineering. Yet, while much work has
focused on the collective behavior arising from interactions between
individuals, less is known about the dynamics of these individuals in external,
dynamically changing environments. This research will tackle the fundamental
question of how isolated, self-propelled swimmers are transported in unsteady
fluid flows. By leveraging tools from dynamical systems theory, such as those
used in analyzing the propagation of reaction fronts in fluid flows, this
project aims to create better understanding of the behavior of swimmers moving
in realistic flows in nature and the laboratory. This work will educate and
train the next generation of the scientific work force and will greatly impact
the growth and educational mission of UC Merced, a university that was recently
established in one of California's most economically challenged areas.

Stable and unstable manifolds are critical structures that control the transport
and mixing of passive particles in steady, time-independent flows. These
manifolds both partition the fluid into vortex cells and control the transport
between cells via “turnstile” lobes in the fluid. Lagrangian coherent structures
(LCSs) provide an analogous framework in unsteady, aperiodic flows. The
objective of this project is to adapt these theories to particles that are both
advected by the fluid and propelled under their own power. Invariant manifolds
and passive LCS are no longer the most relevant structures. Rather, swimming
invariant manifolds (SwIMs), which depend explicitly on the swimming speed,
along with SwIM edges and invariant tori, form key structures in the phase
space. This research will: (i) investigate the role of these structures in both
trapping swimmers and generating ballistic motion, (ii) explore the role of
SwIMs on restricting and guiding transport in chaotic environments, (iii)
develop a rigorous approach to account for swimmer noise in vortex flows, and
(iv) connect these ideas to real-world organisms and flows through
collaborations with experimentalists that study the transport of bacteria and
algae in microfluidic flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.