* 2314381
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Life history strategies within a population depend on cellular and organismal traits that underlie differences in resource acquisition and allocation
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Patricia Jones, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 406,710.00

All organisms need energy to fuel the biological processes of life. In general,
this energy can be allocated to three broad categories: growth, self-
maintenance, and reproduction. Said in another way, organisms can allocate
acquired energy to grow their body to achieve a larger size, to repair and
maintain their body to live longer, or to reproduce and create the new bodies of
their offspring. However energy is limiting, so if more is invested into growth,
less can be invested into self-maintenance and reproduction. This results in
allocation trade-offs, where some individuals are better at growing, while
others may be able to attain extreme longevity. While these patterns generally
hold in animals, in many species scientistâ€™s observe certain individuals who
appear to be able to do it all with few consequences, but little is known about
how this occurs. This proposal studies a long-lived seabird, Leach's storm-
petrels, that has been studied continuously at our site for the past 70 years.
This has revealed that while we have many individuals who show the expected
allocation trade-offs there are also many that somehow have escaped that trade-
off. Our work explores the molecular and cellular processes that underlie the
ability to avoid this trade-off. This work is focused on a fundamental question
in biology, and will help us to understand how molecular processes and
organismal performance affect longevity. This work also strongly supports
undergraduate science education, and will result in the development of inquiry-
based scientific modules used in middle school and high school classrooms.

Factors driving the evolution of diverse life history strategies both within and
between species remain a fundamental question in ecology and evolutionary
biology. Because resources are finite, many life history traits are subject to
intrinsic trade-offs. However, theoretical models have proposed that variation
in individual acquisition of resources can produce apparent positive
correlations between investment in reproduction and investment in survival
instead of the expected trade-off. This proposal tests these models by examining
phenotypic variation in strategies to balance the trade-off between current
reproduction and survival in a long-lived seabird, Leach's storm-petrels
(Hydrobates leucorhous), that has been studied continuously at our site since
1953. This proposal has three primary objectives: 1) to better understand the
molecular, cellular, and organismal performance traits that underlie the
observed variation in trade-off strategies in this population, and 2) to
determine if individuals who appear to escape the trade-off do so via higher
foraging efficiency as proposed in theoretical models, and 3) to determine
whether these trade-off strategies are fixed or plastic in response to
environmental variability. The proposed research is informed by our 70-year
demographic data set, and utilizes (i) a combination of novel technology and
molecular tools to understand the molecular, cellular, and organismal
performance traits that underlie the observed variation in trade-off strategies,
and (ii) experimental manipulations to explore whether these strategies are
fixed or plastic.

This project is jointly funded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.