* 2314759
* Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability and Magnetosonic Wave Emission Along Bursty Bulk Flow Channel Boudaries: Impacts on Near-Earth Plasma Sheet Dynamics During Substorms
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hava Turkakin, Utica College
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 202,312.00

Substorms are key elements of space weather applications and fundamental
processes of solar wind energy storage and release in Earth's magnetosphere.
Understanding substorm dynamics is essential in preparing for extreme space
weather events, which can cause strong disruption and damage to the performances
and the reliability of space-borne and ground-based technological systems. Among
many physical phenomena affecting the substorm dynamics, instabilities in the
magnetotail have caught much attention in recent years. This project will
investigate the evolution of Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability (KHI) and
magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) wave emission along Bursty Bulk Flows (BBFs) and
their potential impacts on the substorm dynamics. The project results will
expand our understanding of MHD waves and instabilities in the magnetotail and
their association with the substorm dynamics, which will contribute to a better
understanding of the magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. Therefore, the results
of this project will have direct applications in the active development of Space
Weather preparedness and building capabilities to forecast space weather
effects, supporting the latest focus of the National Space Weather Action Plan.
This project will also support an early career female scientist from an
underrepresented group, which supports NSF's Strategic Goals in diversity and
promoting the advancement of women in science. Furthermore, this project will
contribute to NSF's goal of developing a diverse and globally competitive STEM
workforce" by involving undergraduate students from Utica University (a
primarily undergraduate institution) and high school students from minority
groups in the greater Utica area as summer research students.

The overarching questions that motivate this investigation are: Do MHD waves
occur along BBFs, and if so, how do these MHD waves impact substorm dynamics?
What is the relationship between the KHI and MHD waves emission along BBFs and
associated substorm dynamics? Specifically: (1) What is the likely presence of
MHD waves associated with BBFs? If they are present, which solar wind conditions
are more favorable for the emission of these MHD waves? (2) If MHD waves are
present, are they often accompanied by KHI evolution along the BBFs? If KHI
evolution is absent during MHD wave emission, what other mechanisms might cause
these waves? How often and under what conditions MHD wave emission occurs with
KHI evolution? (3) What are the characteristics of these MHD waves, frequencies,
periods, phase velocities, etc.? Do they agree with the observed ULF wave
characteristics near BBFs? (4) How do these MHD waves affect BBFs' dynamics? (5)
What are the signatures of these MHD waves in the ionosphere? The team will use
CMIT-LFM coupled global MHD simulations code available at NASA's Community
Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC). Simulation results will be verified with
observations from the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during
Substorms (THEMIS) and ground-based observations from the Canadian Array for
Realtime Investigations of Magnetic Activity (CARISMA).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.