* 2314833
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Article Contraction as a Reflex of Case Assignment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Naomi Kurtz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2025
* USD 15,943.00

Many languages of the world have elements known as clitics. Clitics are small
words that attach to nearby words in different ways, depending on the language.
Cross-linguistically, many kinds of elements can be clitics. For example, in
English, the negative marker "n’t" is a clitic that attaches to a verb to form a
negative sentence: "He isn’t a good student." This project investigates one type
of clitic that has received some scientific analysis, but that has yet to be
studied comprehensively yet offers interesting structural features. This clitic
involves contraction of the definite article (words like "the" in English). The
target definite article is intriguing because whether it attaches to nearby
words depends both on phonology (speech sounds) and on syntax (the order of
words in a sentence). Because of its complex nature, a rigorous analysis of the
target definite article helps to broaden and deepen linguistic knowledge of
clitics more generally and of how different parts of grammar (syntax and
phonology) interact.

A main goal of this doctoral dissertation project is to work with native
speakers of three minoritized dialects of the target language to construct a
large data set. The purpose of this data set is to document how the definite
article behaves in a wide range of contexts, across different dialects and
speakers. The researchers conduct a formal syntactic analysis of this assembled
data set under the working hypothesis that contraction is a morphological reflex
of structural Case assignment that only surfaces in certain phonological
environments. A second goal of this project is to write a descriptive grammar of
the definite article of the target language. Upon approval of native speakers
collaborating on this project, the descriptive grammar is hosted on open access
platforms, so that researchers and the general public can access the grammar of
the target minority language, its definite article clitic, or about clitics
overall. Finally, an overarching objective of this project is to call attention
to a language that has been minoritized for hundreds of years as well as to help
combat language loss of minoritized languages more generally. In addition, an
exploration of a minoritized and understudied language such as the one under
focus holds great potential to uncover phenomena not found in other languages
and therefore to make a new contribution to linguistic theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.