* 2314440
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integration of Social Information in Sociolinguistic Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Annette D'Onofrio, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 10,714.00

Listeners can form expectations about how a person will speak based on a variety
of cues, before that person utters a word. Furthermore, research has shown that
those expectations can, in fact, influence how individuals hear and interpret
the person when they do speak. However, there are instances where individuals
might have multiple, distinct sources of information about a speaker that could
lead to conflicting expectations about how that person will sound. This
dissertation examines how listeners use cues to a speaker’s race and nationality
to inform their expectations about what the speaker sounds like. Minority ethnic
groups are often viewed as foreigners regardless of their relationship within
their home society. This view can lead to various kinds of discrimination,
including penalizing judgements about their proficiency as well as the
legitimacy of their identities. By considering an aspect of face-to-face
communication in the real world, namely that listeners can have several sources
of information about speakers available to them, including visual information,
information about a speaker’s nationality, and a speaker’s name, the overall
goal of this research is to shed more light on how listeners make sense of these
potentially competing sources of information when interpreting and evaluating
speech. Focusing on expectations about how minoritized speakers and their speech
in particular are viewed may inspire a public audience to reflect about the
expectations they hold, consciously or unconsciously, about these speakers.

This doctoral dissertation project consists of a series of experiments with two
main tasks: a speech-in-noise task in which listeners hear sentences in noisy
environments from many “speakers” and are asked to type what they hear, and a
social attributes ratings task in which they evaluate the “speakers” on various
scales including how foreign accented and clear they believe the speech of the
“speakers” were. The experiments differ based on how the “speakers” that
listeners encounter are represented; various combinations of photos to cue a
speaker as racially minoritized or from a majority ethnic group, written
biographies describing a non-immigrant or immigrant national, and written first
names to cue a speaker as racially minoritized or not will be used. The accuracy
of listeners’ responses from the speech-in-noise task and foreign accentedness
and clarity of speech ratings from the social attributes ratings task are
analyzed to assess which types of “speakers” are better understood and viewed as
having speech that is devoid of foreign accents and as easy to understand.
Findings may inform training programs in educational and workplace settings that
aim to reduce language discrimination against ethnic minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.