* 2314032
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How does groundwater contamination influence citizen-state relationships?
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Colleen Linn, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 29,066.00

The majority of human populations rely on groundwater as a drinking water
source. Groundwater contamination thus threatens global drinking water security.
PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) is an identified contaminant of
concern that has polluted environmental resources such as groundwater, posing
adverse human health effects. This project focuses on PFAS-contaminated
groundwater to understand how well users, public officials, and other
stakeholders manage and respond to the harm and uncertainty that PFAS in
groundwater poses for well water access. This project deepens our understandings
of how citizens perceive water toxicity, and investigates how those perceptions
impact drinking water use practices and involvement in remediation efforts. It
contributes to the training of a doctoral student in cultural and applied
anthropology and its results disseminated to academic and non-academic
audiences, including community groups and policymakers. The project develops a
new theoretical framework to understand how social relationships and citizen-
state relationships impact perceptions of risk and uncertainty in relation to
groundwater. The investigators use a suite of mixed methods, including
participant observation and semi-structured interviews, and community meeting
engagement to investigate the following research questions: 1) How is PFAS
contamination shaping drinking water remediation efforts across different
stakeholder groups? 2) How do well users and state agents perceive and
understand contaminated groundwater that affects well water quality, including
in terms of risk and uncertainty? 3) How do well users and state agents respond
to contaminated groundwater that affects well water quality? Results from this
research will help to understand how PFAS contamination is impacting groundwater
management and how government response to PFAS is organized to address
residential concerns about well water use and other environmental protection
concerns. It contributes to scientific cultural anthropological theories
surrounding citizen-state relationships and relationships among individuals and
their environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.