* 2314762
* Building a sustainable future for anthropology's archives: Researching primary source data lifecycles, infrastructures, and reuse
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Diana Marsh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,922.00

Anthropologists create data that are valuable, unique, and irreplaceable. They
often document complex human lifeways, languages, and cultural communities in
far greater detail than ever becomes available in a published form. Field
notebooks, letters, photographs, sound and film recordings, and other
documentation contain the data researchers draw on to publish new ideas, advance
our understanding of human life, past and present, and contribute to cultural
revitalization and reflection. Despite their importance within and beyond
anthropology, recent NSF-funded research has shown these unpublished archival
materials are often neither digitized nor findable via web searching. This
research project builds on these findings to develop and test best practices for
archiving original data across a range of formats. The project has immediate
applied implications, builds partnerships between researchers and archival
institutions, improves interdisciplinary and collaborative approaches to
graduate training, and enhances anthropology’s research infrastructure. For the
broad public, this project makes anthropological archives available as primary
sources to serve K-12 teachers and students, genealogists, artists, and more. It
trains graduate and undergraduate students.

The proposed research investigates the following questions: 1) What barriers
prevent primary source data from being reusable over time? 2) How can
anthropology and related fields sustainably adapt emergent linked data
infrastructures in support of broad access to cultural research data? The
investigators conduct focus group discussions to understand current movements
and future best practices for anthropology’s archival information
infrastructure, evaluate test collections in new open access platforms, develop
two training modules for anthropologists and data curators, and host a virtual
symposium. The project contributes to important debates surrounding the methods
by which and the benefits and limitations associated with the sharing of raw
data across a variety of formats.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.