* 2314956
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Testing a Framework to Evaluate the Quality of Chemistry Instructional Videos Students are Watching on YouTube
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ryan Sweeder, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 190,257.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying ways to improve
the quality of chemistry educational videos that students are accessing with
increasing frequency on platforms such as YouTube. This individual control of
learning allows students to find the right video to meet their needs at any time
of day. However, the huge number of videos and greatly varying instructional
quality means that students (and instructors!) need help narrowing down this
increasingly large volume of content to identify the most effective videos for
supporting student learning. The recent shift to remote instruction necessitated
by COVID made the quantity of videos even more unmanageable. This project aims
to identify elements of instructional videos that are most important for
supporting students’ learning of chemistry concepts and evaluate the extent to
which the most frequently watched chemistry instructional videos incorporate
those elements. This project will contribute to the advancement of knowledge by
identifying strengths and weaknesses of the most frequently viewed chemistry
instructional videos and indicate core introductory chemistry concepts for which
there is a need for more high-quality instructional videos. The video evaluation
framework developed as part of this project will serve as a resource both for
evaluating videos and for developing a set of guidelines that can be used for
developing high quality videos in the future.

The goal of this project is to develop and test an evidence-based framework for
evaluating the instructional quality of the most frequently watched chemistry
concept videos on YouTube. The educational, cognitive psychology, and chemistry
education literature have identified many important criteria for supporting
student conceptual understanding in chemistry. Instruction should connect the
levels of chemistry instruction (macroscopic, particulate, and symbolic),
include three-dimensional learning and causal mechanistic reasoning, and
actively engage students in the learning process. Effective instructional videos
should employ Mayer’s twelve multimedia principles based on the dual-channel
assumption, the limited-capacity assumption, and the active-processing
assumption, to engage students in learning. The framework based on these ideas
will be refined and tested with videos covering multiple core general chemistry
concepts such as Le Chatelier’s Principle, bonding, intermolecular forces, and
kinetic molecular theory of gases. For each core chemistry concept investigated,
specific expectations will be developed to identify how a video would meet each
criterion. Videos for analysis will be identified by conducting searches with a
variety of search terms and filtering the videos using the following guidelines:
(1) videos for educational purposes; (2) 15 min or less; (3) in English; and (4)
over 100,000 views. Selected videos will be independently coded by multiple
researchers using the developed framework to establish interrater reliability.
Data from the analyses will be used to answer the following research questions:
1. How well do the most watched chemistry videos for core introductory chemistry
concepts incorporate features that support conceptual understanding? 2. How well
do the most watched chemistry videos for core introductory chemistry concepts
incorporate the features of quality instructional videos? 3. What quality
criteria are most frequently incorporated into or missing from the most highly
viewed videos? 4. How frequently are videos that meet most/all the criteria for
high-quality instruction viewed? A robust evaluation framework combined with
identification of commonly lacking features, content area gaps, and engaging
video features will allow the project to provide clear recommendations for the
development of high-quality chemistry education videos that are attractive to
students and support conceptual learning in chemistry. Although this project
focuses on conceptual introductory chemistry videos, the aim is for the
evaluation framework to be suitable for use with minor modifications in other
chemistry subdisciplines (e.g., organic chemistry) or other science disciplines
(geology, biology, physics). The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.