* 2314519
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Investigating the Role of Scale in the Development of Flexible Irrigation Structures.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Andrew Bauer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 20,782.00

Scholars have endeavored to explicate the underlying mechanisms that contribute
to the resilience of contemporary infrastructure, which is increasingly
vulnerable to environmental and socio-economic risks. Archaeology holds a unique
position to provide relevant insights, as it can systematically investigate the
factors that have sustained certain kinds of infrastructure that have existed
for millennia. In this doctoral dissertation award the dissertation student, is
examining a particularly enduring piece of infrastructure — the qanat irrigation
systems — as a case study to evaluate its continued operation amidst numerous
episodes of external social and environmental shifts. Based on preliminary
research, the investigators it is hypothesized that the resilience of these
qanat systems can be ascribed to their management of small scale, which allows
them to rapidly adapt to environmental stressors. This research contributes to
the burgeoning literature on materiality, human-environmental relations, and
infrastructure by examining the role of scale in maintaining the social networks
within which technology operates. In a broader sense, the findings of this
project offer valuable insights into the potential advantages of decentralized
management in bolstering infrastructural resilience amid current ecological
crises. Additionally, the study advocates for the cultural heritage of the
underrepresented Uyghur community.

The dissertation student documents, assesses, and synthesizes the long-term
trajectory of qanat systems in response to climatic fluctuations, political
reconfiguration, and evolving agricultural practices system which can be traced
back over a thousand years. The project involves nine months of fieldwork on
over 200 functional qanat systems in the study region, utilizing an
interdisciplinary program of systematic surveys, palaeoecological
reconstruction, geochronological analyses, and ethnographic observation. This
award supports extensive Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) dating of the
qanat systems, a technique that has proven reliable for analogous systems in
multiple regions. Obtaining dates are necessary to establish a rigorous typology
of these systems and reveal relationships between qanat evolution and
environmental transformations, as well as the mechanisms by which these systems
have demonstrated exceptional resilience for millennia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.