* 2314201
* Towards the Future Direction of the NSF Program on the Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ritu Ritu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 12,538.00

The NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) program
has been critical in not only supporting the development and deployment of
innovative software and data products, but also in several workforce development
and community-building initiatives. The projects funded through the CSSI program
have promoted the nation's competitiveness and leadership in the fields of data,
High-Performance Computing (HPC), networking, cybersecurity, software, and
workforce development. A workshop on the "Future Direction of the NSF CSSI
Program" can be instrumental in gathering the community-feedback on the current
scope and objectives of the CSSI program and guiding its future direction such
that the nation's leadership in the aforementioned fields is maintained.

The goal of the workshop on the "Future Direction of the NSF CSSI Program" is to
bring together researchers and practitioners from the industry, academia, and
government laboratories to assess the impact of the CSSI program, share best
practices in supporting sustainable software and data products in present and
future, and identify gaps (if any) in the scope of the CSSI program and needs of
the community. A report resulting from this workshop will help inform NSF of
future directions for the CSSI program. The workshop will strengthen multi-
disciplinary collaborations on developing the cyberinfrastructure (software and
data) for supporting research and innovation in different fields of science and
technology. This project is critical for enabling the organization of the
aforementioned workshop and supporting the participation of a diverse range of
researchers and practitioners in the development of the future CSSI
solicitations. Some participants may need financial support for traveling to the
workshop. This project will help in supporting the travel of such participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.