* 2314360
* AON: Sustained observation and study of the rapidly evolving Arctic Ocean environment
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Sylvia Cole, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2028
* USD 409,235.00

Climate models predict that the Arctic will experience the greatest amount of
warming on the planet in the coming decades. Seemingly consistent with those
modeling results, Arctic sea ice extent and total volume have decreased markedly
since the turn of the century. The expanded areas of the sea surface exposed to
the atmosphere in summer are warming and ocean currents are carrying that heat
below the ice-covered regions to drive additional ice melting from below.
Sustained observations of the rapidly-evolving Arctic Ocean are vital for
documenting ongoing changes and exploring the responsible mechanisms, research
that will ultimately lead to improved ability to forecast the future state of
the Arctic. This award will support annual deployments of autonomous, expendable
instrument systems (called Ice-Tethered Profilers, ITP) that sample and report
in real time the sea water temperature and salinity of the upper ocean as the
buoys drift with their supporting sea ice floes, continuing an observational
record initiated in 2004. These data have proven to be a valuable resource for
scientific research, student projects, and operational forecasting; to date,
approximately 275 research papers have been published and numerous student
dissertations written that have utilized ITP data. Over the duration of this
5-year award, a total of 18 ITP systems will be constructed, tested and deployed
in the Arctic on cruises of opportunity with the resulting data being made
publicly available and preserved in national data archives. Improved forecast
skill based on these and other polar observations will allow more efficient
planning for resilient coastal infrastructure, fishery and resource extraction,
navigation, search and rescue activities and defense systems. Begun in 2004, the
Ice-Tethered Profiler program has annually fielded instrument systems
distributed throughout the deep Arctic that return year-round daily vertical
profiles of sea water temperature and salinity, and other water properties at
sub-meter vertical resolution over depths of ~5 m to ~750 m as the buoys drift
with their supporting ice floes. A new variant of the ITP, the Tethered Ocean
Profiler, TOP, focuses on waters from ~200 m depth up to within 15 cm of the
ice-ocean interface. The present award will continue and improve the ITP/TOP
observing program for another 5 years. A three-pronged effort is planned to
consist of (1) annual deployments of operational ITPs and TOPs from Arctic
cruises of opportunity and dissemination of the resulting data, (2) ongoing
engineering efforts to keep abreast of the evolving supply chain for ITP/TOP
components, and (3) quality control and scientific analysis of the resulting
data with results published in peer-reviewed journals. Data from these
autonomous instruments will be publicly distributed via the project website, the
Global Telecommunications System (GTS) network, the Arctic Data Center, and the
National Centers for Environmental Information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.