* 2314680
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Small: Caphammer: A New Security Exploit in Energy Harvesting Systems and its Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jongouk Choi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 180,000.00

An energy harvesting system (EHS) has emerged as an alternative to battery-
operated Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Instead of using a battery, EHS self-
powers its device by collecting ambient energy from external sources such as
radio frequency, WiFi, etc. However, since such ambient energy sources are
unreliable, their resulting power is inherently unstable and often goes out. To
address the problem, EHS leverages a capacitor as an energy buffer and computes
when the capacitor secures a sufficient amount of energy, i.e., capacitors are
at the heart of any EHS devices. Unfortunately, capacitors can be unreliable in
the presence of frequent power failure across which they continuously charge and
discharge, losing their original capacitance over time. More importantly,
attackers can exploit the capacitor reliability issue to cause incorrect outputs
or degrade the quality of service in targeted EHS devices. To this end, this
research project focuses on investigating attack surfaces and designing cost-
effective countermeasures. The project outcome will lay the foundation for
batteryless Internet of Things services by maintaining their quality of service
and security. The project also aims to integrate research findings into
undergraduate teaching and promote equitable outcomes for women in computer
science through K-12 outreach program.

This project involves three major research thrusts. First, it introduces a new
security attack called capacitor hammering attack (simply Caphammer), which aims
to remotely degrade capacitors in the victim EHS devices. By manipulating power
failure frequency, this attack can result in data corruption and denial of
service (DoS). Second, the project designs a novel energy storage architecture
that can effectively prevent the Caphammer attack and restore the original
capacitance. This design leverages the unique characteristics of capacitors and
EHS to achieve resilience against Caphammer attacks. Third, the project develops
a lightweight countermeasure based on intelligent compiler/runtime co-design to
prevent data corruption and mitigate the risks of DoS problems by constructing
self-recoverable programs. Consequently, these research goals collectively aim
to enhance the security and reliability of EHS devices, safeguarding them
against other potential attacks that can be launched through Caphammer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.