* 2314154
* PFI-TT:  Destroying toxic and persistent perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) with Advanced Materials and Light
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Michael Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2025
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to remove toxic perfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) chemicals from water by destroying them permanently. This
technology has the potential for profound societal impact by improving overall
human and environmental health. With upcoming federal regulations, this
technology (a reusable and green alternative that uses only light and no
chemical additives) will be cost-competitive and responsive to the large market
need for destructive PFAS technologies. This project will broaden participation
of female and underrepresented minority students through active recruitment.
Students will receive training and networking opportunities from Rice
University’s Idea Lab for Innovation & Entrepreneurship, and industrial
experience through collaboration and mentorship with our partners.

The proposed project builds upon fundamental research on how a safe and
commercially available material interacts with light to destroy fluorine-
containing manmade organic compounds with unusual effectiveness and durability
under a wide range of conditions. The ease-of-use and ambient conditions of this
photocatalysis chemistry makes the water treatment process a scalable one, to
eventually treat everything from drinking water in a kitchen faucet to
industrial sites, wastewater treatment plants, and firefighting training sites.
The project will first optimize catalyst performance using actual test waters.
The second task focuses on scaling up the catalyst synthesis to kilogram
amounts, as well as determining optimum operational parameters using test waters
and determining catalyst stability. The final task is to validate the technology
at the pilot scale at flow rates of up to 5 GPM over periods of weeks. Cost
analyses based on the electrical energy per order needed will be used to assess
potential commercial application.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.