* 2314184
* Partnership Development and Planning: Assessment of Maker Practices in Museums
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Adam Maltese, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 02/28/2025
* USD 149,540.00

This partnership project seeks to address the assessment needs of maker
(sometimes called tinkering) spaces and relating programs that have opened in
recent years in many science and children's museums across the country. (These
learning spaces use hands-on and interest-driven experiences, often supported
using traditional and current technologies to foster creativity and STEM skills
among users.) The relatively new maker movement lacks assessment techniques to
understand and improve learning experiences in these spaces. An important goal
of the project is to address the assessment needs of these makerspaces in
relation to the lack of participation of youth and families from ethnic/racial
minority communities and other groups. The project will establish a
collaborative network including museum staff engaged in maker programming,
educational researchers, and community advisors from to address maker-related
assessment needs of this group and the broader museum community.

The project defines making is broadly to encompass the diverse range of maker
programming found in museums today, such as FabLab drop-in making, tinkering
activities, making-related exhibits, targeted workshops, summer camps,
afterschool programs, clubs, challenges, and mobile making initiatives. The
project will use project planning and exploration meetings, surveys with museums
across the United States, and feedback cycles from project partners to gain
insights into the experiences, goals, and requirements of museums. The project's
survey, collaborations, and network will help identify a preliminary list of key
assessment constructs, as well as the realities of data collection and
assessment in their respective maker programs (e.g., the usability, equity, and
usefulness of assessment tools). The project will consider a wide range of
approaches to assessment that will individual learning experiences, but will
also look at learning environments, facilitation, culture/language, and hearing
directly from underserved communities on what they value. The project will value
learners' perspectives, cultural assets, and language and collaborate with
members of marginalized communities who may not be effectively served by museum
makerspaces. The project will result in: a report on the assessment needs in the
museum maker community; identification of promising approaches to maker
assessment and related research (with an emphasis on equity); and a
collaborative network of practitioners, researchers, and community who will
continue the work.The project will work with and share project resources through
a variety of maker communities and publications.

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice that
considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b)
promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement
in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and
enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM
learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science
communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM
processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.