* 2314618
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Computational Investigation of Extralinguistic Cognition in Developmental Parsing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Laurel Perkins, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 8,720.00

Without explicit instruction, children learn language at a spectacular rate: by
5-6 years old, most children are able to speak and understand language quite
well. As children learn their language(s), other cognitive systems, like memory
and inhibition, are developing as well. Because language development relies on
these additional cognitive systems, difficulties that stem from these developing
systems may influence children’s ability to learn language. This project uses
computational tools to model the real-time process of sentence understanding to
provide insights into how developing memory and inhibition may influence
language understanding in children. This project serves as an important step
toward understanding how developing cognitive systems can impact children’s
language learning, as well as how differences in these systems can influence
children’s later language performance in school.

This doctoral dissertation research focuses on children’s understanding of
“temporarily” ambiguous sentences as a window into the effect of systems like
memory and inhibition on language learning and understanding. Like adults,
children commit early to interpretations of sentences that they are hearing in
real-time. Unlike adults, however, they appear to have difficulty revising those
interpretations if additional, incompatible information arrives later in the
sentence. This difficulty has been proposed to arise due to constraints on
memory and/or immature inhibitory control. In this project, the researchers
develop two computational models of children’s sentence processing, one of
memory limitations and one of inhibitory limitations, to test these proposals
and probe the interaction of these cognitive systems with developing linguistic
knowledge. By developing these models, this research provides a fuller
understanding of the influence of memory and inhibition on language development
and comprehension in children.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.