* 2314791
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of modernization on regulation of the transportation industry
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* David Nugent, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 16,225.00

Transportation is a central target for infrastructural development in urban
contexts. Numerous factors determine whether a given form of transportation is
deemed appropriate. Regulation of the transportation industry reflects
incompletely overlapping priorities from individuals involved in the
transportation sector, regulatory bodies, and others. This doctoral dissertation
research project investigates how different cultural and regulatory contexts
lead to different infrastructural outcomes in urban contexts that share the aim
of becoming more modern, yet differ in the means of achieving modernization. It
tests scientific cultural anthropological theories in political anthropology to
understand how historical differences in cities' histories interact with
overlapping goals of modernization to generate different infrastructural
outcomes. The project trains a graduate student in scientific cultural
anthropological theories and methods and disseminates its findings broadly to
academic and non-academic audiences.

This comparative project helps understand the conditions that variously promote
or limit the development of modernization projects in urban contexts.
Specifically, it uses mixed methods, including interviews, transect rides, and
document analysis to examine questions surrounding 1) how understandings of
transportation infrastructure affect governance in different areas; 2) how
individuals involved in the transportation sector respond to different
governance structures; and 3) how individuals and officials negotiate their
perspectives to determine how transportation infrastructure is ultimately
shaped. It does so in contexts with different regulatory histories to understand
how governance structures affect these negotiations. This doctoral dissertation
research project uses a nuanced lens to shed light on how various actors with
incompletely overlapping motivations negotiate infrastructural developments in
modernizing cities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.