* 2314107
* Developing a new generation of collaborative scientists and citizens through popular media
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jorge Cham, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,033,905.00

This project will focus on understanding how media can improve boys' and girls'
perceptions of female scientists and engineers and increase children's
understanding of mixed-gender collaborations in STEM. Two main products will be
developed and disseminated. The first will be eight 11-minute episodes of the
popular children's program, Elinor Wonders Why, which reaches 16.5 million
viewers. This will be used as an intervention within a series of rigorous
research studies and broadcast to audiences for public use and subsequent
benefit. The second will be a game-based, Draw-a-Scientist, assessment in which
3-6 year old participants and their caregivers will create sticker-based scenes
that include scientist or engineer avatars 'at work' in a variety of contexts in
order to clarify young children's perceptions of science and engineering. This
project has the potential to benefit society by modeling and celebrating mixed
gender STEM collaborative work.

The project builds knowledge and understanding on gender-based STEM research and
provides learnings for future ways of exploring the impact of youth perceptions
in media. The project uses mixed methods research and an iterative design
process that involves stakeholders, youth and their adult caretakers, and
partnerships among university faculty, PBS station educators, and media
developers to address these questions: To what degree do children perceive
science as a gendered occupation? How do children and their caregivers perceive
women in science? Do children perceive science as a collaborative process? Do
children perceive science as important to the community? A second study will
include (1) embedding the gamified assessment into a larger Elinor Wonders Why
PBS digital game, (2) linking the assessment directly to the media via a digital
throw transition, and (3) disseminating the intervention (episode) and the
assessment (game) linked together for public engagement through social media,
broadcast, and streaming.

This Type 5, Research in Support of Wide-reaching Public Engagement with STEM,
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers
informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote
personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in
scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and
enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM
learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science
communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM
processes. This project is jointly funded by Advancing Informal Science Learning
(AISL), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.