* 2314730
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agricultural Drivers of Return Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2025
* Bridget Kelly-Vincz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 19,690.00

Return migration, when migrants return to their original homes, is a common
endpoint in the migration life cycle. Whereas much work has focused on the
causes of migration away from home, less work has been focused on understanding
what drives people to return home following stints away. Return migration thus
offers an important window into understanding how the making of home is
motivated by different factors, from material to symbolic. This doctoral
dissertation research project focuses on agrarian return migration to shed light
on factors that motivate home-making in economically disadvantaged regions. In
addition to supporting the training of a U.S.-based doctoral student in
scientific cultural anthropology, this project disseminates results broadly to
academic, policy, and general audiences.

This is a multi-sited ethnographic study of former migrants both at home and in
the diaspora. The researchers engage in interviews and participant observation
in rural community centers, including municipal governments, churches, and
farms, to investigate the factors that motivate return and the conditions under
which those factors become salient for different populations. These findings are
complemented by textual analysis of political debates around rural migration and
land use as well as image analysis of multimedia materials produced by migrants
themselves as they document their efforts to reintegrate at home. This research
furthers anthropological theory about how social and economic remittances shape
communities, especially how the movement of people alters the relation between
cities and countrysides and transforms the development of rural life and
environments. As such, this research provides a framework for reconsidering the
migration-development nexus by accounting for features of rural life that are
important to the people who reside there, which may include economic factors but
are not necessarily limited to them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.