* 2314144
* Kaulele (To Take Flight) - Creating a Native Hawaiian Pacific Islander Indigenous-led Design Framework for STEM Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Maile Keliipio-Acoba, INSTITUTE FOR NATIVE PACIFIC EDUCATION AND CULTURE
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2028
* USD 900,672.00

Over the past few decades, the science museum field has been working toward
better understanding of and approaches to designing exhibits that reflect more
diverse ways of learning and knowing, and support broader participation in STEM
and informal STEM learning. This project, led by the local Hawaiian community
organization Institute for Native Pacific Education and Culture (INPEACE), will
develop and study a Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander (NHPI) Indigenous-led
exhibit design framework. The project team recognizes that developing Native
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander trust in the scientific enterprise requires building
connections that bridge the values and concepts of 'ike kupuna (traditional
knowledge) with scientific knowledge systems and contemporary technology. This
project stems from pilot and feasibility studies that resulted in three pop-up
science exhibitions and laid the groundwork for an initial framework. In
collaboration with Kamehameha Schools, University of Hawaii at Manoa,
Association of Science and Technology Centers (ASTC), Discovery Children's
Museum-Las Vegas, Honolulu City and County Parks and Recreation, and others, the
team will follow the initial framework to develop two exhibitions that are
grounded in Indigenous Hawaiian epistemologies and cultural connections to STEM.
Responsive to local needs and interests, the exhibits will be designed and
delivered as pop-up experiences reaching multiple rural Hawaiian communities and
may cover Indigenous systems of star navigation for ocean voyaging, systems of
netting for food and water containers, or systems of home design with local and
natural materials. Throughout the iterative development of the exhibitions, the
project will employ Indigenous Hawaiian and Western research and evaluation
methods to study and refine the NHPI Indigenous-led design framework.

The culture-first approach of the NHPI Indigenous-led design framework has
strong potential to transform the ways that the science museum field is thinking
about and doing exhibit design. This project will focus on two research
questions: 1) What are the critical elements of an NHPI Indigenous-led design
process for culture-based STEM exhibits that are necessary to retain the
Indigenous foundation and characteristics of the culture?; and 2) Can an NHPI
Indigenous-led exhibition design framework and process result in consistent
replication of results in engagement, increased interest, and relational
relevance in STEM topics for Native Hawaiians? To answer the first question, the
team will prioritize Indigenous epistemologies, participatory approaches, and
the integration of Hawaiian and Pacific Islander cultural research and
evaluation practices. Data collection and analyses will honor the cultural
concepts of mo'oku'auhau (genealogy) and ho'oilina (inheritance), and include
traditional assessment models such as ho'ike and 'uniki, which assess learners'
acquisition and understanding of knowledge and skills and their ability to
demonstrate and communicate such knowledge and skills. Qualitative methods such
as interviews, observations, and document analysis will be employed to capture
the holistic experiences, contextual understandings, and interconnections
within. Practices such as wala'au (talk story) create spaces for open dialogue,
where the voices and perspectives of the community, educators, and learners
ensure inclusivity, agency, and alignment with Indigenous perspectives. Nune
Maila (reflection) exercises will foster self-awareness and critical examination
of cultural biases within the research and evaluation teams. These reflection
processes align with ancestral methods used to make meaning of acquired
knowledge and skills. To answer the second question, the team will use results
from summative visitor experience data (n = 40-50 per pop-up exhibition) to
understand whether the framework can be consistently applied across multiple
exhibits, STEM content areas, and various cultural topics to effectively engage
Indigenous Hawaiian and Pacific Islander populations through informal STEM
exhibits. Results from this work will be disseminated locally though annual
presentations to community interest groups, newsletters and media spotlights,
and publications such as Hulili: Multidisciplinary Research on Hawaiian Well-
Being. Results will also be shared broadly at national and regional conferences
and through practitioner-focused publications, such as ASTC Dimensions Magazine.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.