* 2314179
* Promoting Intraminority Solidarity Through Intergroup Relations Framings
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sapna Cheryan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 618,465.00

Decades of research and theory development in Social Psychology has focused on
the causes and consequences of racism, with most of this research focusing on
Black-White relations. However, little attention has been devoted to
understanding minority groups’ attitudes toward other minority groups. This
issue is important to understand because social equality and progress depends on
solidarity between minority groups, and research that limits itself to only
Black-White relations limits the understanding of attitudes and behavior toward
minority groups. This project focuses on the role of framing in intergroup bias.
Indeed, how people view members of other groups is a fundamental aspect of human
social cognition, and how much racial minority groups support each other is
expected to depend on how racism is framed. Advancing this understanding informs
policies and strategies that bring all groups together in the fight against
discrimination.

This project builds on the observation that racism directed by White Americans
toward Black Americans can be framed in two distinct ways: as anti-Black or as
pro-White. This difference in framing is expected to influence another minority
group’s sense of solidarity or allyship with Black Americans. Specifically, this
research focuses on Asian American allyship with Black Americans. It is
hypothesized that framing racism against Black Americans as the result of anti-
Black rather than pro-White attitudes will increase Asian Americans’
intraminority solidarity with Black Americans. One set of studies examines
whether Asian Americans and White Americans think about these framings as
different from each other or different from other framings of intergroup bias.
Additional experiments examine whether an anti-Black framing leads Asian
Americans to experience a greater sense of responsibility for racism and results
in stronger solidarity with Black Americans. A final experiment explores the
effect of framing on Asian Americans support for intergroup causes.
Understanding how different framings for intergroup conflict affect allyship
from members of other minority groups is important for building a more
comprehensive understanding of intergroup relations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.