* 2314241
* PFI-TT: 3D Printed Tissue Implants for Facial Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Scott Hollister, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,689.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a platform for 3D printing
tissue implants for facial surgery. This platform provides the capability to
design and rapidly manufacture implants for tissue reconstruction. A
comprehensive analysis of the material supply chain will be conducted to
identify any potential risks and develop strategies to mitigate them.
Additionally, two different 3D printing manufacturing processes will be assessed
and optimized to establish an economically viable, and reproducible material/3D
printing manufacturing process suitable for commercialization. The technology
would benefit both patients and surgeons by providing superior options than
current alternatives. Benefits include eliminating painful surgeries, reducing
costs and associated risks, and significantly improving patient outcomes. The
platform is designed to meet various facial reconstruction needs, as 3D printing
enables the production of geometrically complex implants that range from
standardized sizes to tailored patient-specific designs. The ultimate goal of
this project is to match a readily available medical grade material with a
reproducible 3D printing process that can serve as a versatile platform for
multiple types of facial implants.

The proposed project seeks to evaluate the impact of different 3D printing
methods on the cost, time, and most importantly, the performance of 3D printed
polycaprolactone (PCL) implants. Additionally, the project aims to understand
the variability of manufacturing processes and its effect on the material and
mechanical behavior of the manufactured devices. This is critical not only from
a research basic point of view, but also from a clinical and commercialization
perspective. The project will involve a comprehensive evaluation of commercially
available medical-grade PCL powders/pellets using various 3D printing
techniques, such as laser sintering and material extrusion. The manufactured
devices will undergo material characterization and mechanical testing to assess
and compare their performance. Successful completion of this project will create
a foundation to enable the production of implants that can be tested in animal
models, a necessary step for obtaining FDA clearance to bring these implants to
market. This work will not only aid in enhancing our fundamental understanding
of the field but will also help identify the most efficient and effective 3D
printing technique for producing high-quality PCL-based facial implants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.