* 2314549
* PlantTransform: TRTech-PGR: Genotype-independent Regeneration for Recalcitrant Species Through Induced Totipotent Plant Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mao Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 667,324.00

The application of biotechnology for crop trait improvement holds great promise
for the implementation of more sustainable and resilient agricultural practices.
For instance, the generation of crops that have been modified to require less
water and fertilizer supplementation or that are more tolerant of drought
conditions and resistant to plant diseases can help improve crop yields in the
face of a changing climate and increasing population size. Although we have made
great strides in our ability to modify the plant genome (that encodes the
heritable traits of our crops) in individual cells or tissues, turning those
cells or tissues back into whole plants presents a significant bottleneck in the
application of biotechnology for crop trait improvement. The aim of this project
is to find effective ways to reprogram cells in order to facilitate their
transformation and regeneration into whole plants. To that end, we will perform
studies in a model plant system, thale cress, to better understand the cellular
and molecular regulation of regeneration and identify factors that can enhance
the process. As proof of principle, we will subsequently implement the use of
such factors in an important crop species known to be difficult to transform and
regenerate, namely wheat. In addition to the planned research, we will also
advance public understanding and youth involvement through the development of a
lecture series for high school students in the Virginia Summer Residential
Governor's School for Agriculture titled The Past, Present, and Future of
Bioengineering for Crop Trait Improvement.

Regeneration is a bottleneck for plant transformation, and we know little about
the molecular regulatory networks that govern regeneration. This project brings
together a multi-disciplinary research team to develop technology that can
advance the field of plant transformation and further understanding the
fundamental aspects of cell totipotence. The focus will be to enhance
regeneration efficiency through ectopic expression of morphogenic transcription
factors, with an emphasis on regeneration from protoplast culture. The
application of genome editing technology through transient transformation of
protoplasts holds great promise for the rapid generation of transgene-free
edited plants, especially in highly heterozygous, outcrossing, or vegetatively
propagated crop species. The project utilizes Arabidopsis as a model to
investigate regeneration from protoplast culture. We will use automated digital
image analysis and single-cell transcript profiling of developing microcalli as
a high-throughput, information-rich platform. A collection of 20 morphogenic
transcription factors will be comparatively screened in Arabidopsis for their
effects on regeneration through conventional somatic tissue culture and
protoplast culture. The gene regulatory networks governed by transcription
factors that promote regeneration from protoplast culture will be studied to
give mechanistic insight into their function. Effective transcription factors
will be tested in winter wheat, a species recalcitrant to transformation and
tissue culture. This project will advance our foundational understanding of
totipotency and cell fate determination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.