* 2314675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disambiguating Information in Speech and Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Noa Attali, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 18,840.00

Language serves as a remarkable tool for human communication, but in everyday
conversations, humans often need to navigate ambiguity when multiple potential
meanings are possible. How do listeners successfully understand what a speaker
meant? One intuition is that listeners use clues from context (the preceding
conversation) and prosody (the melodic and rhythmic elements of speech) to
decipher the intended meaning. This study investigates the relationship between
these two information sources, asking whether (i) context and prosody provide
two different streams of information, or if (ii) context is the main source of
information while prosody reflects the context.

To better understand how context and prosody help speakers resolve ambiguity,
this doctoral dissertation research takes advantage of the large-scale amounts
of data on everyday language use that have only recently become available.
Specifically, this project builds a unique corpus of naturalistic ambiguity that
captures the attested and diverse sentences people really say. First,
researchers search through archives of conversation recordings from public radio
and TV to find instances of potential ambiguity, which is then used to create an
Ambiguity Corpus, preserving each case with its original context and the audio
recording that contains the prosody. For each case, human annotators judge what
they thought the speaker meant. Judgments are provided for just the transcript,
just the recording, the transcript in its context, and the recording in its
context. By comparing people's interpretations, the researchers compare the
roles of context and prosody on these interpretations. To further investigate
hypotheses about how context and prosody work together to resolve ambiguity in
everyday conversations, the research team builds a computational cognitive model
that simulates how someone interprets ambiguous utterances like the ones
identified in the Ambiguity Corpus, given these information sources. To evaluate
the hypotheses about context and prosody that this model encodes, follow-up
experiments are conducted that test specific model predictions about how
context, prosody, and their interaction matter for interpretations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.