* 2314667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-demographic variation in experiences of maternal healthcare in relation to conceptions of health crisis
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Ayodele Foster-McCray, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 16,163.00

Maternal mortality has decreased significantly over the last century, yet
remains highly variable, impacting how people understand and experience maternal
healthcare. Significant research has shed light on how factors such as proximity
to healthcare and socioeconomic status impact maternal health. Yet, maternal
characteristics intersect with numerous other sociological variables and
histories to impact how they use and experience maternal healthcare. This
doctoral dissertation research investigates how variation in concepts of
maternal health crises affects how women intersect with mainstream and
alternative forms of healthcare. It trains a graduate student in scientific
cultural anthropology theory and methods and disseminates findings broadly to
academic and policy audiences.

The researcher investigates how clinicians and patients understand concepts of
maternal health crises and how this impacts delivery of and experiences of care.
Using interviews and participant observation, the investigator asks: how
individual factors intersect to affect patient experiences; how clinicians’
understandings of crises impact maternal healthcare; and how patient and
clinician experiences intersect in shaping maternal health outcomes. The project
is responsive to recent calls to investigate how perceptions of public health
articulate with patient experiences in driving health and welfare among mothers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.