* 2314435
* Collaborative Research: Electoral Systems, Suburbanization, and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Sarah Anzia, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2025
* USD 37,805.00

One traditional solution to electoral concerns about constituent representation
in local government is to abolish large multi-member districts and create
smaller, single-winner electoral districts, some of which are designed to
encompass minority neighborhoods. While this traditional remedy might help under
some conditions, there is a strong possibility that it may not work as well in
rapidly changing metro areas. Such areas are common, as residents migrate to and
from city centers and suburban neighborhoods. Some suburban areas have become
heterogeneous, while others have become homogeneous. In such contexts, because
of the nature of candidate recruitment, the traditional remedy of creating
smaller/single-winner districts could backfire and limit the effectiveness of
potential remedy for identified representational concern. This study explores
the conditions under which minority representation can be achieved in the
context of ongoing suburbanization and gentrification. The study will also make
a wealth of fine-grained data available to researchers and members of the public
through a user-friendly web interface.

The study explores the conditions under which descriptive and substantive
representation can be achieved in the context of ongoing suburbanization and
gentrification, paying special attention to two of the most important electoral
systems used for local governance: multi-seat at-large and single-member
district plurality. Specifically, the project will include a large-scale data
collection effort combining population demographics, candidate characteristics,
institutional structure, and policy outcomes for 88 municipalities and 22 school
districts from 1970 to the present. The project team will conduct representative
surveys of voters, elected officials, and past candidates. Data will be analyzed
to identify the conditions under which minorities run for local office and are
successful as well as the conditions under which descriptive representation
leads to substantive representation. As time-honored tools for protecting
minority voting rights and representation are being invalidated by courts, these
data will provide crucial evidence regarding new reform efforts relevant to many
urban areas around the country.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.