* 2314324
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Mechanized Cryptographic Reasoning in Separation Logic
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Marco Gaboardi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 103,826.00

Computer-aided cryptography has started to impact the design and implementation
of real-world protocols. One of its main challenges is the development of
maintainable models and proofs. In particular, it is important that the
assumptions and guarantees of verified protocols can be checked against each
other, so that the design of protocols and systems can evolve in a robust manner
through formalized reasoning for cryptography and security. The formal reasoning
methods used in this project are based on separation logic, a mathematical
framework for certifying the absence of bugs in computer systems. While many
such frameworks exist, separation logic has attracted considerable interest in
recent years because it simplifies the analysis of how computer systems employ
resources such as memory, disk space, etc. Reasoning about these resources is
challenging in general because different system components might use the same
resource in potentially conflicting ways. For example, two components in a
program might try to save different files under the same name, thus leading to
data loss. Traditionally, these conflicts were ruled out by reasoning about what
every part of the system is doing at the same time, rendering the analysis of
systems complex. With separation logic, by contrast, it is possible to analyze
what each system component does in isolation, regardless of what the rest of the
system is doing. This makes the analysis more self contained, allowing
separation logic to handle more complex systems compared to traditional methods.
Despite many success stories demonstrating this power, there is an important
class of components that are often overlooked in separation logic: cryptographic
protocols. To withstand attackers when facing an open network, networked systems
must communicate using intricate cryptographic protocols. Current proofs in
separation logic abstract away from these protocols, assuming an ideal model
where malicious agents have limited power over communication. Because the
analysis does not take the underlying protocols into account, it might miss bugs
in the system that result from employing a faulty protocol, or simply from
employing a correct protocol in incorrect ways.

This project aims to advance the state-of-the-art in program verification by
extending separation logic with cryptographic reasoning. The extension will make
separation logic developments more reliable by explicitly taking cryptographic
protocols into account. The goals of the project are: (1) Using resources in
separation logic to model cryptographic terms; (2) Simplifying the analysis of
composite protocols that were developed and verified independently; and (3)
Integrate cryptographic reasoning within existing frameworks for verifying
distributed systems. The resulting logic will come in two variants: one for the
symbolic model of cryptography, which is better suited for formal analysis, and
one for the computational model, which offers stronger guarantees. The design of
the logic will build upon existing approaches for protocol analysis, such as
protocol model checkers or the universal composability framework. Part of the
project consist of implementing a proof checker for this logic based on Iris, a
framework for separation logic built on the Coq proof assistant. This will allow
the logic to support many advanced features of separation logic while keeping a
relatively small and trustworthy code base. The evaluation of the logic will be
based on a series of case studies verifying protocols and integrating them in
larger systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.