* 2314036
* EAGER: New interconnect for the perovskite-silicon tandem solar cell:  optically transparent and electrically conductive multilayer film
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 07/31/2024
* USD 105,194.00

A solar cell is at the heart of renewable energy devices for harvesting sun
light. Out of several light absorbers for solar cells, halide perovskite is an
emerging one of high performance. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of
perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is getting close to that of silicon solar cells
which are dominant in a commercial market. In addition, PSCs can be manufactured
using a simple and cheap synthesis process. Thus, PSCs have a potential to meet
an urgent need for low cost and high efficiency power generation. However, the
performance of PSCs is not expected to excel that of silicon solar cells due to
a theoretical limit. A tandem solar cell consisting of PSC and Si solar cells is
a promising solution to overcome such a theoretical limit. Stacks of PSC and
silicon solar cell can harness solar energy much better than either PSCs or
silicon solar cells. One of key components of the tandem cell is an interconnect
which is placed between top PSC and bottom Si solar cells. A good interconnect
needs to be electrically conductive and optically transparent. A single layer of
oxide semiconductor, which is widely used as the interconnect of the tandem
solar cell, does not fully meet these requirements. In this project,
comprehensive research on the multilayer of semiconductor and metal films will
be performed to address such a need for the interconnect of high electric
conductivity and optical transparency. The new multilayer interconnect will
improve the performance of the tandem solar cells and accelerate the advent of
net zero economy. From the viewpoint of engineering education, the
multidisciplinary aspect of this project including materials synthesis, basic
science, and device fabrication will reinforce a current trend to ask future
scientists and engineers to develop comprehensive knowledge and skills. Though
the project, both undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the
areas of materials science, electric engineering and devices physics.

Among different tandem cell designs, 2-terminal (2-T) monolithic tandem cells
offers the highest PCE, because this design promotes light transmittance and
suppresses parasitic resistance by reducing a number of interfaces. In addition,
the 2T tandem cell simplifies the device structure and significantly reduces the
production cost. However, current 2-T tandem solar cells suffer from a lack of
the suitable interconnect which should provide high electric conductivity and
optical transparency. This project will address this need by developing the
semiconductor-metal-semiconductor (S-M-S) multilayer film. High electric carrier
concentration of the central metal layer and high mobility of the semiconductor
layer will be combined for the interconnect of the high electric conductivity
without decreasing the transparency. The objectives of this exploratory research
are 1) to develop a fundamental understanding of the physical interactions
between semiconductor and metal layers in transparent conducting S-M-S films, 2)
to design a novel S-M-S interconnect which selectively collects photogenerated
charge carriers in PSC â€“ silicon tandem solar cells and 3) test the new
interconnect in the tandem solar cells. For these purposes, there will be
extensive experimental and theoretical research on symmetric and asymmetric
metal-semiconductor multilayer films to understand the electronic band
structures and the light interference. Outcomes of this project (i.e. the
interconnect of high electric and optical performance) will facilitate the
electron-hole recombination at the interface and deliver incident to the bottom
Si solar cell with minimal interface reflectance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.