* 2314242
* PFI-TT:  Device to Recycle Scrap Cathodes in Lithium-Ion Battery Factories
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Christopher Ziegler, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to safely recycle materials from
scrap cathodes generated in manufacturing facilities of lithium-ion batteries.
This proposed innovation could lead to numerous socioeconomic benefits, such as
creating new jobs, reducing the need for extraction of rare elements from mines,
e.g. lithium, improving national security by decreasing reliance on imported
battery materials, and decreasing the battery cost for electric vehicles and for
renewable energy storage. In terms of broader educational outcomes, several
graduate and undergraduate students will be directly trained in developing new
technologies. Students will also learn about technology translation and
entrepreneurship. Additionally, through summer camps offered in this project,
STEM students will benefit from the leadership and entrepreneurship training,
which will ultimately better prepare the STEM workforce to ultimately enhance
and contribute to the U.S. technology-based economy. This project has the
potential to enhance scientific and technological understanding of recycling
energy materials while simultaneously contributing to a sustainable and
environmentally friendly industry.

The proposed project aims to address the unique challenges associated with the
direct recycling of cathode active materials from lithium-ion battery
manufacturing scrap, with the goal of returning the recycled materials to the
supply chain. The project seeks to overcome two major technological hurdles.
First, the project aims to achieve a formulation for solvent blends for
different cathode active materials while considering solubility, toxicity,
safety, recoverability, and cost constraints. Second, the project aims to
demonstrate the performance of the scrap recycling machine, which will involve
two discrete steps: "process and method identification" and "machine assembly,
testing, and proof-of-concept demonstration." It is estimated that this machine
can save 10-15% of the cathode material consumption of lithium-ion battery
manufacturing facilities, thereby reducing the cost of domestic lithium-ion
battery manufacturing by 4-6%. Through this project, the research team will
advance the fundamental knowledge of polymer solvent blending formulation and
explore the effect of the blend on possible damages to cathode active materials,
as well as the recoverability, safety, and environmental impacts of the solvent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.