* 2314101
* Black Representation - Authoring STEM Stories for Climate Risk Preparedness
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ed Greene, Knology Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,995.00

Discussions of climate science have become more common in children's literature
in recent years. Studies show that books and other media can teach children
effective techniques for managing the risks they and their families face from
floods, fires, excessive heat, and other weather-related disasters. However,
Black voices and stories are rare within this literature, despite the fact that
these disasters are more likely to impact areas home to communities of color. To
address this imbalance, this conference project will bring together Black
children's media creators with climate scientists and developmental
psychologists to promote climate science story making that speak to the
concerns, circumstances, and experiences of Black audiences. Expertise in the
science of climate change and children's development will be captured in a
podcast series that will be used to spark conversations and explorations for
making children's stories during three hybrid convenings organized using a
participant-driven (unconference) format. The intention for these convenings is
to lay a foundation for the production of climate science children's media that
supports the unique needs of Black families, helping them and their children
prepare for and respond to a multitude of environmental threats.

This conference project is a collaboration between Knology, the Highlights
Foundation, the National Black Child Development Institute, and the Association
of Children's Museums. Across three, two-day unconferences, Black climate
scientists, developmental psychologists, informal learning practitioners,
authors, illustrators, and publishers will develop strategies for creating
climate-related STEM content that are relevant to the lived and future
experiences of Black families and children. Their deliberations will address
four central questions: (1) What kinds of STEM-related knowledge should be
incorporated into children's climate change literature? (2) What is known about
existing methods for bringing discussions about climate risk preparedness into
early learning spaces and places, and how applicable are these for popular media
directed at Black communities, families, and children? (3) What visual and
textual storytelling techniques are best suited to the task of centering Black
presences in such a way that affirms Black life and nurtures Black children's
relationships with the natural world? (4) How can children's literature serve as
a vehicle for dismantling anti-Blackness in early environmental education? By
working together before, during, and after the unconference convenings,
participants will create and publish a suite of resources (including a library
of research briefs, a podcast series, conference proceedings, reports, and a
guidebook) to help Black media makers develop characters, plot arcs, and story
outlines that Black families can use to talk with their children about climate
science. The project's outputs will help support making children's media that is
better suited to the experiences of Black families, and that contributes to a
broader awareness of STEM careers among children of color. With a focus on
centering equity and building climate resilience in communities that have been
marginalized, this conference focuses on supporting children's media creators
and draws attention to the significant role they hold in engaging young children
and their families in dialogue on critical issues of climate change and the
behaviors and mindsets towards adaptation, mitigation, and resilience.

This Conference project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice
that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM;
(b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.