* 2314075
* Understanding the Impact of Outdoor Science and Environmental Learning Experiences Through Community-Driven Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Jedda Foreman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,583,195.00

Scientific and environmental literacy are valuable outcomes linked to academic
learning, career pathways, and broader engagement in science and environmental
fields and causes. However, while current tools for measuring these concepts are
useful for measuring some dimensions of impact, they are aligned with dominant
views that can marginalize, exclude, and erase the knowledge and expertise of
communities of color. This project will employ a community-driven process,
centering the voices of communities of color, to identify meaningful and
relevant outcomes and develop research tools to measure scientific and
environmental literacy. We will then conduct a national study to measure the
impact of outdoor science and environmental learning (OSEL) experiences on
students' scientific and environmental literacy. This study will contribute new
understandings of how race and culture influence learning, as well as how racism
and biases have shaped research to date. This project will produce a suite of
psychometrically tested tools that are driven by communities of color, improving
the field's ability to measure learning outcomes while also taking one step to
counteract a long history of marginalization in research. The work will
contribute to existing bodies of literature on the benefits of outdoor learning
and the role OSEL experiences can play in developing science and environmental
literacy.

The research will explore four questions across three phases. Phase 1 (Defining
Outcomes) will explore: (1) What do scientific literacy and environmental
literacy mean to communities of color? and (2) What outcomes are most meaningful
for youth of color who engage in outdoor science learning experiences, and how
can they be measured? A Community Research Network (CRN) composed of youth,
educators, leaders, and community members of partnering OSEL organizations will
engage in an iterative process of idea generation, data collection, and
sensemaking to articulate and co-develop a set of outcome measures. These
measures will be piloted with heterogeneous organizations serving diverse
communities and will result in finalized items and scales. In Phase 2 (Measuring
Impact) will explore: (3) In what ways do OSEL programs influence scientific and
environmental outcomes for youth, particularly youth of color? (4) How do youth
of color make meaning of these experiences? Phase 2 will include a quantitative
study, using the instruments developed in Phase 1, at OSEL programs across the
country, while also seeking to understand how youth of color make meaning of
these experiences through a focal student case study approach at selected case
sites. Finally, in Phase 3, the research team and the CRN will collaborate to
share findings with the field, including through a conceptual framework that
articulates the outcomes and structures within and adjacent to OSEL
organizations that enable youth to thrive. Built on the premise that both
research and praxis in OSEL have reinforced the oppression and marginalization
of people of color, this project holds the goal that our community-driven
approach and our creation of new community-driven measures will push researchers
and practitioners to grapple with what it means to move towards more just and
equitable practices in research and practice.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.