* 2314180
* Conference: Building Resilient Communities: A National Symposium that explores the role of public libraries in addressing local climate impacts
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Anne Holland, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 01/31/2025
* USD 249,966.00

The proposed conference will convene library leaders, climate researchers and
educators, public health experts, and informal educators to examine the current
prevalence of climate related programming in libraries, and how the concept of
environmental health can be used by libraries to create locally and culturally
relevant, change oriented, and equitable STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and math) learning experiences. The intention is for these experiences to be
designed with (not just for) their communities increasing resilience and the
ability to address hyper-local climate impacts. The conference will include 30
public library leaders, experts in environmental impacts due to climate change,
public health experts, and experts in STEM education and informal learning. The
purpose of the proposed conference is to bring together thought leaders and
change makers across the fields of public libraries, informal STEM learning, and
climate change science to catalyze action and research around the roles that
libraries and community-based organizations can play in responding to
environmental and health-related concerns due to climate change. The conference
will advance knowledge by documenting current efforts and utilizing the experts
participating to make recommendations for future research, action, and planning.

Informal education environments, such as libraries, are now seen as an untapped
educational resource. While research and evaluation in museum settings has grown
substantially, the potential of informal learning in libraries is still being
explored. There is a need for research exploring how existing informal learning
models can help predict and understand learning outcomes in a library setting.
This conference project aims to identify and create recommendations for a
research agenda across the area of public libraries, climate, and community
involvement. Evaluation for the conference and related deliverables will be
rooted in the Transformative Paradigm, which recognizes the pervasiveness of
inequity and injustice in people's daily lives, and views the role of research
and evaluation to be one of addressing and alleviating these societal problems.
Specific deliverables for this project include: The national conference or
symposium, four background reports to set the stage for the conference and to
identify current salient issues, webinars for public library staff highlighting
project and partner resources as well as the conference results, a webpage to
disseminate conference activities and outputs, presentations at regional and
national meetings, and the development of evaluation instruments meant to
support and iterate on the project work. Project partners include the Space
Science Institute's National Center for Interactive Learning, Web Junction,
Interactive Learning Dynamics, and the University of North Carolina at
Greensboro. With a focus on centering equity and building climate resilience in
poorer communities, this conference targets the public librarians as the primary
audience and will further cement the roles of public libraries as equitably
accessed community spaces and critical anchor institutions in STEM learning
ecosystems, particularly around the critical issues of climate change, public
health, and misinformation about scientific processes related to both. This
conference project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice
that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM;
(b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.