* 2314384
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How is geopolitical conflict reflected in the marketing and valuation of food?
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Rikki Brown, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 31,374.00

Foodstuffs are advertised to consumers in ways that can reveal the values of
both producers and consumers. How this valuation arises differs in relation to
numerous factors, including the extent to which producers identify their
products as traditional and local versus more modern and global. This doctoral
dissertation project examines the valuation and marketing of foodstuffs in
relation to geopolitical conflicts to understand whether and how contestations
over land are reflected in food. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, this research contributes to policy-
relevant scholarship by enhancing the scientific understanding of the
significance of geopolitics and its impact on economic activity. A key impact of
this study is visual StoryMaps that contribute to diverse forms of spatial
narratives that can be compared against existing tourist or geopolitical maps to
illuminate possible intersections and divergences. Results are shared with
policy-makers and nongovernmental agencies.

This research assesses initiatives at multiple levels that regulate and define
qualities inherent to agricultural products. Through twelve months of
ethnographic research, including spatial analysis, semi-structured interviews,
and photo documentation, this research examines how heritage food products are
integrated into state and political structures and how this impacts the
commodification of foodstuffs and localized communities of production. Research
results have intellectual merit for scholarly and policy analyses of economic
policies and development projects by examining issues like heritage and tourism,
new global economic partnerships, and the dynamics of regional and international
food markets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.