* 2314858
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Sociolegal Dynamics of Alternative Dispute Resolution in Marginalized Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Michael Peletz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 31,487.00

This research examines the role of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms
within minority communities. This research specifically investigates diverse
alternative judicial bodies with different legal and cultural outlooks why and
how people use these extralegal systems, and how these judicial bodies are
regulated by and interact with the state. In addition to supporting the training
of a doctoral student, the proposal will be shared with legal practitioners,
civil society organizations, and community activists working in alternative
dispute resolution.

This research examines the factors that lead people who use alternative justice
bodies to view the decisions made by those bodies as binding and the cultural
and legal dynamics that give these alternative judicial bodies their legitimacy,
through a controlled analysis and comparison of two significant different
sociolegal contexts. Broader questions are also asked about social and cultural
network formation, and whether these vary between different minority
communities. Ethnographic methods for this research include participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, and archival research to explore why
people turn to alternative judicial bodies, how these bodies and the state
interact, and how different marginalized groups, such as women and refugees, use
these alternative channels to navigate the dynamics of gender, justice, and the
state. By investigating how minority groups negotiate alternative ways of
seeking justice in their daily lives, this project contributes to the
anthropology of law, anthropology of the state, and anthropology of gender and
religion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.