* 2314594
* Project Safer: A Holistic Approach to Identifying and Mitigating Traumatic Incidents During Field Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Katheryn Twiss, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 387,995.00

This award supports a multidisciplinary team of researchers who will engage with
scientists in a wide variety of disciplines in order to build a database of
traumatic incidents associated with scientific fieldwork. The overarching goal
of the project is to collect data necessary for building fieldwork safety plans
that can effectively support a diverse scientific community, including
researchers from socially stigmatized backgrounds who are at elevated risk of
experiencing traumas. In order to enable informed planning for the multitude of
risks associated with scientific fieldwork– e.g., vehicular crashes, theft and
security issues, mental health episodes, interpersonal conflicts, sexual
harassment and assault, physical injuries, and illnesses– the team will use a
combination of questionnaires and in-depth interviews with scientists who
conduct fieldwork and participate in research expeditions. This information will
help field scientists identify patterns of risk and inform best practices for
safety management.

The project will 1) build a large-scale, cross-disciplinary database of
incidents experienced by scientists while conducting fieldwork, 2) identify the
different types of incidents that occur and to whom, the causal and protective
factors, and 3) clarify the lasting impacts on scientists’ well-being and career
trajectories. At present, there is a critical absence of data on traumatic
events beyond harassment; there is also a lack of cross-disciplinary studies.
This study will inquire across localities, disciplines, academic subfields, and
institutions in order to produce the first-ever large-scale dataset on present
and historical incidents in the field commensurate with risk-reporting standards
in the led outdoors activity industry. The team will use a mixed quantitative
and qualitative approach to clarify who is most at risk for different types of
events in the field, identify the correlates and consequences of those risks,
and co-produce solutions to mitigate them. The use of systems thinking to
identify and address incidents within field work will launch the wide-scale
study of risk within field science, transforming the way that safety concerns
are understood and approached during the data collection in wilderness
locations. This information will provide a framework to guide field scientists
in identifying patterns of risk and inform best practices for safety management
moving forward.

This project is funded jointly by the Directorate for Biological Sciences and
the Directorate for Geosciences, and is managed by the ER2 Program of the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.