* 2314109
* Air Pollution Visualizations for Promoting Data Literacy with Middle Schoolers and the Public
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Alexander Endert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,798,366.00

Air pollution is a data-rich problem space, with vast networks of sensors
constantly capturing and reporting measurements. The measured pollutants are
superficially familiar to many people, but few understand the specific sources,
acceptable levels, and negative effects of any individual pollutant. In
addition, coverage of air quality in formal school curricula is limited. This
project seeks to deepen the public's understanding of air quality data through a
public kiosk and to develop middle schoolers' understanding of air quality data
through a youth summer camp. The project will investigate how air quality data
interactions (via these two concurrent designs: the public kiosk and the youth
summer camp) can be designed to support learners' personal agency in data
investigations, visualizations, and communications as well as how these
experiences help non-experts learn about their environment. This project expands
public engagement with air quality data in ways that extend beyond the
simplified metric of the Air Quality Index (AQI). Because this work has the
potential to lessen the knowledge gap between the scientific community and the
general public it could be an important starting point for enacting meaningful
change in mitigating air pollution.

This four-year interdisciplinary effort draws on expertise in the learning
sciences, visualization, middle and high school STEM education, and teacher
learning and professional development to create two design spaces for informal
learning aimed toward advancing engagement and self-efficacy in reasoning with
scientific data. This project will advance knowledge in human-data interaction
(HDI) design and support environmental data literacy through air quality
visualizations. The Data Visualization and the Environment (DVE) summer camp
will be designed in collaboration with local middle school science educators and
will invite middle school students from the Atlanta area to Georgia Tech's
campus for a sponsored 2-week program during which they will engage with science
educators and visualization experts to collect, visualize, and display
environmental data. Recruitment for these funded camps will prioritize
underserved and underrepresented groups in science. By working first with air
quality data and then a self-selected environmental dataset of interest to them,
students will participate in the scientific practices of generating and
presenting evidence-based arguments about their local environment to investigate
projects of relevance to their own community, culture, and interests. The
project will concurrently develop and iterate the Contextualized Air Quality
Timelines (ContAQT) platform as a public data display in Midtown Atlanta
breaking down current and historical local multipollutant air quality data. The
project will answer the following research questions: (1) How can data
interactions in informal settings support learning about data interpretations
and the environment? (2) How can data interactions be designed to support
learners' opportunities to investigate questions of personal interest? and (3)
What design features support data exploration by non-expert learners? Through
design-based research the team will investigate how changes to the interface and
interaction impact data fluency indicators such as statistical reasoning talk
(identifying outliers, reasoning about trends, etc.), connections to prior
knowledge, and asking questions. Using qualitative research methods, such as
conjecture mapping, the project will investigate how data interactions in brief,
free-choice public kiosk interactions (ContAQT) as well as extended data
investigations (summer camp) can assist learners in asking questions, making
connections to existing knowledge, and proposing and evaluating claims. This
work will advance knowledge in the following areas: 1) best practices for
framing scientific data to be accessible to lay audiences; 2) understanding of
how specific design decisions in visualization interfaces and interactions can
influence data interactions and learning talk; 3) design of summer camp
activities to support middle school students in developing data fluency and
increasing self-efficacy in science; 4) synthesizing knowledge from science
educators in best practices for engaging female, Black, and/or Latine learners
in data practices.

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.