* 2314749
* Collaborative Research: The Architecture of Accountability in 21st Century Latin America
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nicholas Weber, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 186,668.00

Some public officials in Latin America routinely act outside the law, violating
constitutional rights, engaging in corruption, and ignoring judicial rulings.
Such unlawful behavior undercuts the rule of law, weakens democracy, and
inhibits investment and growth in the region. This project examines the
“architecture of accountability” – the sets of institutions charged with holding
public officials accountable to the law – in 18 Latin American countries since
2000. The research addresses three questions: (1) What accountability
institutions have existed in these countries and how have they been designed and
reformed? (2) What explains variation in the design and reform of these
institutions? (3) What explains variation in how effectively Latin American
government officials have been held accountable? We use quantitative and
qualitative analytic methods to test hypotheses about how political incentives
and interests affect the design and reform of these institutions, and how their
design influences how well Latin American public officials have been held to
account since the turn of the century. The researchers will design, build, and
deploy an open-source tool that will systematically monitor the on-line sources
on which the project draws and alert the project when those sources have
undergone change.

The project will significantly advance understanding of the functioning and
dysfunction of Latin American states, and the weakness of the rule of law in the
region. The research will produce a large dataset that will be widely
disseminated. By broadening and democratizing access to data about critical
political and legal institutions, the project empowers original, high-quality
interdisciplinary and trans-American research. By demonstrating to what degree
accountability institutions have contributed to government accountability in
Latin America, and what institutional attributes affect their influence, the
project informs institutional design, and should have a sustained and positive
impact on government transparency and government accountability in Latin
America. Finally, the monitoring tool that the project will develop promises to
facilitate the work not only of this project, but of other data-collection
projects and databases as well.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.