* 2314050
* CAREER: Quantum defects in two-dimensional materials by local-symmetry-guided data-driven design
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Qimin Yan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2027
* USD 195,849.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research integrated
with education activities to advance the fundamental understanding of quantum
defects and discover novel functional material systems for quantum information
science and technologies. Qubits and novel quantum devices such as quantum
emitters lie at the center of the ongoing quantum information revolution that is
expected to transform science and society in previously unimaginable ways.
Quantum defects, such as missing atoms or impurities, in two-dimensional
materials offer a new paradigm for the realization of patterned fabrication and
operation of quantum functionality components. By incorporating symmetry-guided
design principles and data-driven approaches, the PI and his team will
facilitate breakthroughs for the discovery and design of novel quantum defects
with unique electronic structures for quantum information science and
technologies. The research will pave the path toward the creation of a quantum
defect design platform.

The research project will be integrated with educational activities through the
incorporation of numerical simulations and machine learning modules, as well as
outreach activities to K-12 students. Quantum materials, machine learning, and
numerical simulation modules will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate
courses. The construction of an interdisciplinary research environment will
allow multi-level students to acquire a complete set of skills and grasp a big
picture of quantum information science. The PI will participate in scientific
outreach by developing activity kits and demos in collaboration with local
science museums including the Franklin Institute. Educational modules for middle
school and high school students will be developed to introduce quantum physics
and artificial intelligence.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research activities to
develop and utilize first-principles computations and data-driven approaches to
provide insights into the quantum phenomena in technologically important defect-
based two-dimensional (2D) quantum systems. Quantum defects are characterized by
local symmetries and complex interactions with their host materials. The
research will advance fundamental understanding of quantum defects in 2D
materials as spin qubits and quantum emitters by revealing the interplay of
local symmetry and host environment. By harnessing symmetry information and
adopting state-of-the-art learning architectures, the PI and his team will
develop a novel machine learning framework to enable the use of deep learning
for defect property predictions. The ultimate outcome of this project will be to
provide fundamental understanding and symmetry-based design principles for
targeted quantum defect functionalities in 2D materials and beyond. This will
open a new data-driven pathway for quantum information science and technologies
based on quantum defects in 2D solid-state systems.

The research project will be integrated with educational activities through the
incorporation of numerical simulations and machine learning modules, as well as
outreach activities to K-12 students. Quantum materials, machine learning, and
numerical simulation modules will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate
courses. The construction of an interdisciplinary research environment will
allow multi-level students to acquire a complete set of skills and grasp a big
picture of quantum information science. The PI will participate in scientific
outreach by developing activity kits and demos in collaboration with local
science museums including the Franklin Institute. Educational modules for middle
school and high school students will be developed to introduce quantum physics
and artificial intelligence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.