* 2314405
* Measuring the non-uniform surface interactions experienced by a Janus particle
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Wirth, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Janus particles are small particles that are measured in micrometers and have a
non-uniform surface chemistry. They have the potential to revolutionize many
technologies, including defense applications, understanding microorganisms'
behavior in nature, and improving human health by serving as micrometer scale
cargo carriers. The primary challenge this award aims to address is
understanding how Janus particles interact with boundaries, which is relevant to
each of these applications. To achieve this goal, the project team plans to use
a unique microscope to study these interactions. Additionally, the team will
investigate how Janus particles use chemical signals to navigate when they are
near a boundary. Further, they aim to standardize and disseminate educational
modules based on colloidal and interfacial phenomena, which is a fundamental
concept explored during this work.

Over the past decade, Janus particles have emerged as a promising type of
anisotropic particle with potential applications in various technological
fields. The main goal of this award is to accurately measure the non-uniform
surface interactions of both active and non-active Janus particles near a
boundary. To achieve this objective, the proposed work will leverage a recently
developed tool called Scattering Morphology Resolved Total Internal Reflection
Microscopy (SMR-TIRM) to investigate the interactions and dynamics of Janus
particles. The approach involves mapping the scattering from Janus particles at
different azimuthal angles and then using this information to track the position
and orientation of a mobile Janus particle. Despite recent progress in
understanding these complex materials, significant questions remain about their
dynamics. This award aims to address two of these questions related to the non-
uniform interactions experienced by a Janus particle in the presence and absence
of self-propulsion. To answer these questions, it is crucial to monitor the
Janus particle dynamics and infer the surface forces that the particle
experiences. In particular, the project team will conduct these measurements in
the presence and absence of chemical fuel, which a catalytic Janus particle uses
to generate a mechanical force.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.