* 2314932
* ACED Fab: On-chip CMOS-MEMS Infrared Spectroscopy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qun Jane Gu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,999.00

Metabolites, gases, and many chemicals are structurally unique and exhibit
distinctive absorptive fingerprints in the infrared spectrum band. The accurate
detection and tracking of such spectrum using portable devices carry enormous
potential and would enable many applications, including real-time health
monitoring, gas detection, spectroscopy, imaging, the identification of
hazardous materials, etc. Common infrared spectrometers rely on Fourier
Transform system (FTIR) that are bulky, expensive, incompatible with integrated
circuits, and unsuitable for real-life applications. Here, rooted on a
synergetic collaborative effort between U.S. and Taiwan groups, an on-chip
infrared spectroscopy system operating at room temperature and able to scan from
~ 1.5μm to 10 μm using a large number of channels will be demonstrated. The
system relies on the integration of an array of miniaturized and spectrally-
selective infrared sensors fabricated in the US, and CMOS chips fabricated in
Taiwan that implement state of the art noise-suppression and interrogation
techniques. The proposed on-chip infrared spectroscopy platform constitutes a
significant step forward in the field of infrared technologies, moving beyond
bulky and expensive Fourier Transform-based spectrometers into miniaturized,
affordable, and mass-production ready devices. The potential applications
enabled by such systems include sensing, communications, imaging, and
spectroscopy, among many others. On the educational front, this project will
provide multidisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students on a
variety of scientific areas such as CMOS technologies, infrared sensing,
mechanical resonators, metamaterials, and device fabrication and
characterization; integrate research results with education activities,
including the incorporation of research content in graduate courses and its
broad dissemination through journal papers and scientific conferences; and
encourage the participation and retention of women and Hispanic students - the
PIs can serve as role model- in STEM and research. Moving beyond, this program
will foster the collaboration between US and Taiwan researchers and set the
foundations for long-term partnerships and scientific interactions.

The goal of this project is to demonstrate an on-chip infrared spectroscopy
system able to scan from ~ 1.5μm to 10 μm using a massive number of parallel
channels while exhibiting a performance able to surpass competing technologies
operating at room temperature. To this purpose, a large array spectrally-
selective infrared sensors will be fabricated on a single chip at the UC Davis
cleanroom, whereas RF interrogating and noise-suppression schemes will be
implemented on a CMOS chip that will be fabricated at the Taiwan Semiconductor
Research Institute (TSRI). Heterogeneous integration and packaging will also be
carried out at the TSRI. The key building-block is an infrared detector based on
nano-patterning ultrathin and high-Q metasurfaces on top of free-space standing
microelectromechanical systems (MEMSs) to efficiently absorb light with desired
spectral distribution. Each MEMS, designed to achieve a high mechanical quality
factor and to absorb targeted wavelengths, will be excited at resonance by a RF
signal whose phase and amplitude changes with the absorbed infrared power. To
enhance the system performance, the detector will include two MEMS per released
cavity, one serving as the reference and the other as the sensor. Exploiting I/Q
signals for reference/sensing paths, the phase/amplitude variations of both
units will be obtained and processed to highly suppress common mode and
environmental noises (electrical, mechanical, optical, thermal) as well as the
electronic readout circuit noises and non-idealities. In addition to significant
noise reduction, the use of CMOS technology will permit to interrogate
simultaneously a larger array of parallel sensors on a chip, and to multiplex
their signals towards an output channel. This program will lay the foundational
groundwork and demonstrate miniaturized, ultra-sensitive, low-noise, on-chip IR
spectroscopy systems able to compete with state-of-the-art FTIR technologies
operating at room temperature while strengthening the partnership and scientific
interactions between USA and Taiwan.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.