* 2314092
* Conference: Equity, Innovation, and STEAM - Strengthening the R&amp;D Connections
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lillian Poats, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 236,606.00

STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, the Arts, and Math) continues to grow
in the informal science learning field, with a wide variety of findings from
researchers and practitioners. There is a significant need to assess where this
nascent field is in relation to equity and what are the critical next steps that
should be taken. Research shows: (1) a need to develop more mutually supportive
links in this work between researchers and practitioners; (2) a need to address
equitable access, framing, and design in STEAM informal science learning; and
additionally, (3) that STEAM engages underserved populations in STEM. This can,
potentially, help provide needed diversity in the STEM workforce, along with
creative and innovative thinking skills essential to success. Texas Southern
University, in partnership with the Innovation Collaborative, will convene a
two-year five-phase working conference project to address these issues. This
conference project is housed on an HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and
Universities) campus that has a museum studies program and a university museum.
A core group of diverse leading STEAM informal science learning researchers and
practitioners will help lead the project. They will assemble diverse teams
representing the broad spectrum of informal science learning institutions.
During the two years, these participants will immerse themselves in equity,
choose and frame the six most important topics to address, and investigate these
topics through virtual and in-person components. This conference project can
serve as a model for other fields to develop an approach and next steps relating
to equity, especially as it integrates research and practice.

The goals of this research are to develop: 1) a cohesive approach, integrating
research and practice, to the most salient issues regarding equity in STEAM
informal science learning; and 2) an effective model for a STEAM informal
science learning conference project to address equity. All targeted outcomes
will be iteratively measured using equitable, culturally responsive evaluation
techniques. The project findings will be disseminated through traditional and
nontraditional means with a focus on reaching a wide variety of diverse
audiences. At the conclusion of this process, there will be a more cohesive view
of where the STEAM informal science learning field is in relation to equity that
will inform next steps that will benefit a broad spectrum of underserved
populations. This conference project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to
research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and
belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c)
advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM
careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for
effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g)
enhance science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding
of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.