* 2314574
* Effectiveness of water-harvesting earthworks in mountain protected areas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Matthew LaFevor, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2026
* USD 360,870.00

Construction of water-harvesting earthworks (WHE) is expanding in highland
mountain areas to increase the supply of freshwater available for agriculture,
ecosystems, urban and industrial use. The construction of WHEs is transforming
land cover characteristics in public and private lands including in ecologically
sensitive areas. Relatively little is known about the hydrological effects of
WHE construction and whether projects result in desired outcomes. This research
assesses the effectiveness of water harvesting earthworks in the context of
freshwater conservation by combining data from (1) field surveys, mapping,
remote sensing, and spatial analysis; (2) field site monitoring and experiments,
and soil and hydrologic characterization; and (3) spatially distributed
hydrologic modeling. The project identifies to what degree water-harvesting
earthworks are a major drive of land cover change in highland regions the
benefits of project implementation for different stakeholder groups.

This project research employs an empirical approach to gather spatial and
environmental data on existing water-harvesting earthworks projects to
understand the ecological and hydrological impacts of these projects. The
specific goals of this project are to quantify the spatial distributions and
design of WHE projects, 2) characterize, empirically model, & assess
precipitation-runoff & infiltration dynamics of WHE impacted catchments, 3) and
synthesize data into research findings for WHE managers. Data are developed from
field surveys and remote sensing analyses of the spatial distributions and
design of existing WHE projects. Infiltration-runoff models are developed to
determine hydrological impacts of different types of WHE in diverse
environmental conditions. Findings are synthesized into data and reports
designed for WHE managers. The research builds upon geographical research in
agricultural slope management and water conservation and extends the
understanding of human-environment interactions into an important type of
social-ecological system.

This project is jointly funded by the Human-Environment and Geographical
Sciences program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.