* 2314930
* Improving Learning Outcomes and Equity in Blended Online and Face-to-Face Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Casey Henley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,186.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing best practices
for blended online and face-to-face learning in undergraduate STEM courses.
Blended course instruction refers to the mix of online and face-to-face
instructional modalities and is a broad term that encapsulates multiple course
designs. With the recent proliferation of this type of instructional approach,
it is imperative that the STEM education community seek a deeper understanding
of practices that improve student learning gains in these environments. This
project aims to isolate the design features of blended courses that affect
learning outcomes and determine how those relationships impact students from
four historically marginalized groups. The course design variables of interest
are geographical flexibility, amount of instructor versus technology-mediated
instruction, and temporal flexibility. Additionally, instructors will
participate in professional development to facilitate their technological
competence in blended online courses. Outcomes of this project have the
potential to create actionable recommendations for improving blended STEM
education, which ultimately could play a significant role in increasing
participation across STEM disciplines.

This project has two primary goals. First, to determine the relationships
between blended course design components and student learning outcomes. Second,
to explore the extent to which these practices contribute to equity through an
analysis of how impacts differ across student demographics. A quasi-experimental
research design will be utilized with data from students and instructors based
on the Community of Inquiry framework and a modified Mixed Instructional
Experience taxonomy. The project’s novel approach to isolating blended course
design features will improve understanding of which components of blended
courses have the largest impact on student learning outcomes. Student survey
responses will be analyzed by regression and multilevel models, and student and
instructor interviews will be analyzed via thematic content analysis. Project
results will be disseminated through academic conferences, such as the American
Education Research Association annual meeting, academic journals, and through
the Enhanced Digital Learning Initiative’s website. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.