* 2314625
* CAREER: Evolutionary Disease Ecology- Can evolutionary responses to environmental change modify the biodiversity-disease relationship?
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Jessica Hua, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 02/28/2027
* USD 732,033.00

Understanding patterns of emerging infectious diseases is at the forefront of
global interest. This research asks: “Why are some communities more vulnerable
to diseases than others?" To address this broad question, this work focuses on
understanding how biodiversity influences community disease risk. While many
studies find that communities with higher biodiversity have lower disease risk,
some studies show no effect of biodiversity on disease risk and others even find
the opposite effect (i.e. communities with higher biodiversity have higher
disease risk). Overall, the idea that biodiversity can reduce disease risk is
attractive because it suggests that protecting biodiversity has clear benefits
to both nature and society. This research tests the central hypothesis that
cryptic differences in population’s responses to past conditions (i.e.
evolutionary history) plays an important role in understanding when biodiversity
will reduce disease risk. This CAREER award will develop a summer research and
outreach program that supports undergraduate artists, engineers, biologists, and
educators and a 3rd grade citizen science training program.

The Biodiversity-Disease (BDD) Relationship has generated considerable attention
as a theoretical framework for predicting community disease outcomes. Yet,
limited consensus on the generality of the BDD relationship has been reached
leading to repeated calls to uncover factors shaping the magnitude and direction
of the BDD relationship. This research tests the hypothesis that intraspecific
host variation, generated by divergent evolutionary histories, plays a cryptic
role in shaping the direction and magnitude of the BDD relationship. To this
end, the research focuses on amphibian host-parasite interactions and takes
advantage of an experimentally tractable group of focal wood frog populations
that exhibit intraspecific variation in parasite susceptibility as a result of
evolving in contrasting environments. The researchers will first, evaluate the
contribution of intraspecific variation to shaping the BDD relationship by
generating mesocosm communities that vary in amphibian host species diversity
and focal host intraspecific diversity. Second, to integrate ecological context
into our understanding of how intraspecific variation influences the BDD
relationship, the researchers will conduct lab and mesocosm studies testing
whether intraspecific variation in focal hosts can shape the BDD relationship by
modifying (a) competitive, (b) predator-prey, or (c) host microbiota
interactions. Third, to complement the controlled experimental studies, the
researchers will conduct a citizen-led field surveys to evaluate whether
intraspecific variation modifies the BDD relationship in more complex natural
ecosystems. Towards this aim, the researchers will develop a two-step integrated
education-research program: (1) Content development: Researchers will design an
interdisciplinary program where undergraduates work with local communication and
education experts to develop a citizen training program. (2) Implementation:
Citizens will complete training program and collect field data that contributes
to the overarching research goals. Collectively, this integration will
facilitate citizen data collection efforts, diversify STEM training and
engagement, and broaden access to authentic research opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.