* 2314153
* Evaluating Long Term Population Continuity Through Radiocarbon Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jennifer Birch, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 365,726.00

This project addresses the question of how and why St. Lawrence Iroquoian
peoples disappeared from one river valley in the early colonial period. In the
late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries AD Iroquois relocated away from
the valley, abandoning all permanent settlements. This project develops a high-
resolution radiocarbon chronology to determine the timing and directionality of
this population movement. The current lack of chronological resolution prevents
appropriate understanding of the effects of warfare, European encroachment,
disease, and climatic change during the sixteenth century—a critical period
which encompasses the formation of Indigenous confederacies and initial European
colonization. The project includes researchers from the Huron-Wendat Nation
Bureau du Nionwentsïo (overseeing culture, territory, and heritage for the
Nation), the University of Georgia, Cornell University, and the University of
Montreal. The project is explicitly designed to advance Indigenous-led research
agendas and provide a model for the co-production of knowledge and its
dissemination.

This project combats Indigenous erasure by centering the long-term presence of
Iroquoian peoples. It illuminates the intentional actions and decisions made by
First Nations peoples during the sixteenth century. Cutting-edge approaches to
radiocarbon dating, charcoal identification, and statistical modelling of large
suites of radiocarbon dates are critical to the team’s approach. Careful sample
selection from existing collections and use of small samples in modern
accelerator mass spectrometry radiocarbon dating maximizes the utility of the
archaeological record while causing minimal impacts to that record. The project
leverages methodological innovations for overcoming challenges in the
radiocarbon calibration curve developed as part of the investigators previous
NSF-funded research and takes advantage of recent greater refinement in the 14C
calibration curve for the last millennium. Training opportunities are provided
for undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Georgia. A
reference collection will be generated that will be used in courses on
dendrochronology and that can be used for future research. The methods employed
by this project serve as a model for researchers working in other regions for
developing high-resolution timeframes to explore critical events in global
history.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.