* 2314499
* The Care Work System as a Fundamental Cause of Economic Inequalities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Pilar Gonalons-Pons, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Antwan Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,914.00

This project examines how the social organization of caregiving responsibilities
shapes economic inequalities in society. The essential work of providing care
for children or adults in homes, schools, nursing homes, or hospitals often
comes at a significant economic cost to the caregiver. Paid care jobs typically
pay significantly less than other jobs requiring the same skill level or
credentials, an economic toll scholars call the paid care work penalty. Unpaid
caregivers also incur an unpaid care work penalty, which refers to the economic
costs associated with providing unpaid care incurred when caregivers change or
quit jobs, or reduce work hours to provide care for those in their families and
communities. This project comprehensively examines how and why paid and unpaid
care penalties emerge, what their consequences are, and how to mitigate them.
The project includes a targeted dissemination plan to share results with
relevant constituencies and inform decision-making.

The project leverages state-of-the-art statistical regression analyses and high-
quality panel survey datasets from three countries and four decades
(1980s–2010s). Analyses address three central questions: (1) how providing care
work, both paid and unpaid, shapes individuals’ economic outcomes, (2) how
economic penalties associated with care work are linked and/or moderate economic
inequalities by demographic characteristics and social class, and (3) how social
policies moderate both. Research to date has treated paid and unpaid care work
penalties separately, generating critical knowledge gaps that limit the
understanding of the interdependencies, co-occurrence, and synergies driving
economic penalties in both types of care work. This fragmentation also makes it
difficult to decipher how much individual care work penalties impact population-
level economic inequalities across demographic characteristics and social class
more broadly. The project provides the first comprehensive empirical estimates
that examine the significance of care work penalties in understanding the causes
of economic inequalities and provides new insights to understand how care social
policy and infrastructure can mitigate or exacerbate them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.