* 2314889
* Climate action, finance, and justice in small and midsize cities in the USA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Anne Short Gianotti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,934.00

This project examines climate action in small and midsize cities in the United
States (US). Climate policies and programs have benefits and costs that impact
residents differently. This project advances knowledge about what small and
midsize cities are doing to slow climate change, how they are paying for those
actions, and if and how concerns about justice influence policy development. The
project identifies common practices, challenges, and innovations in strategies
to finance urban climate action and promote equity in urban climate policies and
programs. This information is of interest to city governments, climate action
networks, community-based organizations, and members of the general public
interested in urban climate action. In addition, the project provides
educational and training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral researcher. It also supports the development of teaching
materials on mixed-methods research and urban climate governance.

Cities have been important sites of climate action for more than two decades.
Scholars and practitioners have pointed to the need to understand how climate
plans and policies play out on the ground. While most conventional studies
focused on big cities, this project investigates the implementation, funding and
financing, and justice politics of climate action in small and midsize cities.
The investigators address three sets of questions about climate action: (1) What
actions are small and midsize cities taking to implement climate action policies
and programs, and how do they address concerns about justice and equity in these
efforts? (2) How are small and midsize cities paying for climate action, and how
does that financing influence what climate policies and programs are
implemented? (3) How do concerns about justice and equity come into play in
debates and decisions about climate action in small and midsize cities? To do
so, the investigators survey city staff in 250 small and midsize cities across
the US; collect and analyze city budgets, capital expenditure reports, and other
financial documents; and conduct in-depth comparative case studies of the
implementation of two climate mitigation practices, urban greening, and building
performance standards. In conversation with the existing literature on climate
action in large cities, the research findings support a more complex and robust
understanding of urban climate action and justice relevant to US cities of all
sizes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.