* 2314080
* PFI-TT: Eco-friendly concrete for cheaper and safer concrete pipes
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Xijun Shi, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a patented concrete that has been
developed to replace conventional reinforcing steel with recycled steel fibers
and aggregates from recycled asphalt pavement. Through this engineered use of
select recycled materials, the patented concrete will reduce concrete pipe costs
by up to 40% and carbon dioxide release by up to 19%, while retaining superior
strength and toughness. This project focuses on optimizing the special concrete
design used to manufacture concrete pipes and full-scale prototype testing at a
commercial pipe manufacturer. A life-cycle assessment will be conducted for the
special concrete pipes to quantify the economic and environmental benefits
throughout Texas and the US. By using this special concrete, the US pipe
industry could annually save over 738,000 tons of manufactured steel and over
2,700,000 tons of virgin aggregates. The use of the recycled steel fiber alone
would save 1.36M tons of carbon dioxide from being released into the atmosphere
– equivalent to removing 521,000 cars traveling 15,000 km per year from the
roads.

The proposed project will relieve costly workforce shortages by eliminating
hand-tying of reinforcement and satisfy the need in the precast concrete
industry – driven by recent and impending legislation – for lower carbon
footprint construction materials. The goal of this project is to design and
validate the special, patented concrete pipes with reduced or no embedded steel
cages that can replace existing conventional reinforced pipes in the market. The
research approach involves lab testing to develop new functional relationships
between key properties of recycled steel fiber and recycled asphalt pavement
(e.g., sizes, shapes, aspect ratios, thickness of coating, mass fraction of
impurities, and property variabilities) and key material performance properties
of the special concrete and structural performance properties of full-scale
pipes, including tensile strength, flexural strength, fracture properties,
stability, and pipe failure loads. Full scale prototype testing will validate
the capability of the special concrete to replace conventional reinforced
concrete for pipe applications while the life-cycle assessment will quantify the
environmental and monetary benefits of using the special concrete for pipes. The
results will yield new understanding of steel fiber-reinforced concrete behavior
in the dry-cast manufacturing process and the impact of recycled asphalt
pavement aggregates on dry-cast workability, stability, and consolidation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.