* 2314315
* I-Corps: Using Remote Sensing and Geospatial Data for Informed Climate Adaptation, Mitigation, Resiliency, and Environmentally Friendly Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Hamidreza Norouzi, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of advancements in geophysics and engineering using environmental
and geospatial solutions by utilizing models based on remote sensing and other
spatial data. This project may impact areas such as urban sustainability, water
quality and quantity monitoring, and risk analyses based on natural and climate
change. Nowadays, with significant satellite remote sensing observations
availability and advances in machine learning and cloud computing, new analyses
could inform various stakeholders and policy makers. Satellite data are
advantageous because of their spatial (from local up to global scale) and
temporal coverage (some from decades ago) which could significantly lower the
costs of alternative, ground-based, data collection and processing. Particular
topics such as water quality monitoring (including Harmful Algal Bloom (HAB)
detection) and identifying a resilient solution for pedestrians during heatwaves
using satellite data are among the technology and services to be explored in
this project.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of high spatial and temporal
resolution satellite data products using data processing, machine learning, and
validation efforts. The project defines the existing gaps that could be filled
with remote sensing and data processing technologies such as: algorithms to
statistically develop a high spatio-temporal resolution downscaled satellite
data; models to identify cool corridors and open street paths as a resilient
solution and response to urban heat islands (UHIs) which will mitigate the
adverse health impacts of UHIs; and algorithms for small water-bodies and lakes
water quality monitoring using fine resolution satellite imageries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.