* 2314347
* Ice Lithography – A Novel Nanomanufacturing Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Gavin King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 510,565.00

This project catalyzes an innovative ice lithography nanomanufacturing research
and education hub, which currently does not exist in the United States.
Lithography is a cornerstone technology of the modern era, enabling a range of
common electronic devices including cellular phones, computers, and energy
harvesting devices. Conventional lithography based on liquid phase resist
processing is well suited for patterning flat solid-state surfaces such as
silicon wafers. This grant supports research to advance high precision
lithography beyond robust planar substrates. Ice lithography is a dry
nanomanufacturing process that is amenable to functionalizing delicate and
complex surfaces such as free-standing three-dimensional nanostructures or
biological macromolecules. Additionally, the small molecular dimensions of the
condensed gasses employed as sacrificial resist layers in ice lithography yield
very high resolution. The project involves interdisciplinary fundamental
research in nanomanufacturing and nanopatterning leading to novel device
applications which benefits the US economy, health, and prosperity. It brings
together a team of researchers with expertise in condensed matter physics,
biophysics, astrochemistry, chemistry, and mechanical engineering. A broad range
of students including women and underrepresented minorities are trained by the
project. The project involves community outreach to high school students from
central Missouri, who design and fabricate their own “nanoscale ice sculptures”
while learning the basics of high precision lithography and device design.

Using traditional polymer resists on freestanding or nonplanar structures for
electron-beam lithography is not just impractical, it is often impossible due to
liquid surface tension or solvent effects. Additionally, conventional resists
have limitations with their ultimate resolution, leave behind residues, and are
not ecologically friendly. A manufacturing process which could robustly and
precisely arrange metal or semiconducting features on complicated substrate
surfaces such as peptide nanostructures or vanishingly sharp atomic force
microscope tips, would lead to a paradigm shift in nanofabrication. Ice
lithography, which employs solid-phase condensed gasses (amorphous ices) as
sacrificial resists offers a generalizable path for patterning delicate, free-
standing, or three-dimensional structures including biological macromolecules
that deform or denature if exposed to conventional liquid-phase resists. This
project employs a customized cryogenic scanning electron microscope to etch ice
resists by e-beam lithography, metallize the resist and lift it off to fabricate
novel nanostructures on biological and other soft material surfaces thus
creating new devices and systems. Through this research, a high-precision
manufacturing process is developed for multiple applications, including
nanodevices for immunosensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.