* 2314456
* IntBIO: Functional genomic dissection of biomineralization at multiple scales using a new marine model
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mark Martindale, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,057,185.00

Living organisms can transform biominerals into exquisite shapes and sizes
(e.g., diatoms, shells, bones, teeth, coral reefs) with material properties that
cannot be mimicked in the lab. Surprisingly little is known about the “rules” of
biomineralization. That it has evolved on Earth over 50 times indicates that
different organisms have discovered their own ways to generate these molecules.
The proteins involved evolved independently but share some common features with
one another thereby providing an opportunity to understand structure-function
properties. This work utilizes the favorable properties of a non-biomineralizing
marine invertebrate (the starlet sea anemone Nematostella vectensis) to
understand the cellular and molecular aspects of biomineralization utilizing
physical, chemical and biological approaches. A diverse team of scientists will
test theories of biomineralization, and generate novel shapes and compounds.
This knowledge will enable engineers to create novel compounds not seen in
nature and generate structures from that could be used in areas from
biomedicines to environmental engineering, thereby contributing to the
bioeconomy. Biomineralization is a fascinating subject of interest students of
all ages. Progress on this project will be incorporated into educational
activities at Whitney, in Gainesville, and at the University of North Florida.

The process of biomineralization has evolved independently in numerous taxa. The
“intrinsically disordered proteins” (IDPs) known to play a role in modulating
the mineralization reaction are found in disparate taxa such as corals,
echinoderms, sponges, and vertebrates, yet are not homologous thereby providing
a unique opportunity to understand key structural and functional features of
IDPs. The overarching goal is to develop a novel platform for examining
biomineralization at the molecular, cellular, tissue, and organismal levels of
control. This platform is based on the soft bodied "Starlet" sea anemone,
Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria, Anthozoa), which will be genetically
programmed to secrete IDPs into designer matrices and compartments, enabling
examination of their role in promoting non-classical mineralization processes
involved in biomineralization. Integrated approaches enabled by our
collaborative, interdisciplinary, and multi-institutional team include
comparative and functional genomics, biochemistry and proteomics. Cellular
engineering will identify how post translational modification of IDPs affect
their interaction with scaffolding proteins and mineral precursor ions. This
result will enable the study of cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions involved
in creating the polarization needed for secretion of IDPs into controlled
‘reaction spaces’ and the structure and functional ability of these
artificially-induced biomineral IDPs will be studied by monitoring the
‘mineralogical signatures’ created by mineral precursors and their interactions
with the designer matrices. Finally, using genome editing techniques, we will
attempt to engineer a soft bodied organism into one that produces components of
a coral-like exoskeleton.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.