* 2314718
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Dynamics and Social Memory in Contexts of Economic Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Melissa Burch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 17,714.00

This dissertation project seeks to enhance understanding of the implications of
social memory on labor activity, social identities, and forms of political-
economic collaboration. Social memory and cultural heritage have been especially
significant culturally for communities where mining has occupied a central role
in social and economic life. A focus on organizing within those communities
improves understanding of what variables have been driving what the U.S.
National Labor Relations Board has described as a surge in labor activity. In
addition to training a U.S.-based graduate student in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, the project improves public
understanding of science and the scientific method by facilitating exchanges
between practitioners of heritage work, researchers, and other stakeholders
focusing on social and labor relations. The doctoral student disseminates
findings widely, including in presentations to employment research institutes.
Further, this dissertation project advances science through development of a new
combination of ethnographic, visual, and archival methods that uses photo
elicitation to facilitate participatory analysis of personal and family
archives.

Through an eighteen-month ethnographic study with mineworker labor organizations
and cultural heritage groups, the project investigates how memory impacts labor
dynamics in the context of post-industrial labor market restructuring. This
project asks to what degree and in what proportion are changing labor dynamics
are driven by economic, social, and historical factors. The doctoral student
combines participant observation, interviews, and archival research to
empirically examine 1) historical narratives of events like labor actions and
union hall meetings; 2) actions and discourses at heritage institutions and
commemorative events; 3) materials and photographs that people collect in their
personal archives, and their interactions with these materials. The data
collected will be coded for different demographic and economic activity
variables in order to identify what stories people tell, and why, about class
solidarity and unionism, and to investigate potential connections between how
working-class people remember the past and the investments they have in the
present. In doing so, the doctoral dissertation project advances
interdisciplinary studies of post-industrial labor markets through a focus on
social memory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.