* 2314890
* DDRIG in DRMS: The implications of algorithmic decision-making for inequality in long-term care
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Emily Rauscher, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 31,900.00

States are increasingly using algorithms to determine eligibility for Medicaid-
funded long-term healthcare for elderly people and people with disabilities in
the United States. As opposed to Medicaid more generally, eligibility for long-
term care is based on functional capacity and disability status in addition to
income and assets. Previously, states may have relied solely on physicians to
decide whether a long-term care applicant is functionally eligible, but many
states now use algorithms to make this determination. Though algorithms are
often purported to be less biased than humans, research has shown that
algorithms often increase inequality, especially inequality between demographic
categories. However, the population-level consequences of algorithmic decision-
making for inequality are still unclear. Medicaid long-term care is an important
case to address this evidence gap; Medicaid is a crucial source of healthcare
for millions of Americans, especially for members of marginalized groups.
Additionally, the number of people who require long-term care will likely
increase as the elderly population grows over the next few decades, making this
issue particularly timely. This research sheds light on how algorithmic
decision-making, and which characteristics of algorithms, are better or worse
for equity in access to long-term care.

This dissertation uses mixed methods to answer three primary research questions:
1) How and why do state Medicaid programs use algorithms in long-term care
eligibility determination? 2) How do Medicaid bureaucrats use algorithms to
perform long-term care eligibility assessments? 3) What is the relationship
between algorithm implementation and inequality between demographic categories
in long-term care access? By linking Medicaid claims data with primary data on
the algorithms used by each state, this project estimates how algorithm
implementation is associated with inequality in long-term care (RQ3). In-depth
interviews with Medicaid administrators in three states elucidate the mechanisms
underlying this relationship (RQ1 and RQ2). Results help identify organization-
level social determinants of health that can potentially be altered to improve
equity. Further, the primary data collected to answer RQ3 will be made publicly
available to enable future research on algorithms in long-term care and give
Medicaid long-term care beneficiaries better insight into how their benefits are
determined.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.