* 2314278
* Research Infrastructure: 2021BBSRC-NSF/BIO UniPlex - Genome-Wide Protein Complex Prediction and Validation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Kevin Drew, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 137,472.00

Proteins are essential components that both build cellular structures and work
as the tools that make the cell function. However, proteins do not operate in
isolation and often form molecular machines in which several proteins bind
together and with other biomolecules to act as a single entity called a
molecular complex. This provides tremendous versatility and regulatory
capacities, since by changing a single component of the complex, its function
can be dramatically altered. Protein complexes often also form more stable
structures than isolated proteins, and their formation creates new active sites
as protein chains from different molecules assemble in close proximity. It is
therefore of crucial importance to know the composition of complexes and study
them as discrete functional entities in order to truly understand how cellular
processes work. This project is an international collaboration between the
University of Illinois at Chicago and the European Bioinformatics Institute
(EMBL-EBI), Cambridge, UK.

The Complex Portal (www.ebi.ac.uk/complexportal) is an encyclopaedic database
that collates and summarizes information on stable, macromolecular complexes of
known function from the scientific literature through manual curation. This
project will extend the scope and relevance of the Complex Portal by using
machine learning algorithms that can identify groups of proteins that are most
likely to represent functional complexes which exist in the cell. These
predictions of complexes will be validated against other experimental data and,
where possible, also against literature evidence. We will also use large scale
studies of protein expression in different cell types, tissues, and conditions
to validate the predicted complexes and to differentiate between variants of
complexes formed in different conditions. Complexes predicted to exist at high
confidence will be made available through the Complex Portal website, properly
identified as computationally inferred data, where they will both guide the work
of Complex Portal curators and dramatically increase the amount of complexes
available for researchers as reference entities. Additional information from
other resources such as Reactome and PDB will be annotated to these entries and
changes mapped to amino acids which are known to affect protein interaction
strength and stability to complex binding interfaces from the IntAct database.
This work will help accelerate understanding of complexes as the molecular
machines essential to biological processes and support basic and applied
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.