* 2314089
* Integrating Research and Practice: Reimagining Youth Community Science through Make-and-Take Data Sensing Kits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Sylvia Perez, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,638,715.00

In dozens of ways, youths' lives are shaped by data. Yet, youth seldom have the
opportunity to pull back the curtain on data science to experience how data are
collected, prepared, analyzed, and presented into the final, neatly packaged
statistics and figures they see every day. This lack of first-hand data science
experience not only limits youths' data science skills - key to their
educational and career pathways - but also limits their skills as civically
engaged decision-makers capable of critically analyzing data-based claims. This
project investigates how youth can use low-cost sensors to collect data from
their communities and engage in data science practices to explore and tell
stories about community-relevant phenomena (e.g., climate change, urban
segregation, public transportation, pollution). These museum-based camps are
week-long, immersive experiences that focus on question formulation, data
collection, analysis, visualization, and interpretation. The informal camp
setting offers a mix of both high-contact instructional time (i.e., working with
other students and facilitators during the day) and independent exploration time
(i.e., taking the hardware home each afternoon and evening) through which youth
can both learn new skills and apply them in their homes and communities.

In this collaborative project, a university research lab and children's science
museum work together to design, implement, study, and revise a week-long data
science camp for middle school age students, data science learning assessment
items and a facilitator training curriculum. Camps will be implemented during
Winter, Spring, and Summer school breaks over a two year period. The project
will investigate two primary questions: What data science knowledge and
practices do learners gain in the course of designing, carrying out and
interpreting a scientific data collection effort relevant to their community?
And what ways can museums serve as springboards and touchstones for broader
informal STEM learning experiences that expand into learners' homes and
communities? Potential contributions include learning theory and design
heuristics for informal STEM education programming that positions STEM inquiry
and learning within participants' broader communities and sparks youth's
recognition of the relevance of a data-oriented approach to understanding their
day-to-day environments, spaces, and lives. As camp programming includes four
diverse informal data contexts of increasing independence and complexity - (1)
guided explorations; (2) 1-day projects; (3) multi-day projects; and (4)
longitudinal, at-home, extension projects for a subset of participants (who take
the hardware home) - anticipated contributions include comparisons of the varied
settings in which informal data science learning occurs. The project uses a
mixed-methods research approach that includes: 1) quantitative analyses of
paired pre- and post-camp assessments to identify shifts in data science
practices and perspectives; 2) qualitative thematic analyses of pre-, post-camp,
and delayed interviews triangulated with interaction analysis of in-camp
observations; and 3), and log file analyses identifying patterns in learners'
data gathering behavior. Additionally, longitudinal analyses of assessment and
interview data over the 2.5-year project timeframe will gauge the efficacy of
camp curriculum and assessment revisions over the 6 implementations. The project
centers equity and belonging in two primary ways: curriculum development efforts
focus on inclusive and equitable informal science learning and a focus on Latine
populations who are often underserved in STEM education.

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.