* 2314898
* Research Infrastructure: Continued Support of the Duke Lemur Center for the Study of Primate Biology and History
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Erin Ehmke, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award will partially support operations of the Duke Lemur Center (DLC), a
unique living stock collection of the world's most endangered and biologically
diverse primates - the lemurs of Madagascar. Lemurs are exclusive to the
biodiversity hotspot of Madagascar, and due to their critically-endangered
status, are not a renewable resource. Serving as a living laboratory for
advancing interdisciplinary research, scholarship, and conservation, the DLC is
the only place in the world where lemurs are readily available for comparative
study together with associated biological samples, decades of medical records,
life history data, and fossil relatives of living taxa. The diversity of the
colony enables an expansive scope of science to be conducted and communicated,
covering disciplines ranging from evolutionary processes, behavioral ecology,
reproductive biology, life history, metabolic physiology, sensory systems,
cognition, anatomy, biomechanics, and conservation science. In addition, the DLC
is an exceptional training ground for students across academic levels. Over its
57-year history, thousands of students ranging from K-12 through postgraduate
levels have been engaged in and inspired by their experiences at the DLC. The
veterinary department supports educational activities via work-study
opportunities and veterinary student training, including an internship for
Malagasy veterinarians. Critically, the DLC is committed to conservation
activities via both ex situ captive management and extensive community-based
Madagascar programs. Hundreds of thousands of visitors from the general public
have been exposed to the concepts of biodiversity discovery and conservation, as
well as the power of biological research via their exposure to the DLC's staff,
students, and collections.

The overarching aim of this award is to strategically enhance the value of the
DLC’s living collection through five short-term goals. These goals provide
significant opportunities to: (1) continue to maintain and grow a healthy colony
for research use, (2) develop data-driven colony management best practices, (3)
continue to serve the research community and generate additional collaborations,
(4) build a more diverse user community, and (5) increase the digital
availability of data from the living stocks collection. Colony support is
central to meeting these goals for advancing key programs in biological
research, education, and conservation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.