* 2314800
* DDRIG in DRMS: A mixed methods investigation of the barriers to and effects of solutions journalism for climate risk mitigation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Christofer Skurka, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,708.00

Addressing risks posed by climate uncertainty requires the participation of
broad swaths of the public. Risk communicators often focus on threats posed by
climate uncertainty to motivate action. But this kind of messaging may fail to
inspire engagement if people feel too fearful or discouraged. Solutions
journalism, which focuses on successful responses to problems, offers another
avenue for empowering people to support climate uncertainty mitigation. However,
there is little research on climate solutions journalism. This research uses an
experiment to investigate the effect of climate solutions stories on climate
action engagement. Additionally, the researchers explore journalistsâ€™ goals in
reporting as well as common obstacles they face to reporting on climate
solutions. Altogether, findings from this project shed light on the role
solutions journalism can play in promoting public support for climate
uncertainty mitigation. Results also highlight opportunities to support
solutions reporting through training programs, resources, and further
practically applicable research for journalists.

This research uses two studies to understand how solutions journalism
contributes to climate uncertainty mitigation. Informed by Social Cognitive
Theory and Exemplification Theory, Study 1 operationalizes elements of the
Solutions Journalism Framework and tests effects of four solar power solutions
stories (compared to a risk-focused climate story and neutral control story) on
psychological responses and action intentions. Effects are measured again two
weeks after message exposure to assess durability of the intervention. Results
offer insights into effects of solutions stories and cognitive mechanisms that
drive these outcomes. Study 2 involves interviews with environmental solutions
journalists to identify key reporting outcomes and understand challenges
inherent to this form of reporting. Findings shall clarify the conceptual
boundaries of solutions journalism and identify opportunities for future
solutions journalism research. Results from both studies offer insight into how
practitioners define solutions journalism, how it affects audiences, and how it
could support climate uncertainty mitigation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.