* 2314239
* Partnerships for Indigenous Climate Journalism
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Patti Parson, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,287,634.00

Although Indigenous communities are among the hardest hit by the effects of
climate change, national news coverage of how these communities are using
technology and engineering to tackle the problem is usually done from non-
Indigenous perspective. In a unique collaboration between PBS NewsHour and Indij
Public Media (the parent company of ICT, formerly known as Indian Country
Today), this project will put the perspectives and the reporting of Indigenous
communities front and center through their co-creation of digital and broadcast
segments. This work will appear on the NewsHour's nightly broadcast and in the
websites and social media spaces of both ICT and the NewsHour. This project also
will create the first Indigenous climate reporting desk in the US within an
Indigenous-led newsroom. It will allow Indigenous journalists to challenge
existing narratives about climate change and its impact on Indigenous
communities, replacing a narrative of loss with one that is rooted in lived
experience and much richer and reflective of multiple perspectives. The
collaborative research led by Knology will examine what different publics
(Indigenous and non-Indigenous) know about (1) climate problems (the
differential effects on different places and peoples), (2) climate problem-
solvers (the different peoples who offer their expertise on solving climate
problems), and (3) climate solutions (different interventions for preventing,
mitigating, or reversing those effects).

One of the project's key goals is to interrupt negative social stereotypes which
can hinder progress on important issues such as climate change. By uncovering
the culturally dominant as well as Indigenous understandings of climate science,
climate reporting can be crafted to open publics' eyes to a greater range of
engineering and technology solutions. The team will apply the social scientific
framework of "moral motives" (Janoff-Bulman & Carnes, 2018), which refers to the
basic human need to protect and nurture others. The team will use this framework
to systematically study and experiment with different ways of framing climate
journalism through three phases: Phase 1 focuses on analyzing existing news
reports to reveal how climate engineering is covered by contemporary journalism.
Phase 2 will reveal the stereotyped knowledge shared within both Indigenous and
non-Indigenous publics on three topics: climate problems, problem-solvers, and
the solutions that flow from these framings. Phase 3 will deploy experimental
interventions to test the effectiveness of different reporting strategies for
helping public audiences see beyond their stereotypes, and to expand their STEM
vocabularies and understandings of paths to climate empowerment. The research
process is fully participatory, with journalists involved in research design and
implementation at all stages, and cross-pollination among all teams through a
regular series of focused meetings.

This Research in Support of Wide-reaching Public Engagement with STEM project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports
projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal
STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and
educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific
discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the
theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f)
improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the
public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.