* 2314401
* Design and Synthesis of Atomically Tunable Memristors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Judy Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2026
* USD 349,999.00

Neuromorphic computing (NC) is a brain-inspired computing that has recently
emerged as a promising resolution to the von Neumann bottleneck of data movement
in current computing based on separate processing and memory units. NC enables
the information to be processed and stored in the same units and is expected to
provide critical computing hardware for the emerging artificial intelligence
(AI), machine learning, internet of things, etc., and may converge with quantum
computing for quantum neuromorphic computing. Researchers have attempted to
mimic biological brain operation by using artificial versions of the elements
known as memristors. Memristor, regarded as the fourth fundamental circuit
element next to resistor, capacitor, and inductor, consists of a thin dielectric
(typically oxide) film of pinched hysteresis of resistance sandwiched with a
pair of electrodes to mimic the functionality of biological brain operation. In
memristors, the operations of both memory storage and computing are integrated
in one device. However, as the field of NC evolves, the ability to control at
the atomic scale the memristive resistance, switching speed, cycling endurance,
among other performance criteria, becomes increasingly important as NC circuits
potentially require devices with different performance capabilities closely
integrated together. In particular, memristors with tunable properties are
critical to mimic biological brain operation. Unfortunately, an atomic-scale
control of the memristor parameters has not been achieved due to lack of control
in growth of ultrathin (sub-3 nm) oxides films, resulting in defects that in
turn lead to reduced energy efficiency, device non-uniformity and low yield in
current memristors. The proposed research aims to address the challenges through
a synergetic integration of atomically controlled synthesis of atomically
tunable memristors based on ultrathin oxide atomic layer stacks (ALS), atomistic
material simulation/modeling that predicts the physical properties of ALS, and
advanced characterization both in situ on materials and ex situ on devices. The
success of the project can have a broader impact on a large spectrum of
commercial applications including NC, AI, quantum information science, etc.
Scientifically, a long-standing question in material research is whether a few
atomic layers stacked with an atomic precision can provide the functionality and
large-area uniformity as required for advanced electronics. This question is
driven by the continuous down-sizing of transistors in last five decades to
currently sub-5 nm to meet the need in future electronics with functionality
tuned with an atomic precision. Using an in vacuo ALD approach developed in PIâ€™s
prior NSF support, the proposed research aims to address the challenges through
a synergetic integration of atomically controlled synthesis of oxide ALS guided
by atomistic material simulation/modeling and advanced characterization both in
situ and ex situ on materials and devices. Specifically in the two proposed
aims, Aim 1 focuses on design and synthesis of ultrathin oxide ALS and Aim 2
investigates ALS properties at material and device levels. The intellectual
merit of the proposed research is through a new fundamental understanding of
physical properties of ultrathin oxide ALS that is crucial to achieving
atomically tunable memristors for future electronics and computing and a
transformative leap in developing novel approaches for design and synthesis of
ultrathin ALS to enable new functionalities. The achieved atomically tunable
memristors based on the ALS can have a broader impact on a large spectrum of
commercial applications including neuromorphic and quantum computing, artificial
intelligence, quantum information science, etc. The project emphasizes forefront
education and the cutting-edge research capability which will attract high-
quality students, especially those from underrepresented groups, to pursue
careers in STEM fields and will further amplify the impacts towards producing a
unique and diverse future workforce in science and engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.