* 2314238
* A Climate of Hope: Investigating learning at an innovative exhibit towards new knowledge, theory, and practice of climate change learning with diverse audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Lisa Thompson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,026,207.00

This project builds on two prior NSF awards that supported development of a
climate change exhibit at the Natural History Museum of Utah through deep
engagement with research and rigorous prototyping. Grounded in key ideas from
science communication, this exhibit is designed to support new, productive types
of engagement around the topic of climate change among the diverse communities
of Salt Lake City, Utah. This project will study how visitors learn from the
exhibit, with the goal of developing guidelines that other informal STEM
education institutions can follow to develop similar exhibits that can engage
diverse audiences in conversations about climate change.

Specifically, this project plans to study five different framings developed via
pilot work (rational hope, better future, local context, community action, and
playfulness). The research will explore how these frames influence the
knowledge, emotion, and identity resources used in conversation by diverse and
historically marginalized learners. Such learners are often at the frontline of
climate change but are not typically targeted by climate change education. As a
result, they can find existing climate change communication hard to engage with,
even though climate issues intersect with their lives in meaningful ways. In
studying learning at and beyond the exhibit, this project seeks to develop
theory around how science issues can be framed for diverse informal education
communities, explore how such framing strategies can be taken up for community
climate action, and use the results to further refine the exhibit. The project
will recruit community boards to consult on the research and design work. Data
will be gathered from purposively sampled populations, and will include
audio/video recordings of visitor engagement with the exhibit, pre-surveys, and
delayed post-surveys and interviews. Inductive coding, deductive coding,
qualitative analysis, quantitative analysis, and case analysis will be used to
address the research questions: 1) Which knowledge, emotion, and identity
resources do visitors use in conversations about climate chance? 2) How does
their use influence visitors' learning trajectories? And, 3) How do resource use
and learning trajectories vary across learners with different identities? The
intellectual merit lies in contributions made to both the learning sciences and
science communication fields by extending the theoretical understanding of what
forms of climate science communication work, for whom, and why. The broader
impacts arise from how these discoveries can foster learners' critical appraisal
of the connections between STEM and society, and support learners in making
informed judgments about how STEM intersects with their daily lives.
Dissemination efforts will focus on a national network of museum practitioners
seeking to advance climate-related learning experiences, as well as continued
community-based work in the Salt Lake Valley and at the University of Utah.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.