* 2314614
* Switchable Persistent Spin Helix Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Power dissipation and energy consumption are a key limiting factor in the future
scalability of present computing technologies based on silicon field-effect
transistors. Due to their potential for a low switching energy, spintronic
devices that leverage the spin of electrons to carry information instead of
their charge have long been pursued as an alternative approach, both for digital
computing and analog devices. However, realizing the potential of spintronic
devices requires overcoming a few basic challenges. First, weak spin-orbit
coupling in conventional spintronic materials such as GaAs necessitates
transport of electrons over large devices to allow control of the spin. In
contrast, using a material with high spin-orbit coupling to make smaller devices
leads to rapid loss of spin information due to dephasing: spins rapidly rotating
and becoming out of phase with each other. The PIs propose to address these two
challenges by leveraging materials with a special class of spin behavior called
the persistent spin helix, where electron spins remain in phase even when
rotating rapidly, enabling spin information to be retained longer even in high
spin-orbit materials. Specifically, by using electric-field tunable persistent
spin helix in van der Waals solids with strong spin-orbit coupling, the PIs
propose to enable a new class of materials for spintronic devices, where the
spin behavior can be sensitively controlled by electric fields and where the
device dimensions can be reduced by two to three orders of magnitude due to the
significantly stronger spin-orbit coupling. This would help innovate the design
of competitive spin field-effect transistors for high-performance and low-power
computing. This award also aims to promote research training to historically
underrepresented groups in the rapidly growing field of spintronic materials and
devices, and thereby contribute to both the technical knowhow and workforce for
the development of future microelectronics.

The PIs propose to understand the effect of electric field-tuned symmetry and
Hamiltonian on the spin texture, spin dynamics, and spin transport of square van
der Waals crystals with strong spin-orbit coupling for spintronic devices. With
the square symmetry of the basal plane and natural quantum well structures of
selected materials, when an external electric field is applied along desired
crystallographic orientations, persistent spin helix-type spin-orbit field is
expected. With persistent spin helix states and strong spin-orbit coupling, the
PIs expect to achieve electric field/electric voltage-switchable symmetry-
protected long-range coherent spin transport. The model materials include air-
stable, lithography-friendly van der Waals crystals Bi2O2Se and BiOI, and the
model devices include persistent spin helix-based spin field effect transistors.
The proposed approach for enabling and tuning persistent spin helix does not
require careful balance between Rashba and Dresselhaus fields commonly seen in
III-V. This makes the proposed model systems a robust platform for exploring
spin field effect transistor. The PIs will grow single crystalline orientation-
controlled spintronic tetragonal van der Waals semiconductors and fabricate
persistent spin helix-based field effect transistors. The PIs will
computationally predict and experimentally reveal the spin-polarized band
structure, and dynamics and wavelength of persistent spin helix in the model
materials and devices. The PIs will also demonstrate the proof-of-concept
persistent spin helix-based field effect transistors and reveal the effects of
device structure/dimension, gate dielectrics, external voltage/polarization, and
temperature on the characteristics and performance of the spin field effect
transistor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.