* 2314013
* Social Movements and Corporate Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* bocar ba, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 261,234.00

This award funds three projects that investigate how social movements impact
firm performance. The goal is better understanding of how social movements
affect not just the targeted organization/s but also other firms that produce
inputs that the targeted organizations use. The first project will collect and
disseminate a large and innovative data on all firms that are likely to be
affected by the activities of social movements. The second project uses this
dataset to analyze how social movements affects the production, profits, and
stock prices of these firms while the third project will use survey data to try
to understand the mechanisms through which the activities mass movements affect
firm performance. By offering empirical evidence on the effects of social
movements on the economy, justice, and law enforcement spending, this research
provides a methodological template for measuring the cost of law enforcement
violence in the United States. Additionally, it aims to train graduate students
in cutting-edge research methods and interdisciplinary approaches to studying
issues.

This award funds a research project that combines observational data, natural
experiments, and surveys to explore the impact of social movements on firms’
behavior and outcomes. The proposed research consists of three parts. First, the
research team constructs a novel dataset of firms that have contracts with
organizations that may the targets of these social movements. Second, the
researchers will use this detailed data set and several methodologies to study
the impacts of social movement agitation on the performance of these firms with
a focus on their output, profitability, and stock market valuations. Finally,
the researchers survey experts who influence policies to understand the
mechanisms through which the activities of social movements influence the
targeted organizations as well as businesses that supply them with inputs. The
results of our project provide crucial insights into the organizational
landscape and the nature of interactions between firms and law enforcement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.