* 2314478
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Representation and Processing of Vowel Contrasts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Jie Zhang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 09/30/2024
* USD 18,354.00

This doctoral dissertation project uses a series of speech recognition
experiments to investigate how the characteristics of vowel sounds are stored in
the mind and the role they play in speech comprehension. In order for listeners
to comprehend spoken language, the mind must successfully match acoustic
information that the listener hears to specific words they know. For example, a
native English speaker must be sensitive to the difference in vowel sounds
between the words BED and BAD to hear and retrieve the right word in their mind.
By comparing the results of experiments in American English with another
language, the project analyzes to what extent these vowel characteristics may be
stored and processed in a language-specific fashion. As well as making important
contributions to the field of psycholinguistics, this research has implications
for the teaching of challenging vowel distinctions in the classroom for second
language learners, particularly non-native learners of English and native
English learners of other languages.

In American English, the importance of the distinction between so-called 'tense'
versus 'lax' vowel sounds, such as in the words 'beat' versus 'bit', is well
known. However, it is unclear how English vowel tenseness is represented in the
mind and the consequence this has on spoken word recognition. As for other
languages, there is disagreement about whether certain vowel sounds are
distinguished by tenseness, as in English, or by other types of vowel
characteristics. The project uses a combination of 'cross-modal priming' tasks,
in which listeners must recognize one word right after hearing a different one,
and 'discrimination' tasks, in which listeners must identify whether two
consecutive sounds/words were the same or different. These experiments provide
evidence for the way the mind categorizes the characteristics of vowel sounds,
as well as how these characteristics lead to the activation of different types
of mental representation during speech comprehension: phonological (sound
structure), morphological (word structure), and semantic (meaning).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.