* 2314709
* Pedestrian level urban outdoor heat exposure modeling and mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiaojiang Li, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2026
* USD 278,238.00

Many cities are experiencing more frequent and more intense extreme heat events
presenting an increasingly important public health hazard. But there is
considerable variability of urban heat within cities resulting in disparate
extreme heat impacts on different populations. Intra-city heat exposure varies
as a function of multiple factors including building heights, tree canopy cover
and surface characteristics. This project uses urban microclimate modeling and
geospatial technologies to estimate and map the urban heat distribution at a
spatial resolution of 1m and at the pedestrian level. Based on the hyperlocal
variability of heat distribution, this project further evaluates the daily heat
exposure of pedestrians walking from home to nearby destinations including
parks, playgrounds, and public transit stations. This project provides a
detailed understanding of how urban heat impacts peopleâ€™s daily lives. This
research also evaluates the impact of extreme weather on the heat exposure
taking into consideration the socio-economic characteristics across
neighborhoods. This project helps urban planners and city governments to develop
plans to enhance climate resilience. High-resolution urban heat data developed
by the project is disseminated through public websites to benefit public health
researchers and urban environmental planning.

Cities are experiencing more frequent and more intense extreme heat events which
are an increasingly important public health hazard. Knowing the spatial
distribution and the temporal variation of heat is of critical importance to
understand the conditions that result in extreme heat exposure. The project
applies geospatial data analytics, urban microclimate modeling, parallel
geocomputing, and nationally available high-resolution geospatial datasets to
model and map urban outdoor heat exposure. High-resolution heat exposure maps
provide new understanding of the distribution of outdoor heat exposure across
cities. This project also estimates heat exposure for routes connecting
different origin-destination points. Researchers examine the spatial
distribution of outdoor heat exposure among different socio-economic groups
across neighborhoods to identify populations particularly at risk. This project
develops data products and analysis to inform strategies to mitigate and adapt
to the extreme heat in cities using a data portal and web-based
geovisualization. The outcomes of this project help urban planners and city
governments to develop plans to enhance climate resilience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.