* 2314415
* CAREER: A Multiphysics Framework for Modeling, Analysis, and Experimentation of Power Systems and Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Brian Johnson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 02/28/2027
* USD 480,172.00

Today, power systems are conceptualized as a convoluted tangle of passive
components, power electronics, rotating machinery, and control loops at various
scales. Each subsystem is typically studied in a myopic manner with specifically
tailored methods. In this proposal, we show how closed-loop multiphysics energy
systems can be unified under a circuit theoretic framework and prototyped
effectively with power electronics emulation. Since power electronics and their
closed-loop control action can be modeled as equivalent circuits, models are
obtained that effectively bridge the power electronics and power systems divide,
from the converter-level (Watts) to the system-level (Megawatts). Research
themes are uniquely poised at the confluence of circuits, control, and power
such that project outcomes will address fundamental challenges in the design of
sustainably-powered future systems. The proposed techniques naturally yield a
variety of learning opportunities where complex systems and their controls can
be straightforwardly depicted and their actual behavior becomes obvious once
seen as a circuit. Accordingly, this framework codifies numerous topics within
electrical engineering so that students can seamlessly apply concepts across
their educational experience.

The project will develop modeling and experimentation frameworks that allow for
the study of energy dynamics in modern systems. The underlying approach is based
on first showing that well-known circuit laws are naturally embedded in control
feedback paths for power electronics. This allows for a direct translation of
controller dynamical behavior into equivalent circuit representations for
converters; extensions are further made for heterogeneous systems containing
power electronics, sensors, and machinery. What emerges is a comprehensive
framework for closed-loop power systems and electronics modeling where energy
acts as the fundamental link between subsystem models. Research thrusts focus
on: developing equivalent circuit models for multiphysics systems with closed-
loop cyber controls; formulating circuit models for complex power systems with
massive utilization of electronics and their accompanying fast controls; and
outlining a suite of experimental methodologies for emulation of multiphysics
power systems and electromechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.