* 2314980
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Resilience and Grassroots Ecotourism Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Anna Willow, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 31,736.00

Indigenous communities are increasingly turning toward cultural and
environmental tourism as a development and economic alternative to resource
extraction. Ecotourism is particularly promising to historically marginalized
communities who possess deep cultural knowledge and unique ecological features
and seek avenues of community development that honor that cultural knowledge and
preserve those resources. How do community members involved with ecotourism
development make choices about the elements of their culture and environment
they emphasize to visitors? Are ecotourism programs reflective of broader
community ideals and identity, and how do these perspectives vary within the
community? This doctoral dissertation research explores the intersection between
ecotourism development and socio-environmental resilience in a North American
Indigenous community. The research tests the applicability of theories on socio-
environmental resilience used across disciplines dealing with human-environment
relations to Indigenous contexts. It also trains a doctoral dissertation student
in theory and methods in cultural anthropology and the work will be distributed
broadly to academic audiences, community stakeholders, and the public.

This project has three main objectives; 1) to investigate how indigenous
ecotourism coordinators and affiliates develop ecotourism infrastructure in
relation to their ideas of what should be made resilient in their communities;
2) to examine the traditional subsistence and land-based practices of community
members both in and outside of ecotourism programming and the degree to which
they reflect community ideals and identity; and 3) to explore how different
generations of community members construct their identities and futures in the
face of community change both ecotourism-driven and otherwise. The research
involves ethnographic methods, including semi-structured interviews, participant
observation, and community based participatory workshops. The research advances
understanding about the role of Indigenous knowledge in ecosystem science,
ecotourism development, and sustainability. This project also tests whether
theories about frequently used to characterize the resilience of socio-
ecological systems have efficacy within Indigenous socio-ecological systems and
the perspectives of Indigenous system participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.