* 2314378
* Microscopic Electronic Heterogeneity Studied with Ultrafast 2D Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Martin Zanni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 565,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Martin Zanni of the University
of Wisconsin-Madison is developing a spatially resolved two-dimensional white-
light microscope to study charge and exciton transport in perovskite
microcrystals and heterogeneous thin films of semiconducting carbon nanotubes.
The goal is to measure and understand the dependence of exciton and charge
diffusion on microscopic heterogeneities in structural geometries and electronic
couplings. These properties are important because they impact the timescale and
length scales over which energy and charge moves through the material. Professor
Zanni and his students will design and construct a 2D White-Light microscope in
which the focus of the pump beam can be raster scanned relative to the probe.
The corresponding images will give spatial maps that correlate electronic
heterogeneity to exciton and charge diffusion timescales and lengths. Their
studies will create a new type of hyperspectral imaging technique for ultrafast
2D spectroscopy and could lead to a better understanding of the fundamental
science that links electronic structure and exciton/charge diffusion to nano-and
micro-scale heterogeneities. Professor Zanni and his students funded by this
grant will be involved in outreach to a local elementary school as well as build
and test a novel design for an ergonomic and wheelchair accessible laser table.

The electronic structure of organic and inorganic films and crystals dictates
the timescale and length of exciton and charge diffusion. Inherent to solution
processed materials are micro- and nanoscale heterogeneities that alter
electronic structure. Using a new microscope built from an ultrafast 2D white-
light spectrometer, the Zanni research group discovered spatial patterns of
microscopic heterogeneities in electronic structure within single microcrystals
across a variety of materials. In two different types of singlet fission
materials, changes were observed in bandgap near edges, defects, and in
appreciable quantities throughout the bulk material. In 2D perovskites, micron
spatial variations in the binding energy of biexcitons were observed. With these
observations in mind, it stands to reason that a crystal that has spatially
heterogeneous electronic structure should also have spatially dependent exciton
diffusion. The purpose of this proposal is to test that hypothesis by studying
the link between electronic heterogeneity and exciton/charge diffusion on the
micron length scale within microcrystals and domains of thin films. To do so, a
new version of the 2D White-Light microscope will be built in which the focus of
the pump beam can be raster scanned relative to the probe. Using this new
microscope, the ultrafast dynamics in singlet fission and 2D perovskite
microcrystals will be measured as will purposely engineered thin films of
semiconducting carbon nanotubes. The images will give spatial maps that
correlate electronic heterogeneity to exciton and charge diffusion lengths. By
building a new type of ultrafast microscope and pursuing the aims of this
proposal, the Zanni team aims to build a better understanding of how exciton and
charge diffusion is dictated by heterogeneity in electronic structure on sub-
crystallin and sub-domain length scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.