* 2314592
* Explaining Crime Concentration in Cities
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* David Weisburd, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan F. Hirsch
* 07/31/2025
* USD 158,981.00

To date, crime and place scholars have focused interest on what predicts crime
concentration within cities; however, they have generally ignored the
explanation of crime concentration across cities. This has occurred in part
because large scale data sets including information on crime concentration in a
large number of cities have not been available. But it is also due to the
mistaken view that a law of crime concentration indicates that there is not
significant variability in crime concentration that needs to be explained. This
study would in this context fill an important basic science gap in our
understanding of crime concentration across cities by providing the first
systematic examination of the correlates of higher concentration in cities. Such
information could contribute to crime prevention in two ways: 1) the study would
identify whether “risk factors” such as land use, which can be manipulated by
city government (e.g., through management of allowable types of land use), are
important correlates of crime concentration; and 2) would identify “risk
factors” which while not possible to manipulate directly (e.g., variables
reflecting concentrated disadvantage) influence crime concentration. Such
factors could be considered in planning for crime prevention in cities in the
future.

This project would capitalize on the growing movement for police agencies to
allow open-access to crime data, and to identify correlates of levels of crime
concentrations in cities. Sixty-four cities, with populations of over 150,000
and have open-access crime data, were identified, and provided data at a micro-
geographic level. Data will be geocoded to the street segment and six distinct
measures of crime concentration will be developed: percentage of streets that
produce 25 and 50% of crime; percentage of streets with any crime that produce
25 and 50% of crime; percent of crime that is produced by the top 5% of streets;
GINI coefficient. Also, crime concentration for specific types of crime (e.g.,
property crime) will be examined. Data sources include U.S. Census data from
2020, Uniform Crime Reporting data, LEMAS data from 2016, and local data on land
use in the cities studied to develop independent variables. Data analyses
include: 1) correlation analysis to identify relationships between key variables
and crime concentration; and 2) developing multiple regression models to isolate
key variables that influence crime concentration in cities. Additionally, the
researchers will undertake qualitative investigations focusing on understanding
what factors may lead to extreme concentration levels in cities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.