* 2314494
* Expanding a Multi-Level, Longitudinal Database to Assess Ecological Risk Factors in Community Violence
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Daniel Semenza, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 123,523.00

Each year more than 85,000 people suffer from firearm injuries in the United
States. Intentional assaults account for about 40% of all firearm injuries with
approximately 12,000 killed each year as a result. Firearm violence is not
evenly distributed across the population and the majority of homicide and
shooting victims are young men of particular demographic groups living in
structurally disadvantaged urban communities. A robust understanding of the
macrostructural causes of this violence is necessary to inform violence
reduction policies in the nation’s most affected communities. This study will
extend prior research by considering how ecological risk factors operate in
concert with one another and correspond reciprocally to rates of firearm
violence to generate persistent cycles that harm communities over time. Findings
will significantly contribute to the advancement of knowledge to inform the
development of effective policies and programs to prevent firearm violence in
communities. Moreover, it will generate a comprehensive neighborhood-level
dataset that can be made publicly available to researchers for continued study
on the ecological correlates of firearm violence in local communities.
Investigators will construct a comprehensive database and examine the multilevel
and reciprocal ecological causes of community firearm violence in almost 16,000
neighborhoods in 100 U.S. cities over ten years. The research will include an
integrated series of longitudinal, multivariate analyses alongside coincidence
analysis (CNA), a novel cross-case method for causal inference, to generate
greater knowledge of the ecological factors that drive cycles of firearm
violence in local spaces and related community disparities. The investigators
will first analyze a series of multilevel models of neighborhood-, city-, and
state-level risk factors to identify key correlates and multifactorial pathways
that predict rates of local firearm homicides and non-fatal shootings over time.
Following this, the researchers will assess the reciprocal relationship between
community conditions and rates of firearm violence with particular attention to
implications for community disparities. Findings can help prioritize funding and
resource provision for federal, state, and local agencies tasked with preventing
and addressing community violence as well as federal programs that support
group-based violence interventions (GVI’s) documented to successfully help
reduce violent crime in high-risk neighborhoods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.