* 2314055
* I-Corps: Increasing surgical sensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2023
* Jeremy Steinberger, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to impact the 400,000 spinal fusion patients within
the United States annually. Over the past ten years, spinal fusions have moved
toward minimally invasive techniques supported by improved pedicle screws and
better image guidance. These techniques have allowed smaller incision sizes,
reduced tissue damage, and fewer misplaced pedicle screws. Despite these
technical advances, studies have reported 10-40% of patients experience new or
residual pain following spinal fusion. Moreover, 15% of patients need revision
surgery within five years of their first spinal fusion. Smaller incision sizes
have been linked to reduced patient back pain, time to ambulation, hospital
length of stay, opioid use, and risk of surgical site infection. By creating
tools tailored to the unique clinical needs identified by spinal surgeons, this
technology can help these surgeons avoid complications and minimize the
likelihood of pain and revision surgery. The development of smart tools offering
surgeons greater degrees of intraoperative freedom can be expanded beyond the
screwdriver, opening up a vast array of commercial applications in medical and
surgical practice.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology to make surgical
screwdrivers smart by offering neuro-navigation compatibility, high surgeon
comfort and ease of use, retention of haptic feel, and angular feedback. This
technology offers surgeons tools with greater degrees of freedom and this
technology can be expanded beyond the screwdriver to different surgical tools
and other medical procedures. The technology for screw placement in surgery is
limited and relies on fixed screw delivery or difficult to control variable
angle screwdrivers that offer a maximum range of 45Â°. Increased angular range
for screw delivery improves a surgeon's ability to minimize the initial incision
size, as well as decreasing the likelihood of expanding that incision or making
secondary stab incisions. Increased incision size is associated with higher
patient pain, increased likelihood of surgical site infections, and poorer
patient outcomes. Moreover, the variable angle screwdrivers on the market cannot
pair with neuronavigation to provide real time visual and quantitative feedback
of location in the body. This screwdriver technology offers surgeons the ability
to select the ideal angle of screw placement without sacrificing the reliability
or stability of screw delivery. This work includes, but is not limited to,
catheters in neurosurgical burr hole procedures, cement cannulas in orthopedic
vertebroplasties, and scissors/cauterizers in abdominal surgeries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.