* 2314597
* Increasing Science Literacy in Microbiology through the Use of Open Education Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Patrick Armstrong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 163,541.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by engaging students in a novel
way to improve their understanding of microbiology concepts. Understanding the
scientific process and developing critical thinking are important skills for
everyone, but especially for college students pursuing careers in STEM fields.
However, students frequently struggle with learning how to effectively read,
analyze, and write about science. Moreover, many students leave science because
they feel unconnected and uninspired by traditional teaching methods. At the
same time, teachers struggle to find teaching resources that are effective and
innovative to engage their students in the scientific process. This project aims
to address these issues using successful innovative methods such as having
students practice science while working in teams on real problems and generating
readily available teaching materials. Teams of teachers and students will create
accessible and free learning materials based on popular science podcasts. The
project is novel because it will use modern communication tools to engage
students and teachers. The impact of these training and learning materials on
student science literacy, identity, and motivation will be investigated. The
project will also be evaluated to determine best practices for training faculty
to implement these materials in the classroom.

A guiding imperative of this project is to support the training of a diverse
STEM workforce using active methods and accessible materials that build science
literacy and critical thinking. Through the creation of open education
resources, which are free, adaptable, of high quality, and accessible, this
project is focused on enhancing science literacy and critical thinking.
Moreover, this project strives to increase inclusivity in STEM education given
that publicly and widely available resources usually engage larger, more diverse
populations by removing accessibility barriers. With these goals in mind, this
project aims to expand a successful digital initiative that uses "This Week in
Microbiology (TWiM)," a podcast that i) features professional scientists
discussing current papers, ii) is licensed under Creative Commons, and iii) is
supported by the American Society for Microbiology. Under this initiative
students annotate the TWiM podcasts with materials they think other
undergraduates would connect with (cultural relevancy, current events, etc.) and
tie these back to a course’s learning objectives. Critically, the project uses
methods known to increase long term retention in STEM, including building a
collaborative faculty learning community, student participation in the practice
of science, building student science identity, and working on relevant, real-
world scientific problems. There are three main components to this project.
First, it aims to train teachers and students using an established collaborative
workflow. Key features of this workflow are the use of learning methods and
materials that are accessible, inclusive of underrepresented groups, and known
to increase science literacy and promote the formation of science identity.
Second, the project aims to produce a free electronic book called Podcast
Annotation Resources: Microbiology. Third, the project aims to use validated
methods to assess the effect of these active learning materials on metrics known
to promote long-term STEM success: student content understanding, STEM
motivation, science literacy, and science identity. By identifying benefits and
barriers to adoption of this type of active learning and collaboration, the
project will enhance the learning experiences of all participants as they work
on complex and relevant topics in diverse collaborative teams. By training
additional faculty, using a professional society’s podcast with a global reach,
and disseminating research findings through meeting attendance and publication,
the availability of learning materials and methods will enable teachers across
the nation to easily find and adopt active learning materials. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.