* 2314639
* An Injectable Glucose Biosensor Based on a Self-cleaning Membrane &amp; NIR FRET Assay
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gerard Cote, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Diabetes affects millions of people in the United States. To avoid serious
health risks, blood sugar must be measured and kept at normal levels. Continuous
blood sugar monitors are used to replace finger prick tests. This allows
measurement of sugar levels both day and night. Current continuous sugar
monitors use a small sensor probe like a wire that is inserted through the skin.
This is usually put in the arm and is replaced about every two weeks. A
transmitter is put on the skin over the sensor to communicate to a smartphone.
This research seeks to develop a sugar sensor that is easier to use. The sensor
will be the size of a grain of rice. This small size allows it to be injected
into the tissue of the wrist with a needle. Then the sugar levels can be
comfortably monitored with a device like a watch. This new sensor is expected to
last 30 days or more. It will be sensitive to the change in the sugar like
current sensors. It will also be convenient to use. This research will also
provide training experiences to high school students and university students.

This project seeks to develop a grain-of-rice size, injectable glucose biosensor
to enable continuous monitoring with a wearable device. This will be
accomplished by addressing challenges related to biocompatibility and optical
glucose sensing through innovative biomaterials and assay chemistries,
respectively. The scientific objectives include: (1) Develop an injectable
biosensor comprised of a self-cleaning membrane and a near-infrared (NIR)
fluorescence glucose sensing assay and sealing the assay within the membrane’s
central cavity with self-closing caps. (2) Develop a wearable optical detection
system to interrogate the biosensor and measure glucose levels (comprised of an
LED and photodiode pair, without the need for an affixed transmitter). (3)
Assess the biosensor’s ability to monitor glucose levels in vivo (rat model), as
well as the membrane’s reduction of the foreign body reaction (FBR). Beyond
allowing non-surgical injection, such a biosensor design affords convenient,
non-invasive detection exclusively with a watch-like device The NIR fluorescence
optical sensing is expected to enable glucose detection for individuals of all
skin tones and body mass indices (BMIs). The results of this work are poised to
have broad impact in the development of other implantable biosensors and
devices. The self-cleaning membrane will advance knowledge in the role of active
mechanisms rather than passive mechanisms for biofouling control, and hence
improved biocompatibility. The NIR fluorescence assay will advance the knowledge
of optical sensing methods that achieve exceptional in vitro stability,
reversibility, dynamic range, and sensitivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.