* 2314334
* Engaged student learning through coupled ethical-epistemic pedagogy.
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Caitlin Grady, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2026
* USD 393,800.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing the understanding
of best practices in engineering curricula for teaching engineering ethics. It
leverages research from the fields of philosophy, cognitive design theory, and
engineering ethics to address a pressing concern: How can we better equip our
future engineers to act ethically and understand the broad societal implications
of their work? This project seeks to train engineers who are not just
technically proficient, but are also more ethical and globally aware
individuals. As part of this project, new educational strategies in
undergraduate classrooms and research environments across multiple engineering
disciplines will be piloted. Additionally, faculty will also be trained in these
methods to foster a ripple effect, ensuring that the benefits of this project
extend far beyond the immediate research team. Engineers today hold key roles in
shaping our world and driving innovation. By developing engineers who are aware
of and engaged with the ethical dimensions of their work, educators contribute
to the creation of a workforce that values and serves societal interests.
Outcomes of this work will include new open-source teaching tools, training
materials, and research about best practices in engineering ethics education.

This project brings coupled ethical-epistemic analysis from the field of
philosophy and reflective practice from the field of cognitive design theory to
the field of engineering education. This early-stage, exploratory project will
study the effectiveness of leveraging adaptated existing pedagogies (reflective
practice) alongside new methodologies (coupled ethical-epistemic analysis) in
multiple environments. This project seeks to fill gaps in existing engineering
ethics education by testing new approaches and identifying potential mechanisms
for cultivating engineers with broad moral agency and understanding of society-
relevant issues. Across three tasks, this project will answer the questions:
Does undergraduate research using coupled ethical-epistemic analysis influence
the development of moral agency in undergraduate engineering students? Can
coupled ethical-epistemic pedagogy in the classroom influence the development of
moral agency in undergraduate engineering students? To what degree does
variation in instructor and topic influence the efficacy of coupled ethical-
epistemic analysis in undergraduate engineering courses? The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.