* 2314844
* Supporting STEM Academic Advising for Undergraduate Student Achievement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jennifer Osterhage, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 381,537.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying the motivational
beliefs and practices among academic advisors that can enhance motivation and
achievement in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) at the
undergraduate level. Although academic advisors play a key role in student
success, the role of the academic advisor has been consistently overlooked in
STEM education research. As advisors take on ever-increasing advising loads, it
is imperative that we better understand the factors underlying successful
advising in STEM for promoting better learning outcomes for students. Consistent
with the IUSE: EDU goals of increasing persistence of students in STEM
disciplines and laying the groundwork for institutional improvement, it is
hypothesized that academic advising experiences shape how students approach and
experience classroom learning and career-building activities. This Level 1
Engaged Student Learning IUSE: EDU project will advance understanding of how
academic advising shapes motivation, learning behaviors, and achievement
outcomes in undergraduate students pursuing STEM fields. In addition to
generating new knowledge to advance our scientific understanding of these
important learning processes, the project will identify levers for intervention
to increase STEM retention and achievement, especially for students from groups
that have been underrepresented in these fields.

The project will pursue the following specific research aims: 1)
characterization of the advising styles, advising style preferences, and
implicit beliefs about ability and interest possessed by academic advisors and
undergraduate students in biology and psychology, 2) assessment of the content
of advising meetings by coding on dimensions such as advising style, ability
mindset beliefs, and interest mindset beliefs, and 3) examination of whether
self-reported and observed advising styles and implicit beliefs about ability
and interest are significantly associated with student outcomes such as
motivation, course-taking behavior, classroom learning, progress towards degree
completion, and grades. The study is rooted in an ecological systems perspective
that emphasizes the importance of person-context interactions at multiple levels
in shaping human development and will employ a longitudinal measurement design
that incorporates both quantitative and qualitative data elements. Data will
inform theory building in motivation science and will illuminate connections
between advising and classroom instruction/learning in STEM. The results of the
project will be disseminated to the broader STEM education and advising
communities to spark within- and cross-institutional improvements in STEM
student motivation and retention. Ultimately, this work will inform expanded
approaches for fostering the success of all students in undergraduate STEM
majors, encouraging retention and degree progression. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.