* 2314900
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Veterinary Medicine in Anthropological Perspective: Ethnoveterinary Care and Human - Animal Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Evelien Deelen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 35,301.00

Humans and animals have long, evolutionarily relevant, histories of sustained
interactions. Indeed, millennia-long demonstrated co-evolution of humans and
their pets opens fascinating questions involving the costs and benefits that
humans and animals provide to or exact from each other. This doctoral
dissertation research project investigates factors associated with owners’
decisions to provide costly veterinary care to their animals to understand how
concepts of animals impact veterinary care. In addition to training a doctoral
student in anthropological research, this project’s findings can inform and
facilitate veterinarians’ effective interception in disease spread, by better
understanding and anticipating how their human clients perceive and interact
with their sick animals. The project disseminates its findings broadly to
academic, lay, and animal physician audiences.

This project offers novel anthropological research examining the culture of
animal care, i.e., ethnoveterinary medicine. The research tests anthropological
theories and concepts regarding medicine (medical anthropology) and human-animal
interaction (ethnozoology or anthrozoology), and uses cognitive anthropology to
identify salient cultural models (frameworks for thinking) about animal disease
and wellness. It uses ethnographic observational and interview methods,
including surveying, free-listing, semi-structured interviews, body mapping with
animal silhouettes, and self-administered video journaling. The data reveal how
differing human-animal activities connect with different cultural models, or
conceptual tendencies, about animal sickness, including how people conceive of
disease causes, physiology and symptoms, and the appropriate treatment
responses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.