* 2314229
* Developing Partnerships Among Tribes, Geoscientists, and the National Park Service to Advance Informal Geoscience Learning at Grand Canyon
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Steven Semken, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2024
* USD 147,758.00

The Grand Canyon region is the ancestral homeland of eleven Indigenous Nations,
the Traditionally Associated Tribes of Grand Canyon, who possess rich land-based
expert knowledge of Earth processes and features. Grand Canyon National Park was
established in 1919 and has become a globally renowned geoheritage site. Within
the Park, geoscience resources and programs support millions of visitors each
year to explore the immensity of geologic time and the geologic history through
the landscapes and rocks. However, the Indigenous knowledge of the Traditionally
Associated Tribes has historically been marginalized and excluded from
geoscience education at the Park. This Partnership Development & Planning
project seeks to foster respectful, reciprocal, and lasting partnerships at
Grand Canyon among members of the Traditionally Associated Tribes, the Grand
Canyon Trust, Interpretive Park Rangers, and Grand Canyon geoscientists. With
multiple layers of Tribal oversight, the project will use the four Rs of
Indigenous research (reciprocity, relevance, respect, and responsibility) and a
Dine analytical model to support relationship and trust building activities
(e.g., site visits, story circles, a workshop) and co-development. The group
will work toward addressing and helping to remedy the historic exclusion of
Indigenous presence and Indigenous knowledges at Grand Canyon, explore
opportunities for mutually beneficial collaborations and future AISL projects,
and draft recommendations for respectfully Indigenizing future interpretive
resources and programs.

The project will be led by a Steering Committee comprised of a Tribal Council
(all of whom are members of the Traditionally Associated Tribes of Grand
Canyon), university geoscientists (some of whom are members of the Traditionally
Associated Tribes of Grand Canyon) and National Park Service staff. Tribal
Council members and other members of the Steering Committee have long-standing
relationships as well as backgrounds or interest in geoscience. To ensure that
the partnership remains mutually beneficial and fully accountable, and yields
value to all partners, the project will center the four Rs of Indigenous
research. Relationships will be fostered among members of the Tribes,
geoscientists, and the National Park Service through gatherings and mutual
engagement in geoscience activities at culturally and scientifically important
places in and around Grand Canyon and the Park, in Tribal communities if
requested, and at times virtually. The Steering Committee will use the Dine
model of nitsahakees (critical thinking), nahat'a (planning), iina
(implementation in life); and siihasin (reflection and iteration to renew the
cycle) to guide the co-design process. Ultimately, the group will co-design and
co-author common and mutually beneficial goals related to informal geoscience
learning at Grand Canyon, ensure educational benefits expand to local Native
youth, and draft recommendations for respectfully Indigenizing future
interpretive resources and programs at the Park. Insights and recommendations
will be developed while adhering to the CARE Principles of Indigenous Data
Governance, which hold that all Indigenous knowledges remain the credited
intellectual property of the appropriate Tribes, who hold control over all uses.
When approved by the Tribes, the projects' recommendations will be shared with
the informal STEM learning community, including other National Parks. External
evaluation will use recognized Indigenous criteria to iteratively assess and
inform the project's: 1) ability to establish ethical, respectful, reciprocal
partnership(s) among practitioners, community members, and researchers; 2)
conceptions of new decolonized, place-based, culturally inclusive plan(s) for
informal geoscience education at Grand Canyon; and 3) potential for its
approaches and recommendations to extend to other partnerships, Parks, and
geoheritage areas.

This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice that
considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b)
promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement
in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and
enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM
learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science
communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM
processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.