* 2314344
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nominal and deverbal morphology in an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Hannah Sande, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2024
* USD 19,260.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the grammar of an endangered
language spoken in two Indigenous communities. In an era of accelerated language
extinction, this project presents a unique opportunity to document the intricate
features of a language that exhibits some relatively rare grammatical properties
while it is still actively used. The project focuses on the interface between
phonology (the system of sounds) and morphology (the structure of words),
offering insights into the characteristics of the language, contributing to
linguists' collective knowledge of linguistic diversity, and enhancing
scientists' understanding of human linguistic capacity. The project supports the
communities with tools for language documentation, contributing to the
preservation and revitalization of their language. It also aids in the creation
of pedagogical resources for the language, facilitating its future learning and
use.

The study examines typologically rare features of the language's structure,
focusing on its nominal domain — an area of the language that pertains to
objects, people, and ideas. This research will illuminate specific linguistic
processes tied to individual elements of the language, and the expression of
plural forms through unusual sound alterations. The project involves collecting
linguistic data during a field trip to communities where the language is spoken.
The findings challenge existing theories about how elements of language are
represented and interact with each other, contributing to a more comprehensive
understanding of the complexities of human language systems. The collected data
are made accessible to the global research community, supporting further studies
into language structure and diversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.