* 2314358
* Discourse to Improve Student Conceptual Understanding of Statistics in Inclusive Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Laura Callis, Curry College
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2026
* USD 391,546.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the conditions
under which improved student learning occurs in introductory statistics classes.
Traditional approaches to teaching statistics focus on theoretical models that
describe the features of sampling distributions. Research has reported that
implementing a different approach, called Simulation-Based Inference (SBI),
enhances students’ conceptual development of statistics. The SBI approach has
also been shown to reduce achievement gaps for students of color and students
with learning disabilities and executive functioning challenges. This project
aims to identify the qualities of instructional practice in inclusive SBI
classes that increase student-to-student and instructor-to-student discourse and
further enhance the development of students’ conceptual understanding. The
project is expected to develop an online compendium of audio-visual and text
resources to support instructors’ implementation of an SBI approach to teaching.
The long-term goals of the project are to contribute to the professional
development of statistics instructors, who will in turn support their students’
development of conceptual understanding of introductory statistics ideas.

This project will systematically investigate the affordances of the simulation-
based inference approach to the post-secondary, algebra-based introductory
statistics course for students, particularly students with learning and
attention disabilities and other students who have been excluded from the
scholarship of the discipline. Three goals guide the work of this project. First
is to identify and explicate the instructional practices that support students
with learning disabilities to access the content in these introductory
statistics courses. Second is to identify and explicate students’ statistical
conceptions – both productive and less productive – that arise in an
introductory simulation-based inference statistics course. Third, and finally,
is to develop resources for statistics instructors that will enhance their
ability to listen for and productively respond to students’ conceptions in real
time. The project team will disseminate these online resources through a growing
network of instructors who are using the SBI approach. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.