* 2314591
* ACED Fab: Ultrafast, low-power AI chip with a new class of MRAM for learning and inference at edge
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shan Wang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The collaborative team of this project under Advanced Chip Engineering Design
and Fabrication (ACED Fab) program will be working on an exciting advancement in
the field of artificial intelligence (AI) for edge computing, such as secured
machine learning based on personalized or sensitive data in smartphones (a type
of edge devices) without resorting to a server at a remote data center. The
project introduces a new class of Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory (MRAM)
called Spin-transfer torque (STT) Assisted Spin-orbit torque (SOT)-MRAM (SAS-
MRAM) which features ultralow power consumption and ultrafast write speeds. By
co-designing SAS-MRAM with CMOS circuits, the project aims to create energy-
efficient edge AI systems. SAS-MRAM's non-volatile nature eliminates standby
leakage power, making edge-AI chips more energy-efficient at the system level
compared to existing approaches using Static Random Access Memory (SRAM). The
project’s activities extend beyond technological advancements, with plans of
K-12 STEM outreach, undergraduate/graduate training, curriculum development in
innovation and entrepreneurship, and broadening participation of
underrepresented minority groups in the microelectronics STEM field and
semiconductor industry. The team’s efforts in education and inclusivity will
contribute to a diverse and innovative future of the microelectronics industry.

The new SAS-MRAM with ultralow power and ultrafast write speed will be co-
designed with CMOS circuits for energy-efficient edge AI applications. The SAS-
MRAM will be fabricated on top of a TN40G CMOS die through a custom back-end-of-
line (BEOL) process. The team will systematically perform micromagnetic
simulation and HSpice simulation to build Process Development Kits (PDKs)
required for co-designing SAS-MRAM and CMOS circuits. Furthermore, the project
will leverage SAS-MRAM to design, optimize, and tape-out an In-Memory Computing
(IMC) chip prototype for edge-AI, which could implement both on-chip inference
and training computation. Finally, the project will develop new continual
learning algorithms that could minimize the memory weight updates (i.e., memory
writes) and computing complexity, allowing the AI system to learn new data
without forgetting previously learned knowledge. The resulting edge-AI chips
will be significantly more energy-efficient at system level than the prevalent
counterparts based on SRAM due to zero standby leakage power for non-volatile
MRAM. On-device training/learning based on SAS-MRAM is potentially ultrafast due
to lower latency from denser bit cells and multi-bit writing with shared SOT
write lines. The project can potentially revolutionize edge AI devices and
systems by leveraging SAS-MRAM and in-memory computing to create energy-
efficient AI systems with improved performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.