* 2314259
* WaterSIMmersive: Designing and assessing a mixed-reality water sustainability educational game and museum exhibit for communities in the Desert Southwest
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Scotty Craig, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,141,182.00

Amidst the most severe megadrought over the last 1,200 years in the U.S.
Southwest, it is essential that residents of the region understand where their
water comes from, how it is used, and what options for conservation exist.
Researchers at Arizona State University (ASU), in partnership with the
Smithsonian Museum on Main Street (MoMS), the Arizona Science Center, and eight
tribal and rural museum sites around Arizona, will help educate and empower
communities living in the Desert Southwest on water sustainability issues
through the creation of WaterSIMmersion, a mixed reality (MR) educational game
and accompanying museum exhibit. By engaging visitors in whole-body
interactions, social learning opportunities, and real-time, adaptive feedback,
the MR educational game has the potential to deepen understanding of STEM
concepts in ways that more static museum displays are unable to. Informed by the
stories, knowledge, and experiences of underserved urban, rural, and tribal
community members, the game will challenge museum visitors to allocate water to
fulfill the needs of various stakeholders they encounter along the Colorado
River. Relying on data visualizations and perspectives provided by these virtual
characters, visitors will begin to understand the complexities of water system
supply and demand pressures in their own communities and across the region.
Surrounding exhibit panels will showcase local water stories, discuss strategies
and myths around water conservation, and reinforce lessons learned in the
educational game. The exhibit will be co-designed with families from regional
rural and tribal communities, and while the target age group for the educational
game is middle school, the exhibit will appeal to visitors of all ages.

Through the process of developing and then studying WaterSIMmersion, the team
will attempt to answer the following research questions: (1) How can complex
scientific modeling systems be adapted to engage and educate the public about
STEM issues of critical importance to the well-being of their communities? (2)
How can educational game interfaces be designed to provide real-time, data-
driven formative feedback that is comprehensible and engaging to a range of
museum visitors? (3) How can virtualized human and embodied interventions at
museums affect knowledge, behaviors, and attitudes about natural resource
management and conservation in enduring ways? Game and exhibit development will
follow a "transactional design model" (Lauer, 2020), which suggests that
decision-making about consequential natural resource challenges is best
facilitated when the scientific knowledge of experts is posited as equal with
the experiences of local residents and the traditional ecological knowledge of
tribal communities. ASU graduate students from a range of rural and tribal
communities will interview fellow residents about their experiences with water.
These "water stories" will then be integrated into the educational game and
exhibit. The team will conduct observation and interview research to test
engagement and deploy quasi-experimental studies to help them understand how
visitors' knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors toward water sustainability might
vary between those who play the educational game, compared to those who observe
or do not play. WaterSIMersion will first be hosted by the Arizona Science
Center and then travel to eight tribal and rural museums across Arizona,
ultimately reaching thousands of visitors during the study period. The project
will both empower communities disproportionately affected by climate uncertainty
and drought and offer a model for other museums to co-design with and for
learners that value their lived experiences and capitalize on these experiences
to promote community action.

This Integrating Research and Practice project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.