* 2314736
* Evaluating Macroeconomic Stabilization Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Christian Wolf, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 217,000.00

The last couple of years have seen important changes in the design of
macroeconomic stabilization policy: so-called "stimulus checks" have become an
important part of the fiscal policy toolkit, and the Federal Reserve has moved
to a new monetary policy framework. This research develops new methods to allow
researchers to evaluate the likely impacts of such changes in fiscal and
monetary stabilization policy design. The new methods combine structural
macroeconomic modeling with a strong empirical grounding, leveraging both
classical time-series as well as more recently available cross-sectional data.
The results of this research promise to improve policy responses to
macroeconomic crises, from high unemployment to high inflation.

This award funds three separate research projects on the evaluation of
macroeconomic stabilization policy. The first project provides recommendations
on how empirical macroeconomists should in practice estimate the causal effects
of policy interventions. The research reviews a large menu of existing
approaches and then compares their performance in a rich, empirically relevant
set-ting. The second project shows how to combine empirical estimates of the
effects of surprise policy interventions to predict what would happen if the
systematic policy framework were to change. Importantly, the project does so in
a way that respects the Lucas critique. The researchers use the method to
evaluate how the U.S. economy would have evolved under alternative assumptions
on macroeconomic policy design. The third project studies fiscal stimulus. The
re-searchers argue that, if such stimulus is not accompanied by relatively quick
future tax hikes, then the stimulus will instead "finance itself" through a mix
of higher output (increasing the primary surplus) and higher inflation (eroding
the real value of government debt), with the split governed by the tightness of
supply constraints

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.