* 2314710
* Electoral Congruence Across Institutions:  A Comparative Study and Improved Data Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kenneth Kollman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The research team will analyze data on election results and economic policies
from democracies around the world to improve understanding of how election of
non-mainstream political parties to upper chambers (i.e., senates) and
presidencies affect government spending. They will directly compare data across
countries. Results from this research will help scholars, decision-makers, and
practitioners to understand better methods of designing constitutions and
running legislature and parliaments, leading to more stable and effective
economic policies. The research team will also will gather, organize, and
disseminate novel data on upper chamber and presidential election results as
well as data on election results at local levels. Knowledge from this research
can aid government agencies—both domestic and foreign— when they engage with new
and emerging democracies to promote legitimate and peaceful election outcomes
and stable, sustainable policies. This project will also provide opportunities
for students. The research team will rely on graduate and undergraduate students
to assist in much of the research, providing them with valuable training
experiences using complex data.

The team will compare data from democracies around the world, focusing on
countries’ diverse partisan representation across branches of government. In
particular, the researchers will analyze how partisan control and the different
partisan coalitions represented within parliaments and across different
branches—including presidencies—matter for government spending, public goods
production, fiscal and macroeconomic policy, business investment, and the
effectiveness of foreign aid. They will make publicly available millions of
records of fine-grained election results data for parliamentary (both upper and
lower chambers) and presidential elections across most of the world’s electoral
democracies and electoral autocracies. The team will create a novel data archive
that will be available for all researchers to use. Data with greater detail,
scope, completeness, and accuracy, compiled in useful formats, and provided free
to the public, enable a wide range of illuminating research. The research will
help scholars, decision-makers, and practitioners to understand what leads to
legitimate and peaceful political outcomes and to stable, effective policies.
This project will help government agencies and non-governmental organizations
manage expectations, evaluate program performance, and benchmark prospects for
success against historical data by making such election data more accessible to
researchers inside and outside of academia. This project will also provide
opportunities for students. The research team will incorporate graduate and
undergraduate students to assist in much of the research, providing the students
with valuable training experiences using complex data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.