* 2314385
* Participant Support for Biomechanists Outlining New Directions Workshop (USA and Italy: BOND); Naples, Italy; 24-27 September 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Raffaella De Vita, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides registration and travel support for trainees and early-stage
investigators from the USA to attend the USA and Italy: Biomechanists Outlining
New Directions (U&I: BOND) workshop, which will be held 24-27 September 2023 in
Naples, Italy. This workshop is hosted jointly with organizers across Italy and
will take place in the Aula Magna of the Federico Secondo University of Naples.
The goal of the workshop is to bring together researchers from the USA and
Italy, with diverse cultural and research backgrounds, who are working in
experimental, theoretical, and computational biomechanics across different
length scales. The workshop will advance the field of biomechanics while
providing career and professional development opportunities. In addition to the
engagement of participants from a diversity of institutions and biomechanics
specialties, the funding support will target attendees and speakers from under-
represented groups in STEM. The workshop is designed to encourage formation of
peer-peer and junior-senior mentoring relationships to increase the retention
and inclusion of underrepresented trainees and junior faculty in engineering.

The workshop attendees of all career levels will gain valuable conceptual
knowledge and technical skills in biomechanics. The workshop will facilitate the
transfer of knowledge across disciplines and the development of long-term
connections between experts in two different countries. It will enhance the
current and future research infrastructure from the learned technical skills,
the formation of productive partnerships, and the creation of novel technologies
and scientific solutions. The knowledge-building, technology-advancing, network-
broadening, and partnership-generating outcomes of the workshop will accelerate
scientific progress and medical discovery through biomechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.