* 2314021
* Conference: 2023 Chromosome Dynamics Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Coral Zhou, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2024
* USD 11,970.00

The award will provide support for early career scientists, including graduate
students and post-doctoral researchers, to attend the 2023 Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) on Chromosome Dynamics in Lucca, Italy, just prior to the
corresponding Gordon Research Conference (GRC). These conferences bring together
diverse scientists who study chromosome biology from different disciplinary
perspectives (molecular and cellular biology, genetics, genomics, biophysics,
biochemistry, evolutionary biology, among others). The research advances
foundational knowledge about genome architecture, dynamics, and function, which
has implications for various sectors of the bioeconomy, including biotechnology,
agriculture, and medicine. The GRS serves as a forum for junior US and
international scientists to present unpublished research, exchange ideas and
resources, benefit from career mentoring, and build their professional network.
The GRS is organized and co-chaired by a post-doctoral scholar, which serves as
a notable career development experience.

The GRS and associated GRC will advance research on the mechanisms of formation,
repair, and maintenance of chromosomes from molecular to organism scales and
through evolution. Investigators from around the world will have the opportunity
to discuss pioneering ideas and emerging technologies in the field and
potentially launch new collaborations. The GRS in particular will facilitate
training and professional development of a diverse group of scientists in the
field of chromosome biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.