* 2314656
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Modes of State Governance and Mobile Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Carole McGranahan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 30,976.00

The relationship between mobile populations and state interventions is long,
complex, and contradictory. Geopolitical tensions have intensified state
presence in remote areas such mobile populations face various challenges in
resisting and adapting to state formations. This doctoral dissertation project
studies how modes of mobility are impacted by state bureaucracy, infrastructure,
and regulation. By investigating how people navigate complex state bureaucratic
systems that require major shifts to their lives, this dissertation research
advances scientific understandings of how communities experience the
complexities and opportunities of new infrastructure in both locally specific
and broadly similar ways. Findings from this research will be disseminated to
better understand state development projects that seem banal but might instead
be major and meaningful changes for people. While building roads and requiring
different forms of licensure seem to encourage safer and more accessible
mobility, how are they actually experienced on the ground? This project also
brings historically underrepresented and geographically significant groups into
the discovery process of scientific knowledge.

This doctoral research project investigates local and individual experiences of
state formation through an ethnographic study of the role of legalized and
certified mobility in modes of new state bureaucratic governance. This research
examines (1) how mobility is remade under new forms of state road regulations,
driving license requirements, and discipline around mobility and (2) how
individuals experience, navigate, adapt, and respond to these new forms of state
intervention in their day-to-day lives. Research methods for this project
consist of ethnographic participant observation, semi-structured interviews,
ethnographic fieldnotes, oral histories of mobile communities, and reviews of
official documents. Data analysis will focus on both contextualizing nomads’
experiences of state interventions and situating this study in relation to
similar cases elsewhere in the world. In doing so, this research contributes to
scientific theories of state formation, Indigenous knowledge, modes of
bureaucratic infrastructures, and state development projects as modernization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.