* 2314527
* III: Small: Datalog with Aggregates: Complexity, Optimization, Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dan Suciu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith Cushing
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Computer applications are increasingly data driven. They rely on processing
large datasets from which they learn models that drive the application. Machine
learning on massive datasets is routinely done today by leading software
companies and academic institutions, however, using ML tools effectively is
still an obscure practice mostly done by ML experts. Future applications of ML
will be developed by data scientists, who need friendly tools to help them
manage data of massive scale. The goal of this project is to lay the foundations
for building such tools. It extends relational databases that are already widely
used today with the ability to perform iterations that are indispensable in
machine learning applications.

Relational databases are some of the best engineered systems to date, and they
are used routinely to process datasets from small to massive. But the query
language that they support, SQL, is only optimized for queries that do not
require iteration. Yet virtually all modern data science tasks require some form
of iteration. As SQL does not support iteration well, data scientists do not use
SQL for most of their needs. Datalog is a query language proposed decades ago,
precisely to support iteration, however, datalog does not support aggregates,
such as summation or counting, which are indispensable in any data science task.
This project overcomes the fundamental roadblock that prevents datalog from
supporting aggregates by using a new abstraction, where standard relations are
extended to relations over a semiring. This modification allows all traditional
SQL optimizations to be carried over to datalog, and at the same time it allows
recursion and aggregates to be interleaved freely.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.