* 2314969
* ACED Fab: 240-GHz Energy-Efficient CMOS MIMO Radar
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ali Niknejad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

Radar technology is essential in modern automotive applications, enabling
automatic cruise control and semi-autonomous driving. Using advanced multiple
antenna array of radars has the promise to offer even more functionality and
applications, including camera-less detection of living people/animals and
objects, three dimensional localization, and gesture recognition to enhance user
interfaces. Despite these many important applications, these radar systems still
require considerable research to improve their performance, and to reduce the
size and energy footprint. While automotive applications can tolerate the high-
power consumption, other applications, such as sensors in buildings and homes
and mobile gesture recognition require the radar module to be smaller and to
consume less power. To address these many challenges, our proposed research will
explore low-cost integrated circuit technology for next generation radars
operating at 240 GHz. Successful realization of a low power CMOS 240 GHz radar
would enable high resolution radar and imaging. Next generation communication or
“6G” will likely benefit from the availability of spectrum above 100 GHz, and
thus our research would impact broadband connectivity, thus broadening wireless
access, which is a key national priority. Operation over 100 GHz also has
potential new applications in biomedical imaging, cancer detection,
spectroscopy, and security.

Our proposed research will explore low-cost CMOS technology for next generation
MIMO radars operating at 240 GHz. Operating at 240 GHz has many benefits, 3-4X
smaller wavelength than 60 GHz and E-band (today's radars) allows
miniaturization and higher angular resolution, and large MIMO arrays for full
imaging. At the same time, operating at such high frequencies comes with many
challenges due to the lower power gain and activity limits of CMOS technology.
Our team’s focus is on key building blocks, in particular the 240 GHz receiver,
the transmitter, and the frequency generation and distribution. Additionally, we
will address system and antenna/packaging challenges, since power, performance
and cost are highly sensitive to packaging. The integrated circuit needs an
efficient means to couple power to the antenna array, otherwise the performance
benefits will be lost in transition losses. By tackling the entire system, from
baseband to antenna, and by working closely, we plan to pave the path for next
generation sub-Thz radars. Our proposed solution must also be designed in the
context of next generation applications. Emerging applications for mm-wave
radar, including gesture recognition and automotive arrays, require sensitivity
for nearby objects, and undesired large objects near the target, such as tables
and walls, produce large reflections that can easily swamp out the desired
signal. This means that next generation radar systems need to have even higher
performance in terms of linearity and phase noise. This is also true for next
generation autonomous L4/L5 driving systems, which require an order-of-magnitude
higher resolution, sub 1° to detect pedestrians from hundreds of meters away.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.