* 2314112
* Creating Sustainable Community, Museum, and University Collaborations
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Eli Tucker-Raymond, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 147,423.00

Through increasing attention paid to out-of-school contexts, research is showing
that powerful science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) meaning-
making is possible when helping young people see the everyday practices that are
situated within STEM domains. Museums and science centers have long been centers
of public engagement with STEM; however, over that last few decades there has
been growing importance of the need for museums to be relevant to their
communities. This has spurred the recognition of the importance of doing work
with, rather than for, communities and the need to create better mechanisms for
developing meaningful partnerships. Thus, the project is designed to examine
partnership building through a series of online and in-person workshops for
museum and science center staff, community members (high school-aged youth), and
university researchers. Through this year-long workshop series, three primary
goals will be accomplished: a) understand what it means to build and foster
ethical community partnerships between museums, local communities, and
researchers; b) create the foundation for relationship building between
participating partners for continued networking and collaboration beyond the
workshop series; and c) create a generative collaborative space for sharing,
exploring, and developing ideas on what it means to design, enact, and study
culturally sustaining STEM youth programs in museums. Participants from museums
and science centers in three major metropolitan areas of the United States
(Boston, Philadelphia, and Chicago) will learn from one another about how each
serves their local populations and how to improve that service.

Grounded in Bang's community-based design research (CBDR), the project will
engage museum educators and staff, current and alumni participants of youth
museum programs, and university researchers around several questions of
interest: How can museum staff, community members, and university researchers
build a research partnership to open new possibilities for theorizing and
actualizing culturally sustaining STEM learning? How can we develop multi-
layered partnerships in local and distal geographical spaces? How do we consider
diverse stakeholder goals that may be in tension, and translate them into goal-
directed activities for mutual flourishing? What are other obstacles in
including youth to design and develop research and development grants? How might
we mitigate those obstacles? Teams in each city will be comprised of two museum
staff, one youth program alumni, and three youth program participants from each
of six museums/science centers along with four education/learning sciences
researchers. The teams will participate in in-person workshops locally and
virtually across locations. The project will adhere to three core principles to
ensure equitable and ethical participation from all participants: (1) fostering
relationship development; (2) power sharing and respectful decision making; and
(3) identifying future proposed projects that ensure reciprocal benefits.
Photovoice is selected as the core methodology to support ideating, sharing, and
documenting the range of perspectives and experiences from the stakeholders.
Narrative discourse analysis will be the primary approach to analyzing data from
team meetings and workshops. The field will benefit from what the project learns
about collaborating within and across geographic locations, how the participants
create and share knowledge, and an outline of recommended next steps. At the end
of the project, deliverables include a set of principles for more community-
based and inclusive programming that all science centers and museums can use as
well as new collaborations, including new possible research and development
projects between the partners aimed at serving their communities.

This Partnership Development & Planning project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a)
contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM learning's role
in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in
STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest
in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the theoretical and empirical
foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f) improve community
vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the public's engagement
in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes. By examining the foundational
and sometimes problematic practices in the ISL field that must be interrogated
to make meaningful change in this space, the project supports AISL's goal for
broadening participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.