* 2314155
* Collaborative Research: Cultivating Tomorrow's Innovators Through Exploring Planetary Images with Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shichun Huang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,621,745.00

The rapid permeation of AI into nearly all walks of life and every profession
calls for innovative approaches of public AI literacy and education in all
settings. This project will design, develop, and test a sequence of lessons for
high school aged youth from east Tennessee that will teach them artificial
intelligence concepts by using images from planetary exploration and emerging
Generative AI tools to create visually appealing generative artworks and digital
stories. AI concepts grounded in topics that are relevant and engaging through
the lens of creative works can serve as an invitation for underrepresented and
under-resourced youths to explore fields that they would not otherwise choose or
have the opportunity to learn about. The project team including AI researchers
and educators, STEM disciplinary experts and the broader creative works
community will employ a mixture of out-of-school and online activities,
integrating Planetary Science, planetary exploration, big data, creative works,
and Generative AI. The works created by youths with the assistance of Generative
AI and validated by scientists on planetary exploration and Planetary Science
will be showcased online, at the American Museum of Science and Energy, and
other public places. This Integrating Research & Practice project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects
that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM
learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and
educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific
discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the
theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f)
improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the
public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM processes, and co-
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

Over the three-year project duration, the project will directly impact
approximately 360 high school youth and will reach out to a much larger number
of participants through online webinars, workshops, newsletters, and exhibits.
The project will investigate four research questions: (1) How does participation
in an interdisciplinary out-of-school STEM program influence high school youths'
AI knowledge and skills, STEM engagement and identity, and sense of belonging to
a scientific community? (2) What do youths learn about the value of their
personal and cultural knowledge and skills (i.e., assets) to the local and
broader community? (3) What program challenges, features, and content appear to
have the greatest influence on engagement, identity, and belonging? (4) How do
outcomes vary by youth demographics including gender, ethnicity, and urban/rural
environment? The research will use a mixed-methods design, combining
quantitative surveys with qualitative written reflections and pictures with
commentary. In the final year of the project, professional development workshops
will train educators to use learning materials generated from the project.
Research findings produced through this work will contribute new knowledge on
methods and learning designs in integrating AI, STEM and art for informal STEM
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.