* 2314994
* Beyond Success: Transforming Learning by Helping Students to Thrive
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* John Chen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 10/31/2026
* USD 399,683.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping engineering and
computing students to thrive, rather than just attain good grades. This has the
potential to retain more students in engineering and improve their graduation
rate. Thriving students actively pursue the twin goals of ‘doing well’ and
‘feeling good’ as part of their education. This project aspires to begin
transforming the culture of engineering education from one in which students
strive solely to succeed academically (the ‘doing well’) to one in which they
also seek wellbeing. Achieving this goal would lead to a culture of thriving
among engineering and computing students that does not currently exist. Students
can do this by learning and adopting thriving competencies – skills, behaviors
and beliefs – to boost the ‘feeling good’ part of thriving. This project aims to
develop a series of competency-based interventions to improve, for example,
engineering identity, belongingness, gratitude, mindfulness, mindset and stress
management, and to test their efficacy. Achieving the project goals will advance
the understanding of the role of thriving in engineering education and its
impact on graduating more engineers to meet the nation’s needs.

This project builds on what is known about noncognitive and affective factors –
factors not related to talent or intelligence but are proven to be powerfully
associated with academic success, sometimes in nonintuitive ways. The project
team will execute a well-designed plan to develop, test and deploy thriving
competencies through mobile applications (or ‘apps’), classroom-based
activities, and extracurricular or club activities. The deployment scheme for
each competency will be guided by prior research on effective interventions and
supported by evidence. The plan will also include partnering with both academic
and Student Affairs units at the test school and will gather data to measure the
efficacy of various initiatives through direct quantitative measures using
survey instruments and sound analytical methods. Finally, the project evaluation
will include student interviews to determine whether students have adopted the
thriving competencies into their educational toolset. The broader impacts of
this project are achieved in two ways. First, this project will work with
underserved students, defined as underrepresented minority, first-generation or
low-income students. This choice addresses historic educational inequities and
ensures that these students are served. Second, this project will disseminate
the successful parts of the project to additional partner schools to test the
efficacy of the initiatives more widely and in diverse educational contexts. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.