* 2315749
* Biology through art: an innovative, interdisciplinary approach to teaching biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Maxwell, National University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving education in
biology through the inclusion of artistic expression in biology courses. This
approach builds on the demonstrated cognitive and academic benefits of art-
enhanced instruction in biology to increase concept comprehension and course
engagement by students. This project’s rationale is rooted in two national
trends. First, the project is a response to recent calls from national advisory
bodies for the integration of education in biology and the sciences with the
arts and humanities, as well as emphasis on the college graduate as a
scientifically literate member of society. Second, this project serves a
silently growing undergraduate population: the non-traditional student (i.e.,
typically a “working adult”). To engage diverse students with diverse learning
preferences, this project emphasizes concrete, immediate expression of concepts
in biology, and encourages thinking about concepts from diverse perspectives. By
providing opportunities for students to interpret and express course material in
personal, creative ways, this project enriches the learning experience in
biology courses.

This project has two main goals: 1) increase concept comprehension and 2)
increase course engagement in art-enhanced biology courses. To achieve these
goals, the project will implement three treatments in 36 upper division courses
over three years: Drawing, Writing, Control. These treatments enable the
detection of academic benefits due to the inclusion of artwork per se (Drawing),
or, more generally, due to the inclusion of an alternative creative activity
(Writing). Pre- and post-assessment assignments will quantify the effectiveness
of each treatment. Primary participating institutions serve diverse populations
including non-traditional students, Hispanic/Latino students, active and veteran
military members, and students from rural regions. This project includes
community outreach through public exhibitions of student artwork. Formative
project evaluation will examine the processes through which assessment data are
collected, and summative evaluation will examine the outcomes of implementation
on student concept comprehension and course engagement. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.