* 2315080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Extreme Stressors in Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Delaney Glass, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 14,303.00

Extreme stress experienced during adolescence may adversely affect a person’s
development, health, and physiology. Variation in which individuals respond to
stressors can offer insight into developmental plasticity and its outcomes, in
addition to understanding impacts on individual trajectories. The degree to
which these stressors exert influence among individuals, and the persistence of
this influence, is debated. This doctoral dissertation research project examines
how stress due to forced displacement and poverty impact variation in hormone
levels in adolescence, to better understand how the timing and experience of
such stressors impact development, metabolism, and shape the stress response –
which impacts how individuals cope with future stressors. The results of this
research offer perspective on how stress reduction programs may help shape
resilient responses in adolescents experiencing adverse life events, and further
offer valuable insight into the impacts of lived experience during a critical
developmental period.

Evolutionary social scientists suggest early life adversity may accelerate or
suppress pubertal development in the presence of high psychosocial stress. A
developmental perspective suggests that testosterone and cortisol will increase
in tandem to facilitate reproductive development in puberty, and predicts that
they should be dissociated prior to puberty, positively associated in early
adolescence, and then become less positively associated in adulthood. This study
explores whether psychosocial stress impacts the average timing at which
adolescents reach adult hormone levels, as measured by the timing and nature of
the relationship between cortisol and testosterone. Specifically, this project
explores whether greater psychosocial stress is associated with earlier pubertal
development among adolescents who have experienced extreme stress. Through the
measurement of variation in cortisol and testosterone in archived dried blood
spot samples from a previously conducted mixed-age randomized control trial that
included an 8-week community-based stress-reduction intervention program, the
results of this research contribute to a better understanding of the
consequences of extreme stressors on adolescent development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.