* 2315691
* Advancing Quantum Sensing and Metrology Education: Concepts, Curricula, and Research on Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Benjamin Zwickl, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 394,980.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the teaching and
learning of topics in Quantum Information Science (QIS), a growing
interdisciplinary area that is important to the U.S. economy and national
security. The project will focus on quantum sensing and metrology (measurement).
The National Quantum Initiative Act (2018) established quantum technology as a
national priority. Quantum systems and their unique behaviors will lead to
significant improvements in computing, communication, and sensing. To realize
the full potential of these technologies and maintain leadership in the area,
the United States needs educational resources that prepare students in STEM
fields to develop, manufacture, and apply these technologies. Of the three
quantum application areas (computing, communication/networking, and sensing),
quantum sensing has received the least attention within curriculum development,
partly because sensors represent a more diverse range of physical systems and
applications. This project will attempt to fill this gap in the curriculum.

The investigators will pursue three goals: (1) Define major ideas and learning
outcomes for quantum sensing and metrology through interviews with experts. (2)
Develop flexible and adaptable curricular materials (e.g., lesson plans, active-
learning tutorials, clicker questions, and homework problems) that are aligned
with the learning outcomes and tested across several institutions. (3) Conduct
foundational research on students' learning to discover common difficulties and
discover how learners from different STEM fields can most effectively use their
prior knowledge when learning about quantum sensing. The education research
questions encompass both fundamental ideas (e.g., How do experts define the core
ideas and models for sensing?) and more applied topics (e.g., What productive
ideas can students build on and what learning difficulties do they face as they
learn quantum sensing?). Products of the project will include a set of core
ideas and learning outcomes for quantum measurement and sensing; a set of
flexible and adaptable curricular materials that can be applied in
interdisciplinary QIS courses, engineering courses on sensing, and physics
courses on quantum mechanics; and publications for quantum educators and
education researchers about students' learning of quantum sensing. The NSF IUSE:
EDU program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.