* 2315480
* BPC-DP: Building Capacity for a Research Community on Black Women and Girls in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Kyla McMullen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,723.00

The University of Florida seeks to address the underrepresentation of Black
women and girls in computing, a critical issue that impacts both the advancement
of science and the overall welfare of our society. Through the analysis of semi-
structured interviews from the Modern Figures podcast and the collaboration of
researchers, stakeholders, and the community, the project aims to build capacity
for research collaborations and generate evidence-based strategies to broaden
participation in computing. By uncovering the real, lived experiences of Black
women and girls in computing, this project not only advances the field by
identifying gaps in existing literature but also supports community and
collaboration among key stakeholders. The project's outcomes have the potential
to benefit society by ensuring that the advanced technology workforce includes
all members, contributing to a more equitable and innovative future.

This Broadening Participation in Computing Demonstration Project has two primary
goals: first, to conduct a thematic analysis of the semi-structured podcast
interviews on Black women and girls in computing, identifying factors that
promote interest, recruitment, persistence, and well-being in computing fields;
and second, to foster research collaborations and knowledge exchange through a
roundtable, scoping review, and listening sessions with the Black Women in
Computing (BWiC) Reseach community. By analyzing the collected data and
commissioning thematic reports, the project will contribute to the understanding
of the challenges and needs of Black women and girls in computing, generating
evidence-based strategies for broadening participation. The roundtable will
bring together researchers and stakeholders, facilitate collaboration, sharing
of resources, and the development of strategic research agendas. The project's
impact will be measured by the increased research collaboration, research
community engagement, and dissemination of findings to a broader audience of
researchers and practitioners through the listening sessions. Ultimately, this
work seeks to advance the field, promote diversity, and benefit society by
ensuring that the advanced technology workforce is inclusive and reflects the
full range of talent and perspectives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.