* 2315126
* Government-imposed Restrictions on International Economic Relations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dursun Peksen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2026
* USD 795,576.00

It is crucial to understand how decision makers decide whether and what kinds of
restrictions to impose, as well as the manner in which economic restrictions
affect compliance with a government's goals. In the worst case, sanctions can
backfire, undermining the advantageous position the nation-state currently
occupies, while potentially empowering rising challengers for international
influence. This project involves the collection of original data on all
government-mandated sanctions and export controls by nations and international
organizations. Principal investigators will use these data to understand when
different kinds and combinations of economic restrictions are used, when these
restrictions are effective, and when they are most likely to be
counterproductive. The project will help decision makers and scholars better
understand the effectiveness of economic restrictions aimed at coercion and
containment of adversaries and other goals. The project will also provide
insights into how targets try to redirect lost commerce to new third parties,
and how economic and political relationships subsequently evolve.

Using each restriction (the specific prohibited interaction) as the unit of
analysis, the Government-imposed Restrictions on International Economic
Relations project (GRIER) will code all government-mandated restrictions on the
international flow of goods, services, technology, money, finance, and
investment, as well as restrictions on travel, media, and diplomacy for the
years spanning 1992 to 2022. Principal investigators will also construct time-
varying, comparable indicators of the comprehensiveness and severity of each
economic restriction for the target. Using the GRIER dataset, principal
investigators will systematically test two broad research questions. First, what
affects the composition and severity of government-imposed economic
restrictions—whether specifically against governments, individuals, or other
entities? Second, how does the composition of economic restrictions affect not
only the likelihood of target concession, but the broader reshaping of economic
and political networks?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.