* 2315783
* How novices write code: discovering best practices and how they can be adopted
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Edwards, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 238,468.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by understanding the thought
processes of computer science students when writing computer programming codes.
Introductory computer programming courses are a gateway for computer science and
other science technology engineering and mathematics majors. As such it is
important to improve student success in these courses for novice programmers.
While students frequently study examples of completed computer code in
introductory computer science courses, the students are not shown or taught the
process of how code evolves into a complete solution. Indeed, when instructing
students, educators do not quantify the programming process or how the code
evolves during the development process. This project team plans to use analysis
of keystroke logs of students and experts to construct models of student
thinking, problem solving, and trouble shooting. The project intends to
understand how educators can best quantify and teach students how to effectively
write computer programming code. The proposed work has the potential to be a
first principles-based approach to provide a deeper understanding of the code
development process for students, improve the quality of computer science
graduates, and contribute to a diverse computing workforce.

The objectives of this project are to 1) discover through keystroke analysis
descriptors for the process of writing a computer programming code, 2)
investigate what the programming processes are, and 3) demonstrate how students
can adopt best practices. Three studies, centered around keystroke analysis and
outcomes of introducing students to keystroke playbacks of programming
assignments, will be designed to meet these objectives. The project team plans
to produce data analysis software and public keystroke log datasets. The three
studies are designed to identify best practices for novice programmers. The
project results will be disseminated on the website which will be linked to
KeystrokeExplorer, GitHub repositories of KeystrokeExplorer, and the
ShowYourWork plugin. The project team intends to present the results at
computing education conferences and in Transactions on Computing Education. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.