* 2315257
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rewilding, Wildlife Conservation Decision-Making, and Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Nancy Donald, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 27,329.00

Protecting the habitats for threatened or endangered wildlife in national parks
and reserves has been a long-standing practice of wildlife conservation.
However, the effects of climate change on these protected habitats demands a
reconsideration of whether or not this model is effective. Recent scholarship
has suggested that the conservation methodology of rewilding – the
reintroduction or stabilization of wildlife populations as a way to restore
ecosystems – provides an alternative. Its emphasis on dispersing wildlife
through corridors might provide species with greater flexibility to migrate
within and between warming ecosystems. This research examines the implementation
of rewilding projects to assess how the effects of climate change on wildlife
habitats influence scientific practices on the ground. In addition to training a
doctoral student in ethnographic methods and analysis, this research should
provide evidence of how conservation scientists and practitioners confront the
reality of changing climates in their efforts to prevent extirpation and
extinction. Research findings will be shared with conservation organizations
(non-governmental and governmental) and will be published in both academic and
non-academic avenues in order to raise public awareness regarding the
seriousness of climate change for threatened wildlife.

The central question of this project asks whether, how, and why climate change
informs stakeholder responses to and decisions about wildlife conservation. To
answer this, research will be conducted among several groups of stakeholders
including conservation philanthropists, scientists, state officials, and local
communities. By integrating perspectives from actors involved in or affected by
rewilding projects, this research tests for the cultural, economic, scientific,
and/or political concerns that guide conservation decision-making. This research
brings together frameworks from Science Studies and political ecology to provide
new theoretical insights into how recourse to scientific expertise, political
power, and economic influence inflects climate change responses. Through
employing ethnographic methods like participant observation and in-depth
interviews, this project demonstrates the importance of anthropological
investigation in climate change research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.