* 2315720
* Mobility, Aspirations and Social Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Debraj Ray, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 293,490.00

This project continues a broad research agenda on economic development, mobility
and social conflict. It conceptualizes upward mobility, and studies its
connections with several aspects of economic development. Specifically, it asks:
How do inequality and polarization affect upward mobility? How do inequality and
mobility (or the lack thereof) affect social conflict? The project has two main
parts. The first part introduces a notion of upward mobility, and develops a
class of measures for it. These measures are shown to have wide scope, and are
easily applicable to data in the public domain for a majority of the world’s
countries. The second part studies the link between mobility and social unrest
by exploiting a theory of economic behavior developed in earlier work by the
principal investigator. In this theory, an individual’s ambient environment
affects her expressed preferences through its influence on her aspirational
thresholds, which serve as dividing lines between achievement and failure. A
variety of phenomena can be understood from this perspective, including the
connections between economic inequality and upward mobility (or its absence) on
the one hand, and the rise of intolerance and heightened social conflict on the
other. Both parts of the research project work towards such an understanding.

Social mobility is a priority area of research among researchers and policy
makers. But the literature is hamstrung by the demands that mobility measures
place on the data. This new approach to measuring upward mobility opens up a
far-reaching program, which permits the measurement of mobility in a majority of
countries using readily available data. At the heart of the exercise is the
Growth Progressivity Axiom, which states that transfers of instantaneous growth
rates from relatively rich to poor individuals increases upward mobility. This
axiom, along with mild auxiliary restrictions, identifies a class of upward
mobility measures that are linear in individual growth rates, with geometrically
declining weights on baseline incomes. Because the underlying measure does not
rely on panel data, it can be applied to data-poor settings. That application
permits a detailed exploration of recent trends in upward mobility in some
emerging countries, and it also opens the door to a deeper understanding of the
Great Gatsby curve, which links baseline inequalities to subsequent mobility
within societies. These measures of mobility are also connected to phenomena
such as social unrest. A major objective is to understand “orthogonal reactions”
to high and rising economic inequality, those that are not always directed at
the original causes of that inequality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.