* 2315440
* An Online Platform for Learning Neuroanatomy from Neural Connectivity
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* John Pani, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,978.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing a
web-based platform for neuroanatomy instruction based on neural connections.
Understanding functional neuroanatomy is foundational to the rising number of
undergraduates enrolled in neuroscience courses. At the same time, new
techniques for brain imaging are leading to a paradigm shift in neuroscience
research from focusing on individual brain structures to investigating neural
networks and connections. This Engaged Student Learning Level 1 project will
facilitate a revision in undergraduate neuroanatomy education to parallel the
current paradigm shift in neuroscience research. An interactive 3D viewer will
help students visualize and understand functional and structural relationships
among brain areas, and psychologically validated training programs will serve as
multimedia companions to current neuroscience textbooks. By using neural
connectivity to associate brain structures with one another and meaningful
functions, this project will provide undergraduates with a foundational resource
and a functionally relevant perspective on neuroanatomy that better prepares
them for a changing workplace in medicine and research shaped by quickly
advancing technology.

This project aims to develop and test a web-based platform that uses neural
connectivity data to improve student learning of neuroanatomy. Aim 1 (Develop
Technology) will include three components. Development 1 will revise and expand
an interactive graphical software system called Show Me the Brain!! (SMtB) to
include comprehensive 3D models of white-matter fiber tracts that visualize
neural connections. Diffusion-weighted (DTI) images and neuronal tracing data
will be used to generate 3D models of white-matter pathways that fully integrate
with anatomical models based on cryosections and high-resolution structural MRI.
Development 2 will create and test an extension to SMtB called Build-A-Brain for
configuring connectivity networks. By interacting with Build-A-Brain, students
will choose the brain areas they want to learn and will be automatically
directed to white-matter tracts to organize them into functional networks.
Suggested networks will be based on a database of brain networks in which
permuted collections of brain areas are linked by white-matter pathways and
empirically reported functions and applications. Development 3 will build an
open-source community for continuous feedback and improvement of SMtB, Build-A-
Brain, and future platform extensions. Aim 2 (Evaluate Learning) will include a
series of four semester-long experiments in which SMtB and Build-A-Brain will be
used simultaneously for student learning and data collection. These experiments
will follow an existing highly controlled classroom-based protocol to evaluate
the retention, transfer, and critical-thinking effects of connectivity-based
training for undergraduates. Empirical findings from these experiments will
inform and improve the SMtB and Build-A-Brain platforms. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.