* 2315862
* LEAPS-MPS: Controllable sets for nonlinear switched models with applications to infectious diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Esteban Hernandez Vargas, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 10/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

In the growing global public health threat of antibiotic resistance, bacteria
escape the effect of drugs designed to kill them. The misuse of antibiotics in
humans and livestock farming is fueling the rise of multidrug resistance among
common respiratory pathogens. Advances in biotechnology have uncovered a new
paradigm for antimicrobial therapy known as “collateral sensitivity”, which
refers to a trade-of such that the resistance mechanisms acquired by bacteria
for one antibiotic that can make them more vulnerable to another. However,
scheduling the order and time of antibiotic treatment to exploit collateral
sensitivity is challenging and largely unexplored. With this LEAPS-MPS project,
the research team will create the mathematical foundations to model the
population dynamics of antibiotic-resistant and -susceptible bacteria.
Computational algorithms will predict the best chronological order and
respective duration of each antibiotic. The developed approaches will
potentially guide more effective drug regimens that limit resistance development
and prolong available therapies' effectiveness. This project also supports the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in applied mathematics research.
The PI will reach out to historically underrepresented minority students and
recruit them to work on STEM activities. To increase accessibility, educational
and research materials will be disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, workshops, and free online videos.

The technical aspects of this project revolve around developing a mathematical
framework for predicting bacterial populations' evolution based on the concept
of collateral sensitivity. Bacterial population dynamics of antibiotic
resistance can be described using nonlinear switched systems. Control invariant
sets for this class of models will be investigated to ensure desired properties
such as stability, safety, and performance. Computational algorithms will be
created for approximating control invariant sets and permanence sets within a
region outside the origin of the associated nonlinear switched systems. By
identifying control invariant sets, it will become possible to design control
strategies that maintain a system within these sets, conducting predictable and
desirable system behavior. Model predictive control will solve an online finite
horizon open-loop optimal control problem subject to system dynamics and
constraints involving states and control. This set of mathematical tools will
help practitioners decide on cycling therapies that can reduce antibiotic
resistance and consequently eradicate the bacterial infection in the host. This
interdisciplinary project provides opportunities for training students in
different areas of computational mathematics, engineering, and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.