* 2315322
* Scaffolded Computing Projects for the Social Good
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Chad Williams, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 288,100.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing service-learning
opportunities in computing programs. To meet the increasing demand for well-
qualified computing professionals, computing graduates must be ready to apply
their knowledge and skills in a real-world environment. The goal of this project
is to develop a service-learning framework that will help instructors embed
externally sourced projects supporting the social good into existing software
engineering or similar courses. This work will also support competency-based
learning by offering students an opportunity to solve real-world problems in an
authentic environment using current industrial practices and tools coupled with
strong mentoring by support volunteer professionals and near peers. By enabling
competency-based learning, this project will help address the skills gap, both
technical and professional, so that computing students graduate with both the
appropriate knowledge, and the ability to apply their knowledge in a practical
setting. This project will produce the Scaffolded Projects for the Social Good
(SPSG) framework, a low adoption threshold framework to help computing programs
incorporate service-learning projects in their courses. The SPSG framework will
incorporate studio-based learning concepts, agile principles, and the lessons
learned from the Humanitarian Free and Open-Source Software (HFOSS) initiative.
SPSG will provide instructors with a customizable set of curricular materials
aimed at streamlining the software project workflow and offering ample
mechanisms for formative and summative assessment of student learning. SPSG will
help students make meaningful contributions to the missions of non-profit and
community organizations while providing concrete examples regarding the impact
of computing on society. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.