* 2315735
* How to Boost Designers' Emotional Intelligence to Promote Empathy Toward Participants with Disabilities in Design Thinking
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hyung Nam Kim, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 432,655.00

Design Thinking is a problem-solving approach to deeply understand challenges,
ideate a range of solutions, and refine them iteratively through prototyping and
testing. A designer often adopts Design Thinking while working closely with a
user in a face-to-face meeting to create innovative designs. Emotional
interaction with a user is deemed critical in Design Thinking because it helps
to gain a thorough understanding of user needs. This research aims to improve
the quality of emotional interaction in Design Thinking via emotional
intelligence. Emotional intelligence can help to establish a strong emotional
relationship between a designer and a user, contributing to developing design
solutions to accommodate as many users’ needs as possible, including the unique
needs of users with disabilities. This research also supports educational
opportunities for students from underrepresented populations.

Conventional design practices tend to be skewed towards accurate and objective
data collection rather than a designer’s emotional interaction with a user. To
address the limitation, this research utilizes emotional intelligence (the
ability to perceive, understand, and manage emotions). In contrast to empathy
which focuses on others, emotional intelligence focuses on oneself, contributing
to emotional interaction with others. The primary goal of this research is to
understand how to enhance and integrate emotional intelligence in Design
Thinking to foster a designer’s emotional interaction with a user. The specific
objectives include advancing knowledge of human emotion systems; uncovering
individual differences in emotional intelligence; creating an initiative to
enhance emotional intelligence accounting for individual differences; and
evaluating the effect of the initiative on in-person Design Thinking activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.