* 2315041
* Collaborative Research: Black Girls as Creators: an intersectional learning ecosystem toward gendered racial equity in Artificial Intelligence education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Tara Nkrumah, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 09/30/2028
* USD 2,404,767.00

This project will work with artificial intelligence (AI) creators and Black
girls, aged 9-14, to expand the range of perspectives and voices that are a part
of AI technology. The project will include after school and summer camps for
both Black girls and the AI creators to work together on the design and creation
of AI projects.

This project examines two research questions. One is theoretical: What are
design principles for an intersectional AI learning ecosystem? With this
question the PIs explore Black girls' experiences with AI learning ecosystems,
and how they can enact the constructs of intersectionality (critical reflection,
action, accountability). Findings related to question 1 will help them develop a
framework for intersectional professional development for AI professionals that
is specific to how racial equity can be realized in AI learning; and, help them
create new curricula that integrates AI; and, develop a framework for how to
integrate PD, with curricula and technologies in AI spaces in order to create a
more cohesive learning ecosystem. Research question 2 focuses on implementation:
What are practical implementation guidelines for community organizations to
integrate curricula and professional development into an intersectional AI
learning ecosystem? The findings from this question will facilitate the
development of resources for AI educators and community organizations. The
findings from this project will be of interest to technology educators, AI
professionals, the broader STEM education field, and community organizations
that provide STEM education.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF's
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.