* 2315996
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Perovskite-Analogue Nanocrystals via Continuous Flow Reactors
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Milad Abolhasani, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2026
* USD 392,931.00

Lead halide perovskite nanocrystals are an emerging class of materials for next-
generation photonic devices. However, the toxicity of lead has prevented them
from being fully adopted by renewable energy technologies. Substitution of lead
ions with eco-friendly metal ions such as copper, is a promising strategy to
alleviate the toxicity issues of lead halide perovskite nanocrystals. However,
scalable manufacturing of lead-free metal halide perovskites, known as
perovskite-analogues, remains a challenge. This grant supports a collaborative
research project that generates new knowledge related to scalable
nanomanufacturing of high-performing perovskite-analogue nanocrystals using
reconfigurable and modular continuous flow reactors. The new advanced
manufacturing process leverages the high-throughput data generation capability
of continuous flow reactors integrated with in-situ spectral characterization
probes to enable precision synthesis of perovskite-analogue nanocrystals using a
machine learning-assisted experimentation strategy. Lead-free semiconductor
nanocrystals are increasingly preferred in photonic devices such as smart
windows and luminescent solar concentrators. Large-scale manufacturing of lead-
free perovskite-analogue nanocrystals with minimum energy loss can significantly
reduce the total energy consumption across the U.S. and thereby benefit the
nation's prosperity, health, and security. This collaborative research
integrates multiple fields, including advanced manufacturing, materials
chemistry, flow reactor engineering, and data science. The convergent nature of
this collaborative project facilities broadening participation of women and
other underrepresented groups in research and helps train next-generation
leaders in science and engineering. The project plans to use YouTube to broadly
disseminate the generated nanomanufacturing knowledge.

Scalable manufacturing of perovskite-analogue nanocrystals is a time- and
resource-intensive undertaking using conventional batch reactors. This challenge
is mainly due to the fast formation kinetics of perovskite-analogue
nanocrystals, resulting in process-dependent nanocrystal properties. This
collaborative research project is to address the advanced manufacturing
knowledge gaps in scalable production of perovskite-analogue nanocrystals. The
research team plans to utilize reconfigurable and modular flow reactors to study
high-temperature precision nanomanufacturing of copper-based perovskite-analogue
nanocrystals using a decoupled precursor chemistry. Through integration of data
science with automated flow reactors, the high-dimensional nanomanufacturing
space of copper-based perovskite-analogue nanocrystals are rapidly explored to
identify optimal nanomanufacturing routes of fabricating high-performance
nanocrystals with desired optical and optoelectronic properties for device
applications. The application of reconfigurable and modular continuous flow
reactors with on-demand and selective precursor heating capability to
nanomanufacturing is unique and a powerful way to enable precision manufacturing
and increase production scale at which copper-based perovskite-analogue
nanocrystals and other energy-relevant materials can be economically
manufactured.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.