* 2315189
* Concept Integration in Comparative Law: Linking Constitutional, Consultation, and Court Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Zachary Elkins, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2025
* USD 223,357.00

Constitution drafters and researchers have long explored the origins and
consequences of constitutional ideas—to learn why constitutions succeed and
falter, when constitutional ideas gain traction, and how they can shape people’s
lives. Yet it is hard to analyze these questions across different countries and
contexts without a coordinated approach to naming and conceptualizing these
ideas. In some fields, systematizing and organizing concepts has been a central
concern, and has even led to high levels of consensus on categories and terms.
In other fields, such as Law and Political Science, concepts are less regulated.
This project uses digital tools to accelerate a more systematic approach to the
representation of ideas in comparative law. The goal is to improve
constitutional design by organizing and enriching the historical and cross-
national information available to constitution drafters and analysts. The
project will deliver a series of research products including (1) a comprehensive
inventory of topics in constitutions worldwide, which integrates and “maps”
related concepts invoked across research projects in the field, (2) new methods
for discovering and tracing ideas embedded in public comments during episodes of
constitutional consultation, and (3) a systematic analysis of constitutional
ideas embedded in court rulings worldwide, revealing which constitutional ideas
gain traction and how they evolve after the constitution’s adoption. These and
other intermediate products—in the form of data, publications, and online
interfaces—will be actively disseminated in international research communities
in Law, Political Science, and Information Technology. The project uses new and
evolving natural language processing (NLP) tools and the team’s domain knowledge
in constitutional law to facilitate the systematic comparison, integration, and
application of concepts in comparative law. The project employs these tools to:
(1) refine the Comparative Constitutions Project (CCP) ontology for use with NLP
tools and integrate multiple conceptual frameworks from comparative law to
provide broader topic coverage, (2) use the new CCP ontology to provide section-
level topic coverage of national constitutions globally, (3) link constitutional
content to public consultation input to assess the prevalence, evolution, and
uptake of constitutional ideas raised by citizens, and (4) link constitutional
content to court rulings to assess the prevalence, evolution, and extension of
constitutional ideas raised in court rulings across countries. The project’s
methodological contribution lies in developing multilingual concept processing
tools that compare and integrate concepts and ontologies in comparative law. Its
ontological contribution lies in developing a replicable process for optimizing
the performance of ontologies in semantic-similarity applications, refining and
expanding the CCP ontology, and creating a public repository for ontologies in
comparative law. Its substantive contributions identify geographic and temporal
patterns in the constitutional ideas entrenched in constitutions, raised by
citizens, and litigated in courts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.