* 2315556
* Collaborative Research: Using Weather Forecasts to Identify Economic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Derek Lemoine, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2026
* USD 297,437.00

This award funds an innovative research on information economics. It examines
how acting on weather forecasts enables agents to improve outcomes that are
sensitive to weather. The first part of this project examines how improvements
in weather forecast accuracy benefit society by helping people avoid mortality
and why the benefits from these improvements differ across groups. The second
part of this project tests whether people use forecasts differently when they
are aware that forecasts have become more accurate. These types of reactions
could be important for valuing persistent changes in forecast quality. The third
part of this project uses routine weather forecasts to trace out the
geographical footprints of firms’ economic activities, a fundamental but
heretofore elusive feature of the economy. More generally, this research will
further the state of science surrounding the value and utilization of
information. It will also inform public policies on investment in information
that can improve human health and economic prosperity, including to
disadvantaged communities, domestically and across the world. The results will
also help to establish the US as a global leader in the use of weather forecast
to improve human wellbeing.

This research will use three projects to study how ubiquitous information
interventions—routine weather forecasts—impact economic behavior. The first
project develops a theory-driven method for estimating the benefits of
improvements in weather forecast accuracy using mortality events and National
Weather Service temperature forecasts in the United States. Preliminary evidence
shows that forecasts are greatly beneficial overall, but on average, has
differential effects across different groups. The first project seeks to
understand the sources of this disparity. The second project tests a crucial
assumption underlying many recent information studies: that agents’ responses to
messages do not depend on their beliefs about the persistent accuracy of
information with quasi-experimental methods. The third project takes advantage
of the granular nature of weather forecast data to identify the location of
firm-level economic activity. This research contributes to the theoretical and
empirical understanding of the value of information, including for persistent
increases in accuracy and the utility of public information interventions. It
will also contribute to understanding how anticipatory behavior may mitigate
costly weather extremes that plague society. The results will also inform public
policies on investment in information that can improve human health and economic
prosperity, domestically and across the world. The results will also help to
establish the US as a global leader in the use of weather forecast to improve
human wellbeing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.