* 2315881
* BPC-DP: CS Subfield Diversity: Developing the Research Basis to Inform Intervention Strategies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Lecia Barker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2027
* USD 299,181.00

University of Colorado will study the mechanisms that leads to computer science
(CS) subfield segregation, knowledge that can be used to mitigate the lack of
diversity in CS research subfields. The wide range of CS subfields is critical
to nearly every other scientific endeavor, leading to strong and growing demand
for CS research scientists. CS researchers do cutting edge, creative work, are
placed into influential positions, and earn high salaries. Yet relatively few
members of minoritized groups occupy CS research positions. Efforts to broaden
participation in CS have focused on increasing numbers of historically
minoritized group members in the broader discipline. However, evidence suggests
that participation varies widely across CS subfields, with members of
minoritized groups channeled into less prestigious and influential areas of
specialization, positions, and roles. This "occupational segregation"
jeopardizes U.S. innovation, economic competitiveness, and social justice.
Studying the mechanisms that produce CS subfield segregation to mitigate lack of
diversity in CS research subfields—in terms of both numbers and influence—has
been neglected but is fundamental to the design of effective interventions in
broadening participation in computing.

This Broadening Participation in Computing Demonstration Project aims to extend
recent work on CS research subfield segregation by quantifying domestic racial
and ethnic minority computer scientists by subfield and by developing a deep,
qualitative understanding of how CS researchers come to choose subfields. A
three-part, triangulated study is proposed: 1) in-depth interviews of computer
scientists who are diverse in many ways (e.g., subfields, institutional
types/roles, intersecting minority statuses, BPC involvement) will produce a
qualitative understanding of the mechanisms behind CS research subfield choice;
2) textual analysis of public subfield discourse will make explicit the tacit
values and beliefs about who belongs and who does not, as well as ways exclusion
and inclusion are communicated; and 3) a large-scale survey will quantify
participation of domestic racial minorities in CS subfields and may allow
generalization and comparisons across groups of experience of the mechanisms
revealed by the interview and textual analysis. The outcome will be a knowledge
base that will better support development of interventions for overcoming CS
subfield segregation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.