* 2315077
* Alternative transducer and optical pumping scheme for nanoscale thermal metrology and imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peijun Guo, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 402,945.00

Heat dissipation is intrinsic to technologies ranging from micro- and power-
electronics to energy-storage devices and thermoelectrics. The ability to
characterize and understand thermal transport processes can help regulate the
flow of heat and improve device functionality, efficiency, and stability,
especially for those made of materials with poor thermal conductivities.
Nonetheless, measuring thermal transport in low thermal-conductivity materials
at a high spatial resolution is still challenging. A new approach is proposed
here, in which the heat flow will be directly imaged by a high-speed camera with
spatial resolution down to hundreds of nanometers. The proposed approach is
laser-based, hence non-contact, and will take advantage of organic
semiconducting materials, which are abundant and ubiquitously used in organic
light-emitting diodes and displays. The organic semiconductors will serve as
local temperature reporters of materials underneath, whose thermal conductivity
can be assessed by observing how quickly the temperature of the organic
semiconductor varies in time. The project will provide extensive training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students in the construction and
modification of comprehensive optical measurement systems with high spatial and
temporal resolution. K-12 students from local public high schools will gain
understanding and experience in state-of-the-art thermal metrology experiments.

Defects, grain boundaries, among other types of inhomogeneities are
characteristics of materials that are not single crystals or epitaxial films. To
understand the influence of such imperfections on heat transport in emerging
energy-related materials, the team will explore organic semiconductors as an
alternative type of transducer for optical pump-probe thermoreflectance
measurements. The morphology, optical properties, and thermal transport
properties of several prototypical organic semiconductors will be thoroughly
investigated over a wide temperature range. Meanwhile, a time-resolved, wide-
field optical imaging setup will be constructed, which will permit efficient
thermal excitation of organic transducers and their accurate temperature
monitoring with nanosecond time resolution. The team will perform proof-of-
concept experiments to spatiotemporally imaging the flow of heat in
heterogeneous energy materials and in prototypical two-dimensional ferromagnetic
materials. It is expected that the alternative transducer and imaging technique
proposed here can complement the existing thermoreflectance techniques for the
investigation of thermal transport properties of a wide range of technologically
important materials used for energy conversion and storage, optoelectronics, and
beyond. The ability to remove the transducer after their use is a useful feature
for measuring unreproducible or high-value samples, and for failure analysis and
quality control of semiconductor chips.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.