* 2315108
* Conference: Experiments and Theory in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Andrew Schotter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 49,625.00

This award will fund a series of conferences whose objective is to bring
together experts from the respective fields of economic theory and experimental
economics. Economic theory and experiments have had a fruitful relationship for
the last four decades. Over the course of this period, economic experiments have
allowed to uncover many “behavioral anomalies”, that is to say, behaviors which
were consistently observed in the lab and did not seem to conform to the
prevalent economic models at the time. These seemingly anomalous observations
have eventually resulted in the refinement of numerous economic models. Through
this series of conferences, the investigators seek to continue and amplify this
important collaboration (between economic theorists and experimentalists) by
creating many opportunities for scholars in these respective groups of
researchers to have live exchanges, which will include state-of-the art
presentations from the two fields. This continued collaboration is crucial to
ensure the updating of the theories and models seeking to explain the behavior
of economic agents. The participation of experts from psychology, political
science, and computer science gives an interdisciplinary dimension to these
conferences.

Specifically, the first conference in the series focuses on the topic of
“learning with incorrect models”. Behavioral economics has accumulated ample
evidence documenting systematic mistakes and biases in many economic
environments. The question of determining how agents correct these mistakes over
time (with experience and sequential acquisition of new information) is of
central importance. The investigators have identified a burgeoning literature on
this topic from the economic theory side; but there is almost no experimental
and behavioral scrutiny on this important question. The organization of this
event is thus likely to spur the development of the experimental literature on
this topic. The list of conference participants includes world-renowned experts
and students from various universities across the United States. In the second
conference, the organizers plan to explore the topic of “information design and
persuasion”, which essentially refers to one’s ability to influence, through the
choice of the information provided, the actions chosen by another agent. In the
last decade, many theoretical works have used models of persuasion in various
contexts: voter mobilization, traffic routing, rating systems, transparency in
financial markets, etc. However, to date, the related works from experimental
economics have focused on rather simplistic and unrealistic examples. The second
conference will thus give researchers in both field the opportunity to eliminate
this disconnect between the two fields. The series includes additional events,
which focus on other topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.