* 2315820
* Identity, Social Networks, and Academic Flourishing in First- and Continuing Generation University Students
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Warren Reich, Felician University, A New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 448,060.00

This project furthers understanding of how first-generation (FG) and continuing-
generation (CG) students meet and overcome the academic barriers they face. The
research hypothesis is that engagement, success, retention, and well-being will
be higher for those students who (a) strongly identify themselves with their
academic role, and (b) have at least one person in their network who cares about
his or her academic success. The project also examines whether any of these
factors are different for FG than for CG students. This research moves the
discussion of the FG experience toward a more thoughtful consideration of the
contributions of students’ most important social relationships. In doing so we
develop a coherent theoretical frame that will help to organize the existing
knowledge base and give direction to original and actionable research on FG
students. We also conduct a rigorous yearlong training seminar for advanced
undergraduate students that includes conference presentations, guest speakers,
and site visits to research laboratories at Hunter College and Rutgers—Newark.
As well, this project supports the development of underutilized space to expand
Felician’s Psychology Research Laboratory and Training Center. It furthermore
funds the establishment of a Felician University white paper series. Findings
from this project ultimately inform a training model and an evidence-based
intervention for undergraduate students. Students who identify with what they
learn and are supported by trusted network members concerned with their academic
well-being—academic confidantes—will lead generative lives and contribute to the
nation’s human capital.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.