* 2315397
* Atomistic Control over Functional Defects in van der Waals Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Sutter, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 334,479.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary Imperfections (defects) in materials have
traditionally been seen as undesirable, especially in electronic materials such
as semiconductors. Hence, efforts in science and engineering have focused on
eliminating defects in materials for technological applications. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, Profs. Eli and Peter Sutter and their groups at the
University of Nebraska pursue a fundamentally different approach, namely to (i)
identify possible mechanisms by which specific defects can be generated during
materials synthesis; (ii) determine ways of controlling the placement and type
of the imperfection in its host crystal; and (iii) uncover the properties
emerging from such controlled defects. To realize this vision, the project
focuses on a particular class of materials, layered crystals consisting of
atomically thin sheets held together by weak van der Waals forces, as well as a
"vapor-liquid-solid" synthesis process that promises manifold opportunities for
manipulating single defects. If successful, the research could fundamentally
change our view of defects in electronic materials, with potentially
transformative impact in basic science as well as key sectors of technology. In
addition to pursuing these technical objectives, the project provides far-
reaching opportunities for training and career development to the participating
students. And it aims to help enhance education, diversity, and the
participation of underrepresented groups – in particular girls from rural and
Native American tribal communities – in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) by organizing annual summer workshops for student/teacher teams from
rural Nebraska communities and by developing microprocessor-based teaching aids
for use in middle- and high school science classrooms.

Part 2: Technical Summary

Defects have traditionally been perceived as detrimental (and thus undesirable)
in electronic and functional materials. Recent research showed that point
defects may provide important new functionality, e.g., for quantum information
processing. Extended defects could similarly harbor emerging properties of
interest for technology, but identifying and ultimately harnessing functionality
from extended defects faces major challenges, including the development of
synthesis protocols with innate control over defect placement, orientation, and
configuration; and the positioning of tailored single defects in a small host
volume so that the defect dominates the overall properties. This project
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the NSF’s
Division of Materials Research addresses these challenges by taking advantage of
opportunities presented by the reduced symmetry of van der Waals crystals and by
developing vapor-liquid-solid nanostructure growth processes to obtain a
fundamental understanding of extended defect formation and tuning combined with
measurements of emerging properties such as electronic structure,
optoelectronics, charge transport, and ferroelectricity. Specifically, the
research will examine the materials chemistry underlying the formation of
defects such as dislocations and stacking faults in nanostructures of layered
monochalcogenide semiconductors, their alloys, as well as axial and radial
heterostructures. And it aims to identify approaches for transcribing tailored
defects into a wide range of other materials, including other layered crystals
and conventional 3D-crystalline semiconductors. This will set the stage for
systematically exploring the emerging properties of tailored individual line and
planar defects in a wide range of nanostructured materials. The successful
realization of the project goals could pave the way for a paradigm shift toward
the pursuit of crystalline materials where new functionality emerges from single
defects with controlled properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.