* 2315946
* The Contributions of Community Engagement, Faculty Networks, and STEM Student Collaboration to Noninvasively Identifying and Documenting Unmarked Burial Sites
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kirsten Vacca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 167,321.00

The unmarked burial project is an excellent example of scientists and community
members collaborating to preserve and reconstruct cemeteries and their regional
cultural history. The project objectives are to a) identify unmarked burials for
placing markers to commemorate those buried there, b) identify space for future
burials, and c) document who is buried at which unmarked burial for those that
are known. Research for fulfilling these objectives engages community and family
members of the deceased, students, and anthropologists trained in applied
cultural and forensic anthropology, as well as historical archaeology. Students
gain hands-on field experience for developing future careers and obtaining
related occupational jobs in anthropology through learning how to connect
community memory and scientific facts while being trained in and learning the
applications of cultural, ethnohistorical, archaeological, and non-invasive
forensic methods that do not physically disturb or expose human remains. The
project also develops archival audiovisual documentation to preserve the local
and historical knowledge of the community and the stories of family membersâ€™
lives. The findings regarding this novel multi-method approach have significant
relevance for similar suspected unmarked burial projects with partial or non-
existent documentation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.