* 2315294
* Incorporating Generative Artificial Intelligence into Engineering Writing Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Tamara Tate, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing an engineering
writing curriculum that incorporates generative artificial intelligence (AI).
With support from the Engaged Student Learning track of the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Directorate for STEM Education (IUSE: EDU)
program, this project is designed to improve engineering students’ writing
skills and enable them to be knowledgeable and ethical users of AI. Writing and
communication are crucial to engineers and new generative AI tools such as
ChatGPT pose significant opportunities and challenges for helping engineering
students become better writers and communicators. Thus, this project seeks to
study the integration of AI writing tools in an undergraduate engineering
writing course and create open-source products to help instructors integrate AI
writing tools into such courses. The project seeks to maximize the digital and
AI literacy of emerging engineers to foster critical writing and communication
skills, both in college and in their future careers. It is imperative that
engineers both understand the potential pitfalls of generative AI related to
incorrect information, bias, privacy, and intellectual property rights, and
learn to write well with generative AI. The knowledge to understand why and when
to use generative AI in writing, the skills to write prompts that generate
useful text, and the ethical use of those texts to support one’s own writing
should be developed in all engineering students, regardless of socioeconomic
status, race/ethnicity, or gender.

The project will use design-based implementation research to understand the best
practices for integrating AI writing tools into an undergraduate engineering
writing course and the impact such integration has on students’ development as
writers. To meet these goals, researchers will iteratively develop, implement,
and evaluate (a) a curriculum that can be used to integrate AI writing tools
into undergraduate engineering writing and communication courses, (b) a
pedagogically-informed AI writing platform to ensure reliable access to
generative AI for the purposes of the curriculum, and (c) professional
development to support instructor use of the curriculum and platform. Each phase
of the project will be implemented following the Plan-Do-Act-Study framework:
the team will collaboratively plan (set goals, compare practices, select use
cases); do (make an action plan to integrate AI writing tools into the
Communications in the Professional World course); act (implement the
curriculum); and study (monitor and evaluate the progress, analyze findings).
The Plan-Do-Act-Study will be conducted in a cyclical manner to iteratively
improve the integration and products. Ultimately, the team will make the
curriculum, tool, and professional development publicly available on the project
website; conduct in-person and online workshops for instructors to support their
adoption of the curriculum; offer quarterly webinars to a national audience; and
disseminate findings in open access publications, all with the goal of informing
STEM instructors across the U.S. about how to incorporate generative AI in
writing instruction. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.