* 2315353
* Self-Paced Lectures With as-Needed Answers and Live Interactions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Kyle Reed, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2026
* USD 396,362.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by seeking an optimal trade-off
between synchronous and asynchronous instructional delivery methods resulting in
a balanced approach that could potentially enable learners with different needs
and learning paces to learn more effectively. The research project aims to
address common educational challenges caused by students having disparate
backgrounds and content acquisition rates. By providing students with the
benefits of a live class (e.g. real-time discussions and learning from each
other's questions) as well as the benefits of watching a video on their own
(e.g. pause, speed up, rewind), different learning needs can be accommodated.
The approach is particularly relevant to introductory and continuing education
courses that include students having highly contrasted levels of background
knowledge and preparation.

Pre-recorded lecture videos that feature a repository of previously asked
questions are made available to students, additionally, an interactive dialogue
module is used to connect directly with the instructor in real-time. The
approach will be evaluated at two universities and in two different course types
(traditional lecture and flipped classroom) in senior and graduate level courses
in Haptics and Controls. Data will be collected on student utilization,
performance, engagement, understanding and learning efficiency. Mechanisms to be
used for data collection include website access logs, surveys, and performance
in the class. Surveys and student focus group interviews will be employed to
understand how students perceive the learning environment. Also, course
instructors will be interviewed to understand how they are incorporating the
approach into their courses. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.