* 2315646
* Enhancing Students’ Spatial Skills with Augmented Reality Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Juan Granizo, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student engagement
and student learning outcomes for engineering students in engineering graphics,
a foundational course in many engineering programs. Understanding engineering
design specifications is a critical skill for making decisions in the
engineering workforce. Students need to learn how to analyze and interpret these
specifications, which often involves visualizing a 2D drawing as a 3D model and
vice versa. Being able to convert between these two representations enables
engineers to communicate ideas and designs more effectively with other
stakeholders. Students’ spatial skills as cognitive skills can be improved with
intentional instruction supported by effective learning resources. This project
will develop and assess an augmented reality application that will display
visual aids to guide students in analyzing lines and surfaces. Students will be
guided through a step-by-step animation to show how 2D drawings relate to a 3D
model. This study will assess the impact of the application on student
engagement and students’ spatial skills for students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in engineering. Project results will be made available
to the STEM education community through a project website and workshops for
faculty.

The goal of this project is to improve students’ spatial skills by engaging
students in active learning using an augmented reality application. The
application will provide visual aids such as highlighting and shading to assist
students in comprehending the relationship between lines and surfaces. Students
will be able to rotate a 3D model with their fingers or follow an animation that
connects points to create lines and surfaces in an interactive immersive
environment. Incentive mechanisms such as points, levels, badges, and additional
challenge problems will be used to motivate students to solve problems. Embedded
multiple choice questions will be used to assess students’ understanding.
Annotations and contextual information will be added to each question to
motivate students and provide feedback on their answers. The project will use
validated instruments in a within- and between-subjects design to assess the
impact of the active learning experiences on students’ spatial skills and
attitudes in an engineering graphics course. Beyond sharing the findings through
peer-reviewed journals, and conference presentations, a project website will be
developed and maintained which will provide access to assessment results and
project-related materials. Lessons learned and guidelines for implementing the
augmented reality application in courses will be shared with interested faculty
members via workshops and outreach activities. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.