* 2315484
* Building Upon the EarthCube Community. A Geoscience and Cyberinfrastructure Workshop
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Deborah Khider, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 67,048.00

A two day “Building Upon the EarthCube Community” workshop will take place to
launch an effort which will bring together participants from academia, non-
profits, and industry. The intent of this workshop is to continue the momentum
brought upon by the EarthCube initiative consisting of synergistic interactions
between geoscientists and cyberinfrastructure experts. Early-career participants
are especially encouraged to participate to ensure that these interdisciplinary
collaborations better serve their needs as they advance through their careers.

This geoscience/cyberinfrastructure workshop will spark synergies and
discoveries among science and technology experts to advance the goal of
transforming research in cyberinfrastructure and the geosciences. To spark
collaboration and the sharing of ideas, the two-day workshop will be designed to
include cutting edge science talks, demonstrations, executable notebooks,
posters, hands-on activities, as well as interactive sessions on making the best
use of technologies to advance science. The Building Upon the EarthCube
Community Workshop will kick-start the collaborations of a new generation of
science and technology experts who will significantly contribute to increasing
the impact of the output of NSF and other federally-funded research thereby
increasing public and open access to data. To this end, the workshop will
support early-career participants through twenty travel awards, with priority
given to individuals belonging to groups traditionally underrepresented in the
geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.