* 2315709
* Artificial Intelligence-Scaffolded Pre-Classroom Learning for Large, Introductory Undergraduate Physics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Min Kyu Kim, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 07/31/2026
* USD 298,375.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing and implementing
an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-augmented formative assessment and feedback
system. This system will help students develop source-based STEM arguments, such
as STEM text summarization, or problem spaces, which are mental representations
of a problem and of multiple paths to solving it. Project implementation will
take place in large, undergraduate introductory physics courses at an urban
university that serves diverse and historically underrepresented student groups.
Persistent learner engagement in pre-classroom learning activities is critical
to learner success in introductory STEM courses. Undergraduate students often
need to develop a solid understanding of content or problem situations in self-
paced online learning contexts to prepare for in-classroom active and
collaborative learning. However, unsupervised pre-classroom learning can be an
ongoing issue in a student-centered learning model. This problematic situation
is particularly evident in large introductory-level STEM courses where
traditional instructional techniques are less effective. The innovation of this
project will include AI-generated adaptive scaffolding information and learning
progress feedback with data visualization techniques to help students with
conceptual learning and self-regulatory behaviors. The unique learning
opportunities supported by an AI-scaffolded feedback system will significantly
increase students' engagement levels in self-paced online pre-classroom
learning. This, in turn, should help students acquire content knowledge and
build a proper understanding of problems to prepare themselves for success with
in-classroom interactive problem-solving activities.

Three phases will govern the work of this project. First, the project team will
take a Participatory Research (PR) approach that emphasizes the direct
engagement of faculty members who teach physics courses in designing and
implementing new assignments. These faculty members will also co-construct
research through a partnership with researchers to conduct a mixed-methods study
of instructors and students in the courses. During this first phase the primary
research goal is to identify topics and problems that utilize AI-scaffolded pre-
classroom learning and investigate learner engagement and progression in the
pre-class assignments. In the project's second phase evaluation studies will
demonstrate whether knowledge development during pre-classroom learning can help
students solve cognitively demanding tasks in classrooms and develop positive
self-efficacy in STEM. The findings will also determine whether AI in education
improves students' well-being inside and outside of classrooms, with a focus on
students traditionally underrepresented in STEM education. Extensive data
collected in the final phase will uncover the relationships among pre-classroom
activities, in-classroom performance, self-efficacy, interest in physics, and
student backgrounds, including gender, race, ethnicity, first-generation status,
and English language learning. The sequence mining and cluster analysis are
expected to reveal students' different hidden engagement states and group their
engagement trajectories, explaining how cluster membership and trajectories vary
across students' backgrounds. Consequently, this project will lay the groundwork
for further research to develop an AI-scaffolded pre-classroom learning model
that promotes most students' success in introductory physics courses. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.