* 2315943
* Collaborative Research: Generics in context: Examining mental biases and resources  in social and science communication and learning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ny Vasil, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 721,526.00

Lack of diversity in STEM fields (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) stifles scientific, technological and social progress. This project
tackles this issue from two angles. First, it generates new empirical findings
on cognitive and linguistic barriers that stand in the way of eliminating
achievement disparities, and second, it builds a collaborative interdisciplinary
mentoring program benefitting undergraduate and graduate students at two
Minority-Serving Institutions. Using an interdisciplinary approach, the project
investigates ways to harness the mental and linguistic resources available to
children and adults to facilitate science learning and effective science
communication, scaffold deeper understanding of social inequities in the context
of larger social structures (“structural thinking”), and foster the capacity to
envision social change.

Specifically, this project examines the developmental trajectory of how people
learn, represent and communicate about generalizable regularities in the social,
biological and physical world. Bridging methodology and theory from several
Cognitive Science disciplines (psychology, philosophy and linguistics), five
large-scale studies explore how generalization and generic language across
development can (i) be affected by the stability of a regularity across times,
places, and other circumstances, (ii) be flexible and restricted to a context
(e.g., the US today), and (iii) affect (mis)communication in education and
across political divides. Overall, the project elucidates several fundamental
cognitive and communicative barriers to diversifying STEM and identifies
psychologically feasible ways to counteract them, while offering advanced
mentoring and intensive training in cutting-edge research methods to a diverse
and inclusive group of students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.