* 2315574
* Training Computer Science Teaching Assistants to Motivate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Inyoung Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,592.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by redesigning, implementing,
and evaluating a teaching assistant training project in a computer science (CS)
department. Teaching assistants (TAs) can play an important role in motivating
student engagement in large CS courses. However, TAs often do not have the
teaching experience, nor have they developed the skills needed to effectively
motivate student engagement. The purpose of the CS TA Training project is to use
evidence-based practices based on current motivation theories to redesign,
implement, and evaluate a training program designed explicitly to help CS TAs
use inclusive teaching practices that motivate all students to engage in their
CS courses. One of the primary outcomes will be the development of a CS TA
Training prototype that can lay the groundwork for institutional improvement
within the CS department at Virginia Tech and which serve as framework for TA
training for use in other departments and institutions.

About 80 CS TAs will participate in the training before and during each
semester. TAs who participate in the training, as well as the students in their
courses, will be surveyed near the beginning and end of the courses to assess
the impact of the TA training on their motivational beliefs over time. These
data, along with students’ grades, will be analyzed to answer these primary
research questions: To what extent can TA training in CS courses affect (a)
students’ motivational perceptions and grades in CS courses, and (b) students’
and TAs’ CS motivational beliefs and goals? The project findings will be
disseminated through conference presentations, workshops, listservs, journals,
and websites. Long-term outcomes of the project may include enhanced methods to
evaluate CS TA training, improved TA training at other institutions, and
increased representation of students underrepresented in CS fields due to their
increased perceptions of CS self-efficacy and sense of belonging. The NSF IUSE:
EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.