* 2315822
* AF: Small: Theoretical Aspects of Repetition-Aware Text Compression and Indexing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Sharma Thankachan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2025
* USD 414,034.00

Being able to store, search, and analyze massive data sets efficiently is one of
today's pressing challenges. To that end, this project will study a collection
of problems under text compression and indexing with tremendous current
relevance, owing to a specific characteristic prevalent in many modern text data
sets, called high repetitiveness. This characteristic makes the data highly
compressible using some specialized schemes. However, the theoretical
understanding of those schemes is still in a nascent stage. This project will
address some of the fundamental open problems on the effectiveness of several
schemes that are popular in practice. This project will also introduce new ideas
for indexing such data in a highly space-efficient manner and quickly support
various (application-specific) queries. The techniques developed in this project
will apply to a broad class of algorithmic problems and applications; therefore,
they will have a lasting impact on related fields. The main results stem from
this research will be disseminated through major conferences, journals, and
workshop tutorials. The participation of undergraduates and minorities,
including women, will be ensured. Suffix trees and suffix arrays are two
fundamental data structures for text indexing with many applications in
bioinformatics. However, they are notorious for their space complexity. The FM-
index index encodes suffix arrays in space close to the entropy-based lower
bound using the Burrows-Wheeler Transformation (BWT). But, the entropy model of
compression is less effective in capturing repetitiveness. Therefore, modern
applications urge even more space frugal encodings that exploit repetitiveness.
Although the community has made some recent progress in exact pattern matching,
solutions to many other (more complex) matching problems are still open. To that
end, this project will attempt to design repetition-aware indexes for pattern
matching under mismatches, edits, and wildcards, along with efficient
construction algorithms. This project also aims to develop a unified framework
to compress several advanced suffix-tree variants (quasi-suffix trees) that
support even more complex matching paradigms such as parameterized and order-
isomorphic matching. Novel techniques and concepts that go beyond the existing
BWT-based methods will be sought. Additionally, the project will attempt a
deeper study on various aspects of BWT-runs and the relative Lempel-Ziv
compression scheme from the hardness side.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.