* 2315924
* Synthetic control over redox-state and morphology in electronically complex coordination polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Anderson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 571,848.00

Non-Technical Summary Technological advances are built upon the discovery of new
materials and new methods to control their properties and function. Recent years
have seen a surge of interest in such a class of materials known as coordination
polymers. These materials have the advantage of being porous and extremely
tunable. In addition to major advances in using these materials for gas storage,
catalysis, and sensing, there is increasing focus on using their electronic
properties for applications in new devices or for different technologies.
However, understanding and control over the electronic properties of
coordination polymers is still limited. This project, which is supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials
Research, specifically involves the synthesis and study of coordination polymers
with intrinsic building blocks that have the ability to hold or lose electrons.
The ability to tune the electronics of these materials offers the promise of
exciting new properties and applications. Furthermore, the porosity of these
materials allows the possibility to modulate their properties over a much wider
range than standard materials candidates. Thus, researchers at the University of
Chicago design a broad new class of materials with modular and tunable
properties for a wide variety of applications. In parallel with these research
efforts, the award supports a local conference which includes undergraduate
students, graduate students, and local postdoctoral researchers. This conference
builds a community of researchers in the Chicago area as well as links to
ongoing efforts with younger students to increase scientific communication and
literacy. Technical Summary Coordination polymers (CPs) and metal-organic-
frameworks (MOFs) with electronic properties such as conductivity and/or
magnetism are an exciting new class of materials with myriad applications. Part
of the appeal of these materials arises from their innate properties, namely
porosity and reticular structure. However, CPs are also uniquely poised as
electronic/magnetic materials; the molecular nature of CP nodes and linkers
enables synthetic tuning of physical properties. Furthermore, facile
intercalation of counterions coupled with redox-active molecular motifs enables
unparalleled degrees of electronic flexibility spanning many different redox-
states. These properties have stimulated immense interest in synthesizing new
electronically complex CPs and MOFs. Despite enormous progress and new materials
with truly remarkable properties, there remain large synthetic challenges in the
field of conducting or magnetic CPs. Namely, most newly synthesized materials
are isolated in a serendipitous oxidation state; controlling the morphology of
formed materials, for instance to incorporate them into devices, is still a
major challenge. There is now a substantial need to tune and control properties
via precise synthetic modulation of redox-state and morphology. As such, the
main focus of this project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, is to discover robust
synthetic approaches to control CP redox-state and morphology, particularly in
S-based materials. Specifically, researchers at the University of Chicago
explore variable points of redox-modulation, either before CP synthesis, in-situ
during CP formation, or postsynthetically, to control electronic or magnetic
properties. A key hypothesis underlying the research is that the solubility of
CP building blocks or oligomers is related to their redox-state and hence
charge, and thus that redox modulation also enables control over CP morphology.
The successful realization of this research is expected to provide a set of
tools for tuning and applying electronically complex CPs in many different
areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.