* 2315488
* Outsourcing Property Tax Re-Assessments: Empirical Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Olken, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 362,153.00

This award funds research on an important economic policy question: is it
efficient for some public services to be outsourced to the private sector when
governments lack the capacity to provide them efficiently; if so, what is the
best incentive contract to achieve this efficiency. Outsourcing the provision of
public services to private firms is one strategy to address staffing constraints
but carries potential concerns such as cost, quality of work, and scope for
corruption. This research project takes advantage of a property tax re-valuation
exercise in a large city to study the effects of outsourcing and the optimal
contract models for doing so. It will use experimental methods to evaluate the
performance of firms operating under fixed fee versus performance-based
contracts, relative to each other, and as compared to assessments by government
tax staff to assess which approach achieves the tax objectives at the lowest
cost. The results will provide policy relevant evidence to a large audience of
policymakers in the US and worldwide on when outsourcing can be effective and
how to guard against potential pitfalls. The results of this research will lead
to higher efficiency in the use of government human and financial resources and
higher tax revenues, which will in turn result in the improved provision of
public services.

Using a large-scale, two-phase randomized control trial, this project will study
the selection of firms into fixed and performance-based contracts, as well as
the treatment effects of the varying contracts. Initially, firms will bid on
either fixed or performance-based contracts. In the first phase, a random subset
of properties eligible for reassessment will be reassessed by either a firm
under a fixed contract, a firm under a performance-based contract, or by regular
government tax assessors. In the second phase, a random subset of the remaining
properties will be reassessed by firms with all firms being compensated
according to the best-performing contract identified in the first phase,
regardless of the firmâ€™s initial preference. Outcomes of interest include
changes in tax revenue, accuracy of re-assessments, and taxpayer satisfaction.
The researchers will also survey the employees hired by the firms and by the
government to assess the properties, to learn more about differences in
demographic characteristics, experience with completing re-assessments, public
service motivation, among others, across assessors working under the different
treatment arms. Finally, the researchers will use quasi-experimental variation
from recent property tax increases to estimate the elasticity of tax revenue
with respect to the tax rate and use this to benchmark the impact of outsourcing
reforms on tax revenues. Increasing the efficiency of tax assessment and the
execution of government functions generally could lead to better provision of
public services and faster economic growth. This will help to establish the US a
global leader in property tax reforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.