* 2315954
* Interface, Edge and Bulk of Complex States of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kun Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2026
* USD 387,177.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
exotic properties of many-particle systems with strong interactions. It is known
that strong interactions between particles can stabilize various types of
phases, which are very different from those familiar from daily life, like
solid, liquid and gas. The discovery and understanding of new phases of matter
is a central goal of condensed matter physics, which may lead to new
technologies; quantum computation might be one example. In addition to directly
probing their bulk in theory, the PI and his team will study how to reveal the
properties of some of these new phases by probing their edges, as well as the
interfaces that separate them. Theoretical results help guide experimental as
well as numerical simulations on the same subject. They may also be of interest
to researchers in other fields of physics, including high-energy and
gravitational physics.

Included in this research is the study of some quantum Hall phases, which occur
in a two-dimensional sheet of electrons trapped at an interface between
semiconductors, cooled to very low temperatures, and placed in an a very strong
magnetic field perpendicular to the sheet. The PI will focus on phases that
theory suggests exhibit exotic quantum mechanical states the precise nature of
which need to be reconciled with experiments.

In addition, the research activities supported by this award will introduce
graduate students to the frontier of condensed matter physics. Recently the PI
has published a new graduate level condensed matter textbook, that reflects the
transformative developments of this field over the last few decades. More
recently he prepared the solution manual for its homework problems, that has
been made available to instructors adopting this book in their teaching. He will
continue his work in this direction, including creating and maintaining an
online erratum. Such work will further facilitate education of students in this
field.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education on
exotic quantum phases of many-particle systems with strong interactions. Some of
these phases are of topological nature. One of the main foci of this project is
the physical properties of the edges and interfaces separating different
topological phases, and their relations to the topological properties of the
phases involved. Examples include interfaces between Abelian and non-Abelian
quantum Hall phases, and between different non-Abelian phases at the same
filling factor but with different topological order. The PI and his team will
study both the static and dynamical properties of such interfaces, and the
possibility of phase transitions triggered by quantum fluctuations of such
interfaces. Another thrust of this project is to view the Fermi surface of
gapless fermion systems as a boundary in the phase space, which is a non-
commutative; the PI and his team will use the Seiberg-Witten mapping to map such
systems to their commutative counterparts and reveal their properties. The PI
and his team will use a combination of theoretical and numerical tools in their
studies, including density matrix renormalization group, bosonization, and exact
diagonalization. They will also attempt to borrow insights and methodology from
other fields, including string theory, in which related issues have been studied
extensively. These will provide valuable training opportunities for graduate
students, as well as stimulating synergy among different fields. In addition,
the research activities supported by this award will introduce graduate students
to the frontier of condensed matter physics. Recently the PI has published a new
graduate level condensed matter textbook, that reflects the transformative
developments of this field over the last few decades. More recently he prepared
the solution manual for its homework problems, that has been made available to
instructors adopting this book in their teaching. He will continue his work in
this direction, including creating and maintaining an online erratum. Such work
will further facilitate education of students in this field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.