* 2315662
* Preparing empathetic engineers via an empathy-oriented smart manufacturing curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Ramy Harik, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,930.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by engaging engineering
students in an empathy-oriented smart manufacturing curriculum and thereby
fostering empathetic engineers who are well-prepared for the Industry 4.0 era.
Future engineers need to not only prioritize the effectiveness of their
solutions but also embrace empathy to develop user-centric designs and products
that truly cater to user needs. This project aims to cultivate future engineers
equipped with empathy skills to effectively anticipate, sense, and respond to
users’ needs and concerns in real-world problem-solving scenarios. An engaged
learning experience will be provided to engineering students through embedding
empathy-oriented curricular units in the Future Factory platform, a small-scale
smart manufacturing environment, and by integrating design thinking approach and
active learning strategies. The outcome of this project will contribute to the
vision of fostering world-class smart manufacturing workforce that excels in
leading digital transformation into smart manufacturing.

The overarching goal of this project is to design, develop, and implement an
empathy-oriented smart manufacturing curriculum, evaluate its effectiveness for
preparing empathetic engineers, and provide design guidelines for the scale-up
of empathy-oriented curricula in engineering education. Following an evidence-
based approach, a multidisciplinary team of educators, researchers, and
engineers will co-design smart manufacturing curricular units. Those curricular
units will focus on creating opportunities for students to approach real-world
manufacturing problems from a human-centered perspective. To determine the
effectiveness of the curriculum, this project will apply a concurrent mixed
methods design, collecting and analyzing complementary quantitative and
qualitative data. For quantitative data, questionnaires will be used to assess
college students’ level of empathy and engagement in the curriculum. For
qualitative data, semi-structured interviews will be conducted to gauge college
students’ perception of empathy and elicit deeper understanding of student
learning that may have been missed in quantitative data. The findings from two
sources of data will be converged to formulate a comprehensive understanding of
student experience in this empathy-oriented smart manufacturing curriculum. The
findings of the project will enhance the understanding of empathy-oriented
design in engineering education and provide practical implications on broadening
student participation in the smart manufacturing workforce and education. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.