* 2315617
* Hopscotch 4 Scientific Investigation: Promoting Elementary Preservice Teacher Three-Dimensional Learning during Science Content Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Soon Lee, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 397,911.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating new resources and
curricula for future elementary teachers to develop their knowledge, abilities,
and self-efficacy for incorporating investigation and scientific reasoning into
science teaching. Having opportunities to investigate and reason about everyday
phenomena and problems allows elementary students to develop their scientific
sensemaking. This scientific sensemaking is important for encouraging decision-
making and potential STEM careers within the U.S. population. To create these
learning opportunities for scientific sensemaking for all children, teachers
need knowledge of science content and an understanding of how to engage in
science. Teachers also require ability and self-efficacy for supporting
elementary children in investigation and scientific reasoning. This IUSE Engaged
Student Learning Track 1 project will develop and study an innovative toolkit
and associated learning modules. The purpose of the toolkit and learning modules
is to support future elementary teachers to engage in scientific investigations
and reasoning during undergraduate content courses, which is significant for
developing future teachers' self-efficacy in and knowledge for equitable science
teaching. The toolkit and learning modules model how learners can use their
personal and community assets in scientific sensemaking as they engage in
investigation and argumentation. The explicit emphasis and reflection on
expanding the conceptions of what constitutes science and who can engage in
scientific investigation can contribute new understanding of how to embed
equitable science teaching within undergraduate science content courses. The
mixed methods case study of how future teachers use the toolkit will advance
knowledge of how teachers develop self-efficacy in and knowledge for equitable
elementary science teaching.

The project's goal is to use design-based research methodology to develop and
improve the Hopscotch 4-Scientific Investigation toolkit and supporting learning
modules for use within two different integrated science content courses for pre-
service teachers. One of the integrated science content courses focuses on life
and earth science concepts, and the other focuses on physical science. The
project aims to integrate the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) three
dimensions of Disciplinary Core Ideas, Crosscutting Concepts, and Science and
Engineering Practices. The toolkit will embed explicit supports for scientific
reasoning with the Crosscutting Concepts, such as patterns and cause/effect,
into tools for the Science and Engineering Practices of investigations and
argumentation. The associated modules will center on a set of key Disciplinary
Core Ideas for elementary teaching in life, earth, and physical science. Through
mixed methods case studies, the project will investigate how the toolkit
facilitates the teachers' engagement in scientific sensemaking, knowledge for
teaching, and self-efficacy related to equitable elementary science teaching.
The mixed case studies will use pre- and post-course measures of the future
teachers' abilities and knowledge. The research study will also conduct
interviews and observe focal participants' interactions with the toolkit and
supporting modules to analyze how teachers interact and learn from the
materials. The findings from this study will be disseminated in publications and
workshops with other teacher educators and researchers. Additionally, the
Hopscotch 4-Scientific Investigation toolkit will be shared on a website for use
by teachers, undergraduate students, science educators, and university faculty
to be used for other undergraduate courses and teacher professional development.
The Hopscotch 4-Scientific toolkit, modules, and research implications will
improve undergraduate STEM courses and support teacher educators and elementary
teachers in creating meaningful, equitable learning opportunities in science.
The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.