* 2315376
* Medical Device Enabled by Portable Fluorescence Microscopy and Microfluidics for Monitoring Surgical Inflammation Biomarkers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Umer Hassan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Monitoring patients’ individual response to infections is vital not only for
early diagnosis but also to determine effective treatment for the patients. In
United States, around 14 million operative procedures are performed in inpatient
hospital settings with more than hundred thousand people subsequently developing
surgical site infections (SSI). Its management and treatment cost another US $10
billion yearly in excess costs. Further, 77% of the deaths of surgical patients
are attributed to SSI. This award which is being made to Rutgers University New
Brunswick will develop a biomedical platform to perform prescribed diagnostics
tests rapidly and accurately. The award will enable a significant advance
compared to currently employed instruments used for these tests which are bulky,
costly, and requires manual sample processing by technically trained staff to
perform these tests. In future, proposed platform can translated in multiple
healthcare settings including primary care offices, emergency care settings,
intensive care units and testing laboratories. Biomedical platform resulting
from this award will have a great potential to benefit human health and welfare.
This project will train undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of
biosensors, microfluidics, microfabrication, optics, and machine learning. The
project will also enable the integration of proposed research into investigators
educational efforts. Further, the award will facilitate the investigators to
implement various outreach activities including engaging K-12 students in
research, and the public through educational lectures and making them available
online for broad dissemination of knowledge.

Personalized immune response monitoring of patients to infections is critical
not only for early diagnosis but also for determining effective therapy, thereby
having a significant impact in patients’ outcome. SSI is a common condition
faced by patients’ post-surgical procedures. Early visual indications of SSI
include inflammation and puss at the site of the wound, pain, fever, and
discomfort. This is followed by a microbial culture which takes multiple days to
get the results, leaving huge diagnostic gaps in the treatment pathway. Post-
operative frequent quantification of clinically approved biomarkers (e.g.,
C-reactive protein (CRP), procalcitonin (PCT)) on high-risk patients could
provide an early indication of an SSI, however, their testing requires
centralized lab facility, trained professionals and longer wait times to get the
results. In this work, investigators envision a biomedical platform for
inflammatory proteins quantification using only a drop of whole blood. The
proposed innovation is based on a cross-cut integration of photonics,
microfluidics, smartphone enabled optical sensing, and 3-D multi-layer
microfluidic architectures on a single biochip with automated whole blood
processing to provide clinical test results from patient samples. Sensors will
be equipped with real-time measurement capability and machine learning models to
train the sensors data and provide test results. Sensors will be benchmarked
with patient samples collected from Robert Wood Johnson Medical Hospital.
Investigators envisions proposed biosensor platform to be generic and the pre-
functionalized cartridges can be swapped out for different infectious diseases
biomarkers testing. This transformative research will also open new educational
initiatives to train the next generation of engineers and scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.