* 2315626
* Development of Assessment Tools for Evaluating Organic Chemistry Learners' Understanding of Reaction Mechanisms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jeffrey Raker, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 299,134.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and implementing
computer-based scoring models to evaluate students’ learning about reaction
mechanisms in college-level organic chemistry courses. Developing a good
understanding of reaction mechanisms is critical for students’ success in
organic chemistry courses, which are often a barrier for students seeking to
complete STEM degrees and advance their professional goals. To address this
challenge, the project team will design predictive scoring models to help
instructors provide feedback to students during their studies, as well as to
instructors during class sessions. The investigators will collect students’
written explanations for what they think is happening for organic chemistry
reaction mechanisms; develop computer-based scoring models using machine
learning text analyses to evaluate the written explanations; and offer
professional development opportunities (both in-person and asynchronously
online) for organic chemistry instructors to reflect upon how they assess
students’ understanding of reaction mechanisms and how they can incorporate the
new technologies into their organic chemistry courses.

The project team from the University of South Florida (USF) will: (1) develop
machine learning text analysis scoring models, (2) use the scoring models to
explore how student understanding of reaction mechanisms develops across the
two-semester organic chemistry course sequence, and (3) facilitate professional
development opportunities for organic chemistry instructors. This work will
explore how machine learning technologies can be used to develop predictive
scoring models for chemistry topics such as the role of nucleophiles or
electrophiles in organic chemistry reaction mechanisms. The work will extend
current predictive scoring models that only evaluate written explanations for a
single assessment prompt to the development of a set of models that can be used
to evaluate written explanations for a wide array of prompts. Additionally, this
work will capture how faculty members teaching organic chemistry engage with and
respond to (1) learners’ written explanations of what is happening in a reaction
mechanism and (2) the education research literature that highlights
opportunities to improve students’ learning of reaction mechanisms. The project
activities have the potential to positively impact the learning and STEM
retention of 7,000+ students at the USF study site, an emerging Hispanic-serving
institution with a diverse population, including investigating differential
impacts on learners for whom English is not their first language. Through this
work, the project team will also strive to encourage other researchers to
explore more generalized predictive models that address broader concepts and
skills (e.g., argumentation and explanation) in STEM courses. The NSF IUSE: EDU
program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.