* 2315178
* Co-designing STEM Education with Communities: Centering History, Heterogeneity, Power, and Place
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Nichole Pinkard, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2028
* USD 865,946.00

This project examines the historical and contemporary manifestations and
possibilities of a diasporic Black community’s aspirations for STEM educational
justice in Evanston, Illinois, a racially diverse suburb of Chicago with a
longstanding, diverse, and dynamic Black community. Evanston made news with
plans to reopen a campus-model community school in its historically Black 5th
Ward of the city. The project will work in close partnership with the local
school district, the city, as well as Black families and community partners, to
support the efforts to design equitable STEM opportunities for the new school
and adjoined community center. The project will advance key knowledge in
culturally sustaining STEM learning and teaching, through a specific focus on
Black diasporic epistemologies, cultural values, and pedagogical design. The
project will make near-term impacts on the educational experiences of Black
youth in Evanston and beyond the local context. Teaching and learning resources
(as well as in-depth case studies of resource use in classrooms and out-of-
school-time (OST) contexts) will be freely available for educators and
researchers across the nation. The co-design partnership approach that
coordinates efforts across the school district including numerous in- and out-
of-school stakeholders, will make substantive contributions to the overlapping
fields of racial equity, STEM education, and school reform, while providing an
example of the significance of community research-practice partnerships as a
methodological intervention.

The project will investigate how a research-community-practice partnership
(RCPP) model focused on history/ethnography, project co-design, and systems co-
design can facilitate more equitable and culturally sustaining STEM learning
experiences for Black youth and their families. The RCPP will create tools and
processes centering Black community goals and values within in-school and out of
school STEM ecologies in Evanston. The project will make empirical and
theoretical contributions in multiple areas of scholarship. Analysis of archival
and oral histories will make important contributions to the scholarly record on
how Black families and communities have understood STEM education as part of
their decades long struggle towards equity, economic mobility, and justice. The
ethnographic study will advance a robust social scientific understanding of the
localized nature of how Black families and communities are actively organizing
towards STEM educational justice in local contexts. Methodologically, the family
interviews will contribute to novel methods for studies of interplay among
culture and child cognition and identity. The systems RCPP work will create new
knowledge in institutional theory and organizational change, as well as how
educational technologies can support community empowerment. Overall, the project
will make important contributions to the study of Black educational histories
and futures, and the field of Black Education Studies more broadly.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF’s
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.