* 2315811
* Pore Formation and Polymer Thermal Debinding during Vapor-Induced Phase Separation-Enabled Metal Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 09/30/2026
* USD 531,212.00

Metal additive manufacturing has been of great interest for the fabrication of
complex metallic components ranging from automobile parts to jet engines to
medical implants. Despite its advantages over conventional metal fabrication
methods, current metal additive manufacturing technologies are subject to
challenges including handling metal powders, which can be explosive, and
fabricating parts with heterogeneous materials to enhance part properties. This
project aims to explore a room-temperature polymer binder-assisted metal
printing technology, which uses suspension inks made of metallic powders and
dissolved polymer. The new process has two advantages: (1) using metal-polymer
suspension inks reduces the hazards of handling and inhaling metallic powders
for machine operators; and (2) heterogeneous materials can be deposited by
adjusting the metal composition of suspension inks. Simultaneously this project
will stimulate science-based manufacturing education to broaden the
participation of underrepresented and minority students in STEM and prepare a
manufacturing workforce for the fast-evolving manufacturing industry.

Of various metal printing technologies, powder bed fusion (PBF) and directed
energy deposition (DED) are the most common modalities. PBF and DED are energy-
driven high-temperature printing processes and require handling metal powders
before and after printing. Advances in bound powder extrusion allow the use of
metal powders pre-bound in the form of a filament, which, however, limits the
choices of materials. The vapor-induced phase separation-enabled three-
dimensional printing technology (VIPS-3DP) utilizes metal-polymer suspensions as
build materials and VIPS as the solidification mechanism. The resultant metal-
polymer green parts are further processed for polymer thermal debinding and
sintering to get final metallic parts. The objective of this research is to
study the effect of the VIPS-induced solidification of polymer binder on the
formation of an interconnected pore space in metal-polymer green parts during
printing and the effect of the resulting interconnected pores on the crack
occurrence during polymer thermal debinding. The research will be implemented
via two tasks: (1) theoretical modeling of the porous microstructure evolution
and thermal debinding processes, and (2) experimental characterization of
printed green, brown, and final parts in terms of their microstructure and
mechanical properties. The resulting knowledge of the VIPS-induced porous
microstructure and its effect on thermal debinding may lead to new sustainable
metal additive manufacturing technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.