* 2315076
* The role of land use change in the decline and recovery of coral reefs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Amy Frazier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2026
* USD 398,887.00

As the window for coral survival is quickly closing due to accelerating climate
change impacts, there is an urgent need to identify and implement near-term
solutions to stem coral declines and promote coral recovery. One essential
component of this strategy that is underdeveloped is the reduction of land-based
pollution inputs that harm corals. This project investigates the past and
present impacts of land-based pollution on the health of coral reef ecosystems
and assesses the potential for improved land use to increase reef resilience to
climate change. To address the lack of reef water quality monitoring, this study
combines data from the reef fossil record with historical and current data on
coastal land use change from satellite imagery to link human alteration on land
over the past 40 years with changes in reef water quality and coral health. This
approach provides data at temporal scales that can lead to new understanding and
monitoring of the long-term impacts of land alteration on coral reefs. This
study uses established partnerships with local reef conservation organizations
and research institutions to provide local reef managers with a range of
potential scenarios for increasing coral reef health via improved land
management. This project also provides students with interdisciplinary training
in the traditionally separate fields of paleoecology, coral reef ecology,
environmental geochemistry, and geography.

Coral reefs in many regions are negatively impacted by a range of environmental
and social factors. Over the past 50 years reefs have lost over half of their
habitat forming corals due to the cumulative effects of climate change and local
human impacts including fishing, introduction of invasive species, land use and
land cover change, and associated land-based pollution. These declines threaten
reef persistence and the critical ecosystem services reefs provide to millions
of people. Although it is widely suspected that coral loss is associated with
declining reef water quality, it has been difficult to quantify the link between
land use and land cover change, reef water quality change, and coral declines
because (1) the linkages between land-based activities and associated social-
ecological impacts on coastal marine systems have been under-studied within the
land system science community and (2) there is a lack of long-term data on human
and reef ecosystem dynamics. This project combines paleoecological and
geochemical techniques for reconstructing long-term reef water quality and
ecosystem health with geospatial analyses of remote sensing data to track long-
term anthropogenic change to Caribbean coastal watersheds. This approach
addresses three key questions for reef management and conservation: (1) How have
land system dynamics associated with human-induced land use conversion affected
reef water quality over the past 40 years? (2) How has changing reef water
quality, impacted by land-based pollution and runoff, affected coral reef health
and resilience over centennial and millennial time scales? (3) What are the
projected impacts of improved land use management on future coral reef health?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.