* 2315532
* Capacity Assessment, Tracking, &amp; Enhancement through Network Analysis: Developing a Tool to Inform Capacity Building Efforts in Complex STEM Education Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Beshoy Morkos, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This research and development (R&D) project aims to serve the national interest
by advancing the development of an innovative tool and approach to document and
assess capacity building in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) programs in higher education. The Capacity Assessment, Tracking, and
Enhancement through Network Analysis (CATENA) tool is based on a systems
approach to understand complex organizations. The Five Capabilities Model of
Capacity provides a framework for understanding capacity building that informs
assumptions, conceptualization of metrics/measures, research questions, data
collection, data analysis, interpretation, implementation, and use of findings.
The dimensions of the Five Capacities Model include the capabilities of system
actors to (a) commit and engage; (b) carry out tasks and produce results; (c)
relate and attract support; (d) adapt and self-renew; and (e) balance diversity
with coherence. The R&D effort integrates Social Network Analysis (SNA) with
additional qualitative information in an effort to measure the capacity of an
educational system for transformation. The mixed methods study is designed to
yield the following outcomes: (1) An understanding of facets of capacity that
are manifest in interactions and network features within education; (2) an
instrument to capture these facets of capacity; and (3) a well-documented SNA
data collection and analysis process rooted in graph theory to capture emergent
system features. The project is designed around a three-phase research and
development plan: The purpose of Phase 1 is to define salient interactions among
key actors involved in advancing STEM educational capacity. Phase Two is
designed to incorporate findings from Phase 1 into survey development. During
Phase 3, the project team will pilot the survey across a College of Engineering
and develop supporting documentation for its use. Evaluation and dissemination
activities are supported by an external evaluation team and an external advisory
board of experts in institutional change, SNA, and qualitative methods.

The goal of the project is to address a national need for methodologies to
evaluate and inform systemic, institutional change in a way that foregrounds
continuous capacity building for long-term, sustainable change in higher
education. In accordance with the overarching goal, the project will investigate
three research questions across the three sequential phases of the study: (RQ1)
What types of interactions among faculty, staff, and graduate students advance
STEM education capacity among each of the capabilities defined by the Five
Capabilities Model? (RQ2) How can each of the types of interaction observed
through answering RQ1 be measured quantitatively through the design of the
CATENA instrument? (RQ3) What network topologies emerge as significant for
evaluating STEM education capacity in the networks created from piloting the
CATENA instrument created in answering RQ2? The R&D effort integrates
quantitative and qualitative data from a broad range of methodologies, such as
social network analysis, surveys, and interviews to develop the CATENA tool and
then to study capacity building. Examples of metrics include clustering
coefficients, average path length, betweenness centrality, and degree
distribution. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through its Institutional and Community Transformation track, the project
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.