* 2315767
* Leveraging Machine Learning to Explore the Effects of the Design2Data Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Justin Siegel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 397,508.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by engaging students in the
Design to Data (D2D) program, a nationally networked biochemistry Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE). The project will help to determine
which parts of the student experience positively impact graduation and access to
STEM careers. D2D engages students in exploring protein science through a
cutting-edge computationally driven research project. This project anchors the
curriculum across a network of highly motivated, early-adopter faculty members
teaching students in varied STEM disciplines and levels. The hands-on D2D
learning experience prepares students for success in this new era of biology
while crowdsourcing data collection for improved protein modeling artificial
intelligence methods. The large, diverse D2D student body offers a rich
opportunity to explore novel, machine learning-based assessment methods for CURE
education research. In reaching the aims of this grant, this project will (a)
pioneer a cutting-edge approach to investigating student learning in research
experiences and will make these data analysis methods broadly accessible to STEM
education researchers, and (b) create equitable, meaningful research experiences
for thousands of students, many of whom would not have otherwise had the
opportunity.

D2Dâ€™s undergraduate research project anchors the program, and D2D faculty
network members facilitate its implementation by integrating the project into
their classes on a wide variety of campuses across the United States.
Participating students functionally characterize novel enzyme mutants generating
data for protein modeling stakeholders to explore with the goal of developing
better functionally predictive tools for more rapid solutions to human-centered
problems. Not only is there potential to meaningfully advance science through
the program, but the experience enables equitable access to cutting-edge
biotechnology training that is in high demand by employers. Reaching many
students with this program is tractable: D2D readily integrates into lab
practicum settings across the disciplines and from first-year to senior-level
classes. The network includes forty institutions and will engage approximately
4,000 students over the funding period. The project objective is to use this
large, diverse population in assessing mediators to psycho-social and behavioral
outcomes linked to STEM persistence by collecting multi-level motivational data
at scale with layered variables and benchmark cutting edge machine learning
methods for the data analysis. The project activities will (a) support dedicated
network continuity coordination to maintain current levels of faculty
participation, and (b) assessment activities to plan and execute comprehensive
data collection and machine learning (ML)-based analysis that captures and
evaluates a deep set of discrete CURE-implementation variables. From these
activities, meaningful professional development beyond the D2D Network will be
promoted by making the cutting-edge student learning data analysis methods
accessible to other education researchers. Finally, this project will put
research into hands of thousands of students and enable more equitable access to
CUREs, increasing the diversity of students participating in research. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.