* 2315652
* Private Disclosures in Competing Mechanisms: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Alessandro Pavan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 278,400.00

This research studies a broad class of economic situations in which multiple
designers compete by offering sophisticated mechanisms to attract and serve
multiple privately-informed agents. Examples include sellers designing auctions
to attract bidders, platforms designing payment schemes to attract users and
developers, local governments designing taxes and subsidies to attract companies
to their municipalities, and stock exchanges designing trading protocols and
payment schemes to attract buyers and sellers to their venues. The research
explores a novel dimension in the design of mechanisms in these environments,
namely the possibility to inform the relevant agents asymmetrically about the
functioning of a mechanism. For example, auctioneers may disclose their reserve
price to some bidders while keeping it secret from others, a practice that some
vendors have started following in recent years but whose merits have not been
investigated yet. Alternatively, manufacturers may raise their profits
approaching the collusive outcome by informing common retailers asymmetrically
of how their production responds to market conditions. The research develops a
new methodology to study these markets and uses it for positive and normative
analysis. On the positive front, it investigates the limits to competition in
markets where contracting is decentralized and sophisticated mechanisms are
used. On the normative front, the analysis sheds light on the merits of existing
regulations such as mandatory disclosure laws, exclusivity, transparency, and
“meet the competition” requirements, and investigates the welfare implications
of novel policy interventions. The methodology and results are expected to be of
interest to economists, computer scientists, and regulatory authorities.

Private disclosures (that is, information about elements of a mechanism
disclosed asymmetrically to the agents before the latter act in a mechanism) is
a new dimension in the theory of mechanism design. It has profound effects on
equilibrium outcomes. For example, allocations and payoffs that can be sustained
in equilibrium when the designers are restricted to standard mechanisms with
arbitrarily rich message spaces but no private disclosures may not be robust,
that is, may not be sustainable when designers can engage in private
disclosures. Furthermore, allocations and payoffs that cannot be sustained in
equilibrium with standard mechanisms can be sustained when private disclosures
are allowed. These results call for a novel approach to the study of competition
in mechanisms that is developed under this grant. The research involves two
fronts. On the theoretical front, the analysis develops a new approach to the
characterization of equilibrium allocations in these games. It identifies a
class of tractable mechanisms that is “canonical” in that it supports all
equilibrium outcomes. On the applied front, the research shows how private
disclosures can be concretely used in many markets of interest and how
regulatory authorities should reconsider certain policy interventions in such
markets when accounting for private disclosures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.