* 2315167
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The grammar of number, countability and measurement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Alexis Wellwood, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 18,378.00

The sentence 'Max wrote books' can only signify that there are two or more books
that Max wrote. The presence of the marker '-s' on 'book' seems to induce a non-
singular interpretation. However, 'Max didn’t write books' signifies that there
is not even one book that Max wrote. Evidently, plural nouns such as 'books' can
sometimes refer to a plurality (i.e., 2 or more) or a singleton (i.e., 1). When
are such mismatches between the form of a noun and its meaning possible? In some
languages, unlike in English, there is optional plural marking on nouns; in
those languages, even if the plural marker is absent, the noun may freely apply
to either singulars or plurals. This doctoral dissertation project investigates
an understudied language variety that exhibits this particular property, using
interviews with speakers and the recording and transcription of narratives as
the basis for an analysis of the properties of the linguistic expression of
number in this language and cross-linguistically. This project also contributes
to the training and diversification of the next generation of language
researchers, inviting undergraduate students from under­represented groups in
STEM to participate in scientific research with an emphasis on developing both
academic and industry-­relevant skills related to data collection techniques,
data analysis, project management, and project presentation.

This project documents and analyzes linguistic data from a language that marks
the grammatical distinction between singular and plural rather like English, at
a first pass level of description: singular nouns are unmarked and plural nouns
are marked. However, there is an important difference: unmarked nouns that apply
to inanimate things are interpreted as number neutral (i.e., can be understood
to apply to one thing, or to more than one) while unmarked animate nouns, in
contrast, are strictly singular, so only plural marked expressions apply to
pluralities of two or more. The same pattern is found when the nouns combine
with measure expressions like 'many' which require that the noun apply to
pluralities, but it is not found when the noun is modified by a numeral like
'seventeen'. Numerals in this language require that the noun they modify be
unmarked and understood to be semantically singular. This project connects these
patterns of number marking to the 'mass-count' distinction, and the language of
measurement and counting. The project thereby connects different research
traditions and grows the field's collective understanding of how number and
related categories are expressed cross-linguistically, to reveal deep properties
of human language and cognition. The research therefore informs fields adjacent
to syntax and semantics wherein notions of number and countability play an
important role, including philosophy, language acquisition, and cognitive
psychology. Within linguistics, this work contributes to best methodological
practices for theoretically-driven fieldwork concerned with eliciting morpho-
syntactic and semantic data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.