* 2315548
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: International Technology Transfers: Adoption or Imitation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Byung Uk An, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 27,900.00

Innovation and commercialization of technology are the sources of firms’
competitive advantage and countries’ economic growth. Hence, firms and countries
compete and cooperate over frontier technologies through various channels. As
geopolitical tension and inequality among countries rise, more research on such
interactions in the global economy is needed. This research delves into the
dynamics of international technology transfer, specifically focusing on its two
major channels: technology imitation and technology adoption. Imitation is
unauthorized replication of existing technologies without compensating the
innovators, while adoption means legal acquisition of technologies through
licensing agreements. These two distinct channels of international technology
transfer not only coexist but also interact with each other, shaping the growth
and development of countries, and consequently the global economy. This study
utilizes unique data on imitation and adoption, and investigates the interplay
between these two channels. The derived results will provide important policy
implications. First, by documenting how different industries use different modes
of technology transfer, the research can inform industrial policy, particularly
on promoting innovations. Second, it will help both leader and follower
countries better understand the relative costs and benefits of the two channels
of technology transfer. Third, by shedding light on the global competition and
cooperation in the market for technology, it will help devise more efficient and
compatible institutions, including intellectual property (IP) systems. Such
institutions can better satisfy various needs of countries and reduce tension
between developed and developing countries.

This project starts by constructing a unified endogenous growth model to
theoretically explain the mechanisms and assess the impacts of technology
adoption and imitation. This framework disentangles the economic forces at play
and offers a nuanced understanding of how these dynamic decisions of firms and
countries' policies shape their growth trajectories. Next, on the empirical
side, the researchers will utilize two proprietary datasets on global patent
litigations and patent licensing agreements at the patent- and firm-levels to
offer a set of new facts to the field. By taking such direct measures with a
granular approach, this research can enrich the understanding of technology
transfer patterns across a broad set of developed and developing countries, a
critical aspect in today’s highly globalized economy. Lastly, employing a
quantitatively-oriented approach, the research will enable realistic assessment
of various hypothetical policies, which provides guidance on the optimal
industrial innovation subsidies and international agreements of IP protection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.