* 2315755
* BPC-DP: Rice Emerging Scholars Program for Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Risa Myers, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Rice University will develop, implement, and evaluate the Computer Science -
Rice Emerging Scholars Program (CS-RESP) to support incoming freshmen from
historically excluded communities whose lack of access to economic and
educational opportunities has obstructed their preparation for higher education
to succeed in their aspirations of becoming computer scientists. By supporting
these students to become computer scientists with a strong sense of belonging,
the project staff will broaden representation of these communities in the field
of computer science and strengthen our own community. Doing so will enable Rice
University and the computing community to tackle a wider range of challenges and
issues not always amplified due to their limited visibility and devise more
innovative solutions. This program will also increase the number of diverse
computer scientists and, eventually, role models at all levels of organizations.

This Broadening Participation in Computing Demonstration Project aims to improve
the sense of belonging, retention, and academic achievement of the participants.
The program supports these students academically, socially, and financially. The
program kicks-off with a stipend based six-week intensive summer program and
provides academic, navigational, and social support during the students' first
two years. This program takes an anti-remedial approach, where, instead of
bridging gaps, students are taught some of the most challenging material they
will encounter during their first year as CS students. The program also provides
"intrusive" advising to prospectively address social issues these students face.
The program further includes faculty and staff equity mindedness training to
improve the classroom and university climate. CS faculty mentors will partner
with these students to build relationships and to ensure their participation in
critical local, regional, and national organizations and events. The program
will be evaluated by comparing short-term metrics such as sense of belonging,
retention and introductory course grades against current "comparison" students
who did not participate in the program and against historical participants in
the non-CS specific RESP program. This program aims to be a model for XX-
Emerging Scholars programs by which other disciplines and / or institutions can
follow our examples and processes for building their own domain specific (e.g.
Chemistry, Electrical Engineering, etc.) support program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.