* 2315354
* CISE-ANR: HCC: Small: Learning to Translate Freehand Design Drawings into Parametric CAD Programs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Daniel Ritchie, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,999.00

Computer Aided Design (CAD) is a multi-billion dollar industry responsible for
the digital design of almost all manufactured goods. It leverages parametric
modeling, which allows dimensions of a design to be changed facilitating
physically-based optimization and design re-mixing by non-experts. But CADâ€™s
potential is diminished by the difficulty of creating parametric models: in
addition to mastering design principles, professionals must learn complex CAD
software interfaces. To promote effective modeling strategies and creative flow,
design educators advocate freehand drawing as a preliminary step to parametric
modeling. Unfortunately, CAD systems do not understand these drawings, so
designers must re-create their entire design using complex CAD software. This
research project explores the question, "Is it possible to automatically convert
freehand drawings to parametric CAD models?" By leveraging the visual vocabulary
shared by drawing and CAD modeling, this project will develop a system to
translate from the natural language of drawing to the formal language of CAD.
This technology will increase the productivity of professional CAD designers
across multiple industries and make CAD modeling accessible to more people
without extensive training in confusing software interfaces.

To handle drawings as input, the researchers will treat them as timestamped
sequences of strokes, allowing them to cast the problem as one of machine
translation from drawing stroke sequences to CAD program token sequences.
Drawing strokes are grouped into coherent drawing operations that are correlated
with CAD modeling strategies (e.g. first drawing construction lines and simple
primitives shapes, then refining). The researchers propose to extract these
drawing operations as an intermediate representation, which helps disambiguate
between the (potentially infinitely) many programs which can represent a single
shape. Performing this extraction and then producing CAD programs are complex
search problems; the researchers will leverage novel deep neural networks to
guide the search. They will gather a paired (drawing, CAD program) dataset from
professional designers to help develop these networks. They will also develop
learning algorithms that do not require such ground-truth paired data. Finally,
they will develop metrics to assess CAD programs produced by the system, which
will be used both to evaluate the system's efficacy and to guide the program
search process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.