* 2315913
* Travel Support for Workshop on Best Practices in Modeling Across Scales from Materials Discovery to Manufacturing; Arlington, Virginia; Summer 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Elif Ertekin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2024
* USD 46,865.00

This award provides travel support for key speakers and presenters to attend the
workshop on “Best Practices in Modeling Across Scales from Materials Discovery
to Manufacturing: Towards Systematic Analysis of Errors and Uncertainty." This
workshop will address the need to understand the challenges and opportunities in
the area of first principles modeling for materials innovation and
manufacturing. The workshop provides a forum to share leading-edge research on
materials modeling, uncertainty quantification and error analysis. It offers
participants an opportunity to showcase their scientific accomplishments,
interact with peers and colleagues from academia, government labs, and industry,
extend their network, and foster new collaborations within the broader advanced
materials and manufacturing communities. The workshop provides attendees with a
broader view of the materials discovery, design, and manufacturing cycle, that
are critical to advancing new technologies that benefit society. Consistent with
NSF's goal of broadening participation in science and engineering, the workshop
seeks participation of women and underrepresented minority groups as speakers
and attendees. The workshop meets the national priority of fostering advanced
materials and manufacturing.

This workshop provides a platform for experts to present and discuss their
research and results in Best Practices in Systematic Analysis of Errors and
Uncertainty Across Scales from Materials Modeling and Discovery to
Manufacturing. The workshop participants will discuss the application of Data
Science, Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) in developing First
Principles Modeling of Materials and their Manufacturing. The workshop brings
together researchers and experts in modeling and simulation, multiscale
modeling, machine learning, informatics, data analytics, artificial intelligence
for process design and manufacturing to discuss cross-cutting pathways,
challenges, and opportunities. The goal is to determine and integrate error and
uncertainty analysis into standard computational workflows, so that rigorous
error determination and reporting become a standard norm for the materials
modeling community. The workshop focuses on innovative pathways for new
materials discovery, their design and manufacture, and identification of cross-
cutting research opportunities. The workshop is organized into different
sessions and includes talks by leading domestic and international experts
discussing their latest research and identifying research gaps on topics such as
(1) Error control for electronic structure, first principles, and quantum
chemistry methods, (2) Best practices for modelers when working with
experimentalists, (3) Error control at higher scales: interatomic potentials
including machine learned error propagation in multiscale materials modeling,
(4) Error control for materials synthesis, processing, and manufacture, (5)
Incorporating error analysis into workflows and materials data repositories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.