* 2315259
* A Scientific Thinking Skill-Based Curricular Overlay for Introductory Psychology at 2-year and 4-year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Melissa Witkow, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 09/30/2026
* USD 389,544.00

This project aims to serve the national interest through improved education in
first-year college science courses. Recognizing the importance of repeated,
scaffolded practice, the project introduces and assesses a novel curricular
approach to training scientific skills, applied here to three scientific
learning outcomes specific to Introductory Psychology. In particular, this
Engaged Student Learning: Level I project will generate a set of research-
validated materials that can be incorporated and adapted by Introductory
Psychology instructors with a range of teaching experience and teaching in a
variety of contexts including both 2- and 4-year college settings. As an
innovative approach to scientific skill training, the curricular approach
designed by the project also serves as a replicable framework for skill-based
training that can be applied to other scientific skills and/or disciplines.

The overarching goals of the project are to develop, evaluate, and disseminate a
Skill-Based Curricular Overlay (SBCO) to bolster scientific thinking in
Introductory Psychology courses at 2-year and 4-year institutions. This will
meet the need, recognized by the American Psychological Association and other
STEM disciplinary organizations, to incorporate stronger training of scientific
thinking skills in introductory courses, in addition to content coverage. Using
backward design, the SBCO systematically identifies precursor skills and
subskills of key scientific thinking learning outcomes and targets them in a
scaffolded, iterative way, including aligned class examples, homework
assignments, and exam questions relevant to the main content domains of
Introductory Psychology. A plug-and-play structure and accompanying instructor
guides will allow an instructor to easily graft the SBCO onto existing course
structures with minimal course revision or need for new technology or special
resources. In order to ensure materials are responsive to different
instructional contexts and student needs, development and evaluation of the SBCO
will occur in two distinct settings: at a 2-year and 4-year college. Throughout
development, input from student and faculty advisory boards at both institutions
will be considered through a diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) lens to
ensure fairness and accessibility of materials for all students who enroll in
undergraduate Introductory Psychology courses. A comprehensive assessment plan
will provide a summative assessment of the effectiveness of the SBCO at both
institutions prior to broader dissemination to the teaching community. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.