* 2315148
* Investigating and Fostering STEM Entrepreneurship Among Racially Minoritized Undergraduate Students
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Ebony McGee, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,171,621.00

Racially minoritized (RM) entrepreneurs face significant challenges due to
various factors, such as limited access to entrepreneurship education, a lack of
capital sources, and discriminatory social networks. This project aims to
investigate entrepreneurship among both RM and non-RM students, while also
implementing interventions to address these issues. The project will use
comprehensive survey and focus groups to explore RM and non-RM students’
motivations, attitudes, practices, behaviors, and prior experience in STEM
entrepreneurship. The project will use the findings from this study to provide
tailored training, workshops, and coaching in entrepreneurship to address the
specific challenges faced by marginalized groups. Given that STEM fields are
crucial to the future of the US and its economy, diversifying STEM is essential
for fostering innovation. This project holds direct public interest, as it seeks
to ensure equitable access to the rewards of successful entrepreneurship,
thereby improving innovation and creativity of the STEM ecosystem.

The theoretical framework guiding this project is the Equity Ethic (McGee,
2020). The survey will be conducted in year 1 of the project. Other activities
in the program include summer virtual training, three-day in-person summits
consisting of patent workshops and additional in-depth patent coaching for
select participants. Additionally, in the fifth year, business coaches will be
assigned to aid potential entrepreneurs with business incorporation. The
ultimate objective is to train the next generation of RM business owners and
facilitate their integration into the STEM ecosystem. The intended outcomes for
the target audience encompass several goals: establishing limited liability
companies (LLCs), increasing the retention rate of racially minoritized (RM)
groups in STEM fields, generating financial prosperity through business
ownership, promoting STEM innovation that challenges systemic racism, developing
an entrepreneurship curriculum tailored for RM individuals, and augmenting the
pool of RM STEM entrepreneurs who actively contribute to a more equitable STEM
ecosystem.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF’s
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.