* 2315370
* Battery-less Sensing Networks for Food Quality Control with Power Efficient Wireless Power Transfer System and Communication Capabilities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimated that
approximately 1.3 billion tons of food are wasted every year, which represents
about 30% of all food produced globally for human consumption. The major sources
of premature decomposition in perishable food arise during the harvesting,
packaging, transportation, and storage processes. Harmful microorganisms infect
the food and are usually picked up during the transportation and storage of the
food packages. An efficient monitoring system of critical food parameters can
detect timely needs such as adjustment of transportation conditions as well as
adjustment of food distribution plans. Available smart sensors can detect food
freshness, ripeness, concentration of microbial pathogens, and emitted gases.
Many of these sensors are not toxic and can be used for non-invasive food
monitoring. Some of these sensors provide visual information such as color
changes while some others provide small sensing current or voltages that can be
efficiently monitored and wirelessly transmitted to the central office for
proper actions. However, the main challenge of these smart sensors is that they
require batteries to achieve long-range operation. This project aims to develop
a battery-less green monitoring system with sensing nodes that can be included
in every food container. The food container monitoring system measures critical
food parameters such as PH, temperature, and humidity. The proposed green
technology is cost effective, re-usable and does not require batteries.

The research objective of this proposal is to develop a wireless networked
sensing system with battery-less sensing nodes that will monitor and report
critical food parameters. The food package will be equipped with a semiconductor
chip that can receive energy wirelessly to power the sensing and communication
functions. A central unit employing a wireless power transmitter and a network
control unit will be installed in a key location to power the sensing nodes. The
wirelessly received energy is stored in supercapacitors that can be reused
multiple times. The research will study power beaming techniques using a phase
optimization algorithm to speed up the wireless power transferring process. A
phase calibration algorithm will focus the power beam in the direction of the
farthest sensing node. When fully charged, the energy accumulated during
11-minute wireless powering should enable the sensing node transmission system
to operate for at least 100 milliseconds. Since all sensing nodes covered by the
wireless powering antenna's transmission can be simultaneously powered, the
control unit can simultaneously power and communicate with multiple sensing
nodes. Every food container is associated with an identification code that
allows wireless tracking during its transportation, storage, and distribution
stages. In this project, 100 food containers and a network prototype covering a
typical 20-meter-long transportation container will be considered to demonstrate
the proposed battery-less wireless sensing network systemâ€™s scalability in real-
world applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.