* 2315029
* Collaborative Research: Energy Efficiency and Energy Justice: Understanding Distributional Impacts of Energy Efficiency and Conservation Programs and the Underlying Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Destenie Nock, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The adoption of energy efficiency technologies and conservation behaviors has
the potential to significantly reduce energy demand and improve people's
physical and financial well-being. This is particularly important for households
facing energy poverty, who may forgo basic needs or engage in risky behaviors to
meet their energy needs. U.S. electric utilities currently offer over 900 energy
efficiency and conservation programs that aim to reduce household energy
consumption and improve living conditions. These programs either provide
information to help individuals change their energy consumption habits or offer
financial incentives such as rebates and loans to lower the costs of adopting
energy-efficient technologies. There is mixed evidence, however, regarding the
cost-effectiveness of these programs, as their impacts depend on factors
including income levels, rebound effects, and energy consumption behaviors.
Unfortunately, many energy efficiency and conservation programs are not
effectively reaching disadvantaged communities, and the equity of their impacts
is under-studied. There is a need to investigate how these programs can
effectively change energy consumption behavior and address instances of energy
poverty in households.

This project examines the heterogeneous impacts of multiple energy efficiency
and conservation programs and the underlying mechanisms that contribute to
inequitable program impacts. This project has three parts: 1) evaluating the
heterogeneous impacts of four different energy efficiency and conservation
programs using quasi-experimental designs, 2) examining how the heterogeneous
impacts are related to multi-dimensional energy poverty, and 3) modeling energy
behaviors to uncover the mechanisms behind inequitable program impacts. The data
include actual consumption information provided by a Tallahassee energy provider
as well as survey and experimental results. This project not only provides a
fundamental scientific contribution to uncovering the distributional impacts of
energy programs and their underlying mechanisms, but also has direct societal
benefits by helping develop more effective and better-targeted programs to
improve consumersâ€™ financial and physical well-being, particularly in
disadvantaged communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.