* 2315683
* Fostering Culturally Relevant Programming Learning Experiences by Learnersourcing Contextualized Worked-Out Examples
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Alejandra Magana-de-Leon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 399,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in enhancing the persistence of
women in computing by fostering culturally relevant programming learning
environments. In the last 20 years, the U.S. has seen a sharp decline in the
number of women pursuing degrees in computing. This is a significant problem
given the shortage of graduates qualified to pursue employment in computing. The
project will identify how crowdsourcing-enabled pedagogy influences the
engagement and learning outcomes of female students and will develop culturally
relevant learning activities that can benefit all computing students. This
project will provide early research exposure to female undergraduate students
through participation in the research studies and co-authoring publications,
which will, in turn, provide more exposure to young women's voices in the
literature. The project has the potential to engage women as they are learning
course material and building culturally relevant examples that could engage
classmates.

The methodology will incorporate feminist pedagogy and learner sourcing in the
development of a workflow that will enable students to contextualize and create
worked-out examples. The approach will be an empirical deployment of the
workflow in the scope of three programming classes. This project will study the
effectiveness of customized computing learning in minority-serving, culturally
relevant, and domain-specific contexts and investigate conditions under which
improved student learning occurs. Results will advance the understanding of how
learner sourcing approaches can be effectively integrated in the classroom. The
teaching practices will be disseminated with an open-source web application,
workshops and outreach efforts, and the design and development of guidelines and
tutorials. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.