* 2315296
* NSF-BSF: Deciphering the factors that govern the temperature-dependence of ADAR reactivity and dsRNA substrate recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Peter Beal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2026
* USD 820,000.00

RNA editing is a process found in many organisms, including humans, capable of
intercepting genetic messages and changing the encoded information. This allows
for a range of different proteins to be made from a single gene. The ability of
different organisms to modulate the information content in RNA through editing
is likely to have a substantial impact on how organisms’ respond to stresses
they encounter (e.g. changes in temperature, exposure to harmful substances or
pathogens, etc). This collaborative effort involving two labs in the U.S. and
two labs in Israel will investigate RNA editing enzymes called ADARs (adenosine
deaminases that act on RNA) from different organisms. These efforts will advance
our understanding of how editing can be used by an organism to thrive in its
unique environment. This project provides a unique opportunity for
interdisciplinary training of students spanning molecular biology, nucleic acid
chemistry, enzymology, and structural biology. Each lab will contribute a
different disciplinary effort to achieve in-depth understanding of RNA editing
by ADARs as a function of body temperature, which is critically important in a
changing climate. The team will maximize the broader impact of the research
discoveries by disseminating our results to interested communities including the
RNA editing scientific community, graduate students, undergraduate students,
K-12 students and the general public. The proposed new work is a joint NSF-BSF
grant; it will be carried out by an American team directed by Professors Peter
Beal and Andrew Fisher and an Israeli effort led by Professors Shay Ben-Aroya
and Erez Levanon. The Ben-Aroya/Levanon team have established the baker’s yeast,
S. cerevisiae, as a versatile screening platform to evaluate the editing
activity of ADARs from different organisms. Using this platform, they identified
bird ADARs as highly efficient adenosine-to-inosine (A to I) editors in yeast
and have advanced the hypothesis that this is a consequence of the high body
temperature of birds. In this project, all four labs will work together to
define the critical features of bird ADARs that lead to the high editing
activity and define its molecular basis. This will be accomplished using domain
swapping and random mutagenesis coupled with additional screens for growth
effects in yeast. Purified bird ADAR proteins will be subjected to RNA binding,
deamination rate measurements and structural studies of ADAR-RNA complexes.
Finally, ADARs from other organisms, that inhabit different environmental
niches, will be characterized to define the generality of the observed
phenomenon.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.