* 2315230
* Collaborative Research: Mentoring You is Learning for Me: Peer Mentor Preparation and Mentoring of Undergraduate Engineering Student Learning in Makerspaces
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Louis Nadelson, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2026
* USD 120,244.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring the impact of a
course designed to enhance peer mentors' capacity to facilitate learning in a
makerspace-based course. Makerspaces are non-traditional learning environments
where students learn to “tinker” and make things for the purpose of
understanding how they work. Hands-on project-based learning – typical of
makerspaces - can help students visualize abstract concepts bringing real world
implications to light and making learning more interesting. Peer mentors often
play a supervisory role in makerspaces and are knowledgeable about technical
aspects of designing and prototyping. However, peer mentors' teaching
preparation is usually minimal,thus limiting their capacity to facilitate
student learning. This track 1 Engaged Student Learning IUSE project will
design, implement and investigate the impact of peer mentor teaching preparation
on their ability to facilitate learning in makerspaces. A variety of high impact
practices, including role-playing, observation reporting, reflection and
shadowing will be leveraged in a course specifically designed to significantly
enhance peer mentors’ ability to facilitate student learning.

The research planned intends to investigate the impact of the peer mentor
teaching preparation course on both the peer mentor and the mentee. On the
mentor side, impact on mentor professional identity, self-efficacy, leadership
identity, and mentoring effectiveness will be evaluated. On the mentee side,
engineering identity, sense of belonging, success, and team function will be
investigated. The mentor preparation course will comprise training modules
focused on a range of topics such as How People Learn, Education Methods
Fundamentals, Diversity of Learners, Fostering a Growth Mindset, Effective
Classroom Observation, Social Belonging, Inclusion, Student Identity, Fostering
Teamwork, and Group Conflict Resolution. Training modules will be available
online on an open-source basis, free for use by other institutions. Evaluation
of the impact of the intervention will be accomplished through research
questions to be investigated in a mixed methods study. Surveys, observations,
interviews and reflections will be utilized to gather quantitative and
qualitative data that will help determine the impact of the intervention on both
the mentors and mentees. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.