* 2315665
* Collaborative Research: Causal Structures: Experiments and Machine Learning
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Guillaume Frechette, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 234,489.00

To make decisions, people must rely on their understanding of the relevant
environment: what are the causes and outcomes of the various forces at play. In
other words, in many settings, including economic ones, people rely on
subjective causal models (or narratives) to understand the world. Such models
help agents organize and interpret information, allowing them to make forecasts
about the future, and providing them with a way to evaluate counterfactuals. The
main goal of this research is to take a first step towards understanding how
economic agents come to adopt (possibly incorrect) models and how this depends
on the information available to them. The researchers will approach this topic
from two different perspectives. The first involves a series of experiments that
aim to understand how people’s subjective models arise from patterns they
identify in data. Some experiments will be conducted in an abstract setting,
while others involve natural context. Natural context can trigger preconceptions
about how different variables are associated with each other that may help or
hinder people from correctly identifying actual patterns in a set of
observations. The second approach aims to better understand whether news media
plays a role in heterogeneous subjective models. The goal is to study whether
different news outlets organize and explain the same outcomes using different
causal models.

A growing literature in economic theory studies ramifications of adopting
possibly incorrect subjective models, referring to economic agents relying on
such models as ‘misspecified.’ But, for the most part, the literature is silent
on how a person comes to adopt a subjective model to begin with, how such a
subjective model may depend on the setting, and how it may be shaped by the
person’s experiences. In addition, it is an open question under what conditions
people adopt subjective models that are consistent with the true data generating
process. The goal of this research is to take a first step towards understanding
how such misspecifications may arise and how they depend on features of the
data-generating process. The researchers will approach the topic from two
different perspectives. A first approach involves a series of laboratory
experiments to understand how people extract patterns from their observations.
The novel experimental design asks subjects to organize different sets of
observations (data) with the goal of making predictions in similar situations.
The experimental data will let the researchers understand whether the
predictions subjects make in each environment are consistent with them using
some model that posits specific statistical relationships between different
variables. Complemented with ancillary non-choice data that emerges as a by-
product of the experimental design, the results will provide insights into how
people form models of the world by studying data and how they use these models
to make predictions. Experiments will be conducted both with an abstract setting
and with context. Understanding how people come to adopt (possibly incorrect)
models and how this is impacted by the information available to them is
important to determine in what situations they are more vulnerable to being
manipulated. Furthermore, it can help us design policies that are effective in
correcting beliefs and inducing optimal behavior. The second approach aims to
better understand whether news media plays a role in shaping heterogeneous
subjective models. The goal is to study whether different news outlets organize
and explain the same outcomes using different causal models. To do so, the
researchers will use an end-to-end trained Machine Learning pipeline that will
take text (news articles) as input and identify the main causal statements
advanced in this text as output. Documenting the heterogeneous causal models
propagated by news outlets is important for understanding why voters with
different political affiliation disagree on the optimal response to problems
that are accepted by both sides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.