* 2315534
* Collaborative Research: The Economics of Port Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Giulia Brancaccio, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 215,000.00

This award funds a project in the economics of transportation infrastructure
that focuses on the role of shipping ports in international trade. Such
infrastructure is crucial for the smooth functioning of international trade.
Because more than 80% of traded goods (amounting to 11 billion tons and about
$20 trillion) are carried by ships, shipping ports are the literal gateway to
international trade. The advent of global sourcing, whereby firms source their
inputs from further away suppliers, as well as just-in-production, whereby firms
expect their inputs to arrive at the moment they need them, has made ports even
more pivotal in recent decades. This became painfully apparent during the “Great
Supply Chain Disruptions” induced by the Covid-19 pandemic, which upended supply
chains, and generated enormous costs to importers and exporters worldwide, who
faced massive delays in obtaining their goods. In this uncertain environment,
what are the returns to investing in transportation infrastructure? And how
should funding be coordinated and spent? What are the drivers of port
performance and why are ports so prone to disruption? This project seeks to
provide an answer to these questions, by combining a collection of novel data
sets on ports, with a state-of-the-art modeling framework for port technology
and demand for port services. The results of this project will be useful for
making policy decisions about infrastructure investments, including both where
ports should be located, what kinds of investment has the highest returns, and
whether or not these decisions should be decentralized.

The researchers construct a unique database on global ports that relies on data
collected by private providers, as well as their own data collecting efforts.
The data includes satellite vessel position data, detailed port charges, as well
as union membership. They create a dataset on port infrastructure by manually
collecting historical satellite images of world ports from Google Earth. In
order to evaluate the role of transportation infrastructure one needs the
following ingredients: infrastructure technology to understand both the dynamics
of congestion, as well as how investment in infrastructure affects congestion;
and a demand system for transportation services. This is necessary both because
demand endogenously responds to infrastructure improvements, but also in order
to quantify their welfare gains. Using insights from queueing theory, the
researchers construct and estimate a micro-model of port technology that takes
port inputs, such as infrastructure, labor, cranes, and productivity, and
produces output, namely time at port. That setup endogenously generates convex
costs of congestion. The researchers then estimate a demand system for port
services: potential exporters/importers decide which port to use and obtain
utility from lower time at port, shorter distance to their origin and
destination, lower port prices, as well as other characteristics of the port.
The researchers combine their estimates of technology with their estimates for
port demand to estimate the returns to port infrastructure investment. The
research advances knowledge by shedding light on how ports operate and how they
contributed to the Great Supply Chain Disruption. It takes a deep look into port
technology and shows that it renders ports inherently disruptive. This also
illustrates the role of uncertainty and the impact of different inputs on
resilience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.