* 2315647
* Augmented Learning for Environmental Robotics Technologies: A Data-Driven Approach for Sustainable Built Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Biayna Bogosian, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,411.00

The Augmented Learning for Environmental Robotics Technologies (ALERT) aims to
serve the national interest by developing and testing an Augmented Reality (AR)
learning platform for Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) students
to prepare them for working with environmental data and robotics. ALERT will be
designed to address the training needs of the AEC industry, which is expected to
face disruptions due to robotic automation. ALERT will leverage advancements in
Artificial Intelligence (AI), AR, and information technologies to create
immersive, interactive, and data driven environmental robotic learning
environments. It will integrate an AI-powered intelligent learning systems with
AR to collect and analyze learner performance data to customize learning
experiences and improve learning outcomes. ALERT will also develop a novel
interdisciplinary curriculum focusing on environmental monitoring and data
visualization for sustainable building design and construction.

The project will address the need to prepare the AEC students to capture,
analyze, and apply environmental data in order to reduce the impacts of human
development and construction. It will also address the shortage of a skilled
workforce in the AEC industry, focusing on the sustainability of the built
environment. ALERT will provide a technology-rich learning experience, which
will enhance students' competitiveness for future jobs. By developing and
testing ALERT at Florida International University, one of the largest majority-
minority student populations, the project will take advantage of a unique
opportunity to create a curriculum tailored to diverse learners. Project results
will be disseminated through various channels including webinars, press
releases, publications, and presentations in a variety of disciplinary and
interdisciplinary venues. The project team plans to utilize social media as a
vehicle to communicate with interested students and educators. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.