* 2315814
* Characterizing variations in magnitude-frequency distribution and b-value using relative magnitudes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yihe Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 259,240.00

The “magnitude-frequency distribution” (MFD) of earthquakes describes how often
earthquakes of different magnitudes occur in a particular region, with large
earthquakes being far less frequent than small ones. The proportion of small to
large earthquakes, which scientists obtain from the MFD, is represented using
the “b-value”. This quantity is used to infer from recordings of frequent, small
earthquakes how often rarer, large earthquakes are expected, and to flag regions
that may be at risk for major earthquakes. Robust estimates of b-value require
enormous collections (or ‘catalogues’) of earthquake data, in which all
magnitudes were estimated the same way. Dr. Huang and her team will characterize
the variations in MFD and b-value by recalculating earthquake magnitudes for two
catalogs: one from southern California (where most earthquakes occur naturally)
and one from Oklahoma (where most earthquakes are triggered by injection of
wastewater from oil and gas production). Using the new MFDs, she and her team
will assess how b-values may vary in these two regions during foreshocks, large
earthquakes, and aftershocks; and (where applicable) operation of nearby
wastewater injection wells. This project will provide vital information for
quantitative seismic hazard analysis, which is required for updating building
codes and other public safety measures; and will advance scientific
understanding of earthquake physics. The PI and her group will also develop and
share a free online educational tool that will enable students, teachers, and
the general public to access and analyze seismograph data, and estimate
earthquake magnitudes.

Current MFD and b-value analyses are strongly affected by magnitude
uncertainties of small earthquakes and mixed magnitude types in earthquake
catalogs. Recent studies have shown that MFDs can deviate from exponential
distribution at low-magnitude ranges and b-value can vary considerably with the
magnitude of completeness due to the discontinuity of MFDs in high-resolution
catalogs. The project will produce earthquake catalogs with consistent
magnitudes for small and large earthquakes using recalculated magnitude
differences, which will enable a systematic analysis of the spatial-temporal
variations in MFDs and b-value in Southern California and Oklahoma. After the
magnitudes are recalculated, the project will investigate the possible
deviations of MFDs from exponential distribution and their effects on the
estimation of b-value. The project will also quantify whether there are
significant changes of b-values during foreshocks, mainshocks, and aftershocks
as well as the operation of injection wells for induced seismicity. The
systematic MFD and b-value analysis together will produce more robust parameters
for seismic hazard analysis and unveil whether b-value variations manifest
changes in fault stress state.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.