* 2315828
* Equipment: University of Miami - Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric and Earth Sciences Research Vessel F.G. Walton Smith Oceanograhic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Don Cucchiara, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 76,470.00

The University of Miami requests funding for additional and back-up
instrumentation on the R/V Walton Smith, a 96,’ general purpose regional vessel
operated by the University of Miami’s Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Sciences (RSMAS) as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).

The vessel conducts a substantial portion of her operations in the near shore
waters of South Florida and the Gulf of Mexico, providing scientific information
relevant to major environmental initiatives. The operations include oil spill
monitoring, water management changes, municipal waste disposal, and storm water
discharge among others which are deemed critical to the sustainable development
of the South Florida and Gulf economy.

Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes: 1) Turner
Designs C3 Fluorometer (3 optic channels) $9,605 2) (2) WET Labs C-Star
Transmissometer (CST-25-DR) $21,387 3) Sea-Bird 9+ underwater unit repair & 911+
Upgrade $27,993 4) 2) Sea-Bird ECO-FLNTU_RTD Fluorometer/Turbidity $17,485
$76,470   Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under
Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.