* 2315876
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Equitable, Affordable, and Health-Promoting Access to Energy Efficient Housing
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Soowon Chang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,968.00

Health disparities arising from inequities in the built environment, such as
uneven exposure to heat risk, are exacerbated by the challenges faced in
affording energy expenses. Nearly one-third (31%) of U.S. households struggle
with paying energy bills and maintaining comfortable temperatures in their
homes. The indoor environment plays a crucial role in shaping both physical and
mental health outcomes, particularly in minority and low-income communities. The
goal of this project is to develop affordable and efficient energy use
strategies through simulation-based discovery, data analysis, and community
engagement, and to cultivate an engineering mindset with social equity among
STEM students. By investigating the impact of real-world energy usage on human
health and well-being, this project addresses the societal and economic
challenges associated with energy use and poverty in low-income households.
Ultimately, it strives to shift from current static building control practices
towards a sustainable and adaptable approach to the built environment.

Despite the existence of energy assistance programs such as the Low-Income Home
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) in the U.S., there remains a persistent lack
of understanding regarding the impact of controlling indoor temperatures on
energy bills and health. This knowledge gap hinders the provision of cost-
effective and thermally comfortable indoor environments, which have the
potential to address disparities in dwelling conditions. This project aims at
filling this gap by establishing a comprehensive knowledge base for balancing
energy demand reduction with thermal comfort thresholds across diverse
residential building conditions by utilizing parametric building energy modeling
and simulation methods in combination with empirical data analytics.
Additionally, community-based participatory outreach is employed to collect
actual measured data from low-income residential housing, ensuring the
validation of the simulation results. The research outcomes are then
disseminated to underrepresented groups in STEM through a sustainable
partnership between Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) and non-MSI
institutions to promote the ability to situate engineering discovery within
social science contexts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.