* 2315763
* Leveraging Lived Experiences of Nontraditional Engineering Students to Promote Engaged Student Learning in Technical Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Ean Ng, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 308,559.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by leveraging the lived
experiences of nontraditional engineering students to increase engaged student
learning for all engineering students. Nontraditional students (NTS) are defined
as students who satisfy at least one of the seven criteria provided by the
National Center for Education Statistics or are older than 24 years of age in an
undergraduate program. NTES typically include adult learners, veterans, and
women. The population of nontraditional engineering students is expected to
increase and will become a significant part of the engineering student
population. This project will advance the understanding of the lived experiences
of nontraditional engineering students as an asset and focus on the importance
of leveraging their strengths for engineering education. This project will
identify the characteristics of nontraditional engineering students’ lived
experiences that can be leveraged, create cooperative learning activities that
leverage their lived experiences to increase engaged student learning, and
create open resources for other STEM educators. As an IUSE program Engaged
Student Learning Track Level 1 project, this project serves the IUSE program’s
intent of increasing student engagement and learning in STEM by broadening the
participation of nontraditional engineering students in STEM education and STEM
fields, and by providing an alternative pedagogy to increase traditional
students’ awareness and understanding of the need for diversity and appreciation
of diversity in engineering teams.

The project will use a mixed-methods approach that includes semi-structured
interviews, surveys, instructor observations, and minute-papers to answer two
major research questions: (1) What are the lived experiences of nontraditional
engineering students that can be leveraged in undergraduate engineering
classrooms to increase engaged learning for all students? and (2) How do we
leverage these lived experiences in undergraduate engineering classrooms through
cooperative learning to increase engaged learning of all students? A group of
engineering educators will implement the cooperative learning activities
developed through this project to evaluate the effectiveness and ease of
implementation. Upon completion, this project will contribute to the
undergraduate engineering education body of knowledge through: (1) exploring
nontraditional engineering student education from an asset-based perspective;
(2) identifying the themes and attributes of nontraditional engineering
students’ lived experiences that can propagate future research in nontraditional
engineering students; (3) expanding the assessment instrument in measuring
engaged student learning at the in-class activity level; (4) creating an
alternative instructional method by developing methodologies to create
cooperative learning activities that leverage nontraditional engineering
students’ lived experiences and developing a set of cooperative in-class
activities based on this methodology that is used to validate the methodology.
The major deliverables from this project will be (1) identifying characteristics
and attributes of the lived experiences of nontraditional engineering students
(2) an open handbook of cooperative learning activities developed through this
project, and methodologies to develop additional cooperative learning activities
that leverage the lived experiences of nontraditional engineering students to
increase engaged student learning. The deliverables will be disseminated through
conferences, demonstrative workshops, virtual workshops, and publication of the
handbook as an open resource. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.