* 2315219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How New Legal Doctrine Shapes Human-Environment Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2025
* Eduardo Hazera, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 31,500.00

This project examines an experimental legal doctrine that defines environmental
entities as legal subjects for the purposes of adjudicating land tenure and
other resource disputes. Typically, laws treat environmental entities (such as
rivers and mountains) as objects of ownership or protection. The new doctrine
proposes a dramatic shift in the ways that laws deal with the environment. The
research looks at a sociolegal context where legal experts are struggling to
figure out how to implement a law that claims a river is a legal subject. In
training a student in methods of scientific data collection and analysis, this
research project would develop systems for better understanding of how the
rights of nature framework is changing human relationships with the environment.
The project also broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in
science.

This doctoral research project explores what implications a legal paradigm
emphasizing the rights of nature doctrine has for transforming sociolegal
relations between human and environmental systems. To carry out this project,
the researchers are using a two-pronged approach. On the one hand, the
researchers are conducting a series of standardized interviews with judges who
have written rights of nature laws. On the other hand, the researchers are using
semi-structured observational methods to study a committee that has been
judicially mandated as the legal representative of a river. This research design
helps the investigators to understand the rights of nature from both the
practical side of policy implementation as well as the more theoretical side of
policy conceptualization. On a scholarly level, this project contributes to
theories in legal anthropological and sociolegal studies about the role of
bureaucracy in social life.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.