* 2315087
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental studies of porous polymers for selective gold retrieval
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhonghua Peng, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,996.00

Investigators at the University of Missouri – Kansas City (UMKC) and Southern
Methodist University (SMU) will investigate how to retrieve gold ions from waste
streams using porous polymers. Recovering gold from electronic waste (e-waste)
has significant environmental and financial benefits. The global e-waste
recycling market reached around $55.3 billion in 2022, with gold recovery
accounting for the most value. Adsorption technology is regarded as a highly
effective, simple, economical, and environmentally benign separation method.
However, current adsorption-based gold recovery technology suffers from low
adsorption capacity, slow adsorption rates, and low selectivity. This project
will develop adsorbents for the effective and efficient recovery of gold and
other metal ions essential for rechargeable battery applications, promoting the
United States’ global leadership in the energy and defense sectors. This project
supports the interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students.
The investigators have partnered with UMKC’s Multicultural Student Affairs
Office and SMU’s Engaged Learning, McNair Scholars, and Hamilton Undergraduate
Research Scholars programs to recruit students from underrepresented and
underserved groups in STEM. The research results will be broadly disseminated in
peer-reviewed journals, conferences, and online outlets.

Systematic experimental and theoretical studies will be conducted to gain
fundamental insights into the interactions between gold ions and novel
adsorbents based on intrinsically porous triazine-crosslinked polyethyleneimine
(TCPEI) networks. Four research tasks will be completed: (1) design and
synthesize three series of TCPEIs with dramatically different distributions of
the various types of amine nitrogen; (2) experimentally and theoretically study
the gold ion adsorption capacities and energies of the three sets of TCPEIs; (3)
experimentally and theoretically determine adsorption and desorption kinetics;
and (4) explore the gold adsorption selectivity of TCPEIs over other metal ions
commonly found in e-waste such as lead, mercury, nickel, cobalt, manganese,
cadmium, chromium, iron, and copper. The research is expected to lead to
advanced adsorption-based gold recovery technology. The fundamental knowledge
gained through this study may also be applied to develop adsorbents for other
metal ions, including critical metals. The graduate and undergraduate student
researchers will be trained to synthesize these unique polymers, measure and
characterize the polymers’ metal ion adsorption properties, and perform
theoretical studies to understand adsorption processes and polymer properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.