* 2315915
* Equipment: Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Lee Ellett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2025
* USD 683,104.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for oceanographic
instrumentation that is needed to carry out NSF-supported scientific research.
Working within the collaborative framework of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed instrumentation will be
maintained by the SIO ship technical services department for use by researchers
from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing facilities.

With this proposal, SIO provides technical descriptions and rationale for the
acquisition of the following Oceanographic Instrumentation:

1) Multibeam Echosounder Spares, Sally Ride and Roger Revelle $298,401 2)
Salinometers, Oceanographic Data Facility $93,636 3) Computing Hardware,
Portable Multi-Channel Seismic System $39,923 4) Portable Magnetometer System
$71,162 5) Precision Time Protocol Time Servers, Sally Ride and Roger Revelle
$29,108 5) CTD Support Instrumentation $78,463 6) Theater Hoist, Roger Revelle
Pipe String $7,520 7) Other direct costs (shipping, CA tax, etc.) $55,552 8) IDC
$9,339 $683,104 Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is
under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It
provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-
use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research
projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research
program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use
instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.