* 2315364
* Enhancing Climate Literacy in General Education Geoscience Courses through Individual Urban Heat Exposure Active Learning Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mark Abolins, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2026
* USD 260,031.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the
effectiveness of active learning projects to increase climate literacy among
general education students in university geoscience courses. Global climate
variation creates both an opportunity and a need to learn about the variability
in the climate where students live. Yet, this topic can be difficult to teach in
the undergraduate general education classroom as it is largely an intangible
subject in the day-to-day lives of students, and because students come into the
discussion with varied educational backgrounds and biases. The curricula
developed through this project will use novel temperature and humidity sensor
technology to tie studentsâ€™ real-life environmental experiences to the larger
discussion on how the global climate is experiencing variation. The sensor
technology will be tested in numerous different general education courses at
both 4-year and 2-year colleges to explore how active learning projects that
involve personal experiences can improve understanding of climate science among
students, regardless of their major and background.

This project will combine the benefits of project-based learning with action
research by utilizing the theories and applicability from wearable sensor and
heat exposure research to frame climate variation as an everyday issue that
students experience. This project will be implemented first at Middle Tennessee
State University, a 4-year university, and then at partner 2-year colleges, with
refinement to the curricula throughout the project. Instructors will receive
training in the inclusion of active learning practices in their curricula to
help develop their knowledge of urban microclimate science and increase
confidence in teaching global climate science, more generally. With the goals of
improving their understanding of climate science and more closely aligning that
understanding to that of the scientific community, students will complete in-
depth climate study and a microclimate curriculum, and collect their personal
heat exposure data over a two-day period using wearable sensors. Students will
analyze the data and compare their exposure to that of others in the class, work
with fellow students to interpret results, and apply both scientific and
sociological concepts to their results. Formative assessment will occur twice
per year. Curricula resulting from repeated testing and refinements will be
publicly available to enable instructors to implement the program in their own
classes. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.