* 2315912
* CAREER: Supporting Undergraduate Mental Health by Building a Culture of Wellness in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Karin Jensen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2024
* USD 450,574.00

This project addresses the mental health crisis in undergraduate engineering
programs by characterizing the role of mental health in engineering culture as
perceived by undergraduates over the course of their academic programs. Further,
the project explores the role of faculty, staff, and administrators in
perpetuating or dismantling the perception of a high stress culture as a
necessary factor for success in engineering. The outcomes of the project will
support the improvement and development of proactive interventions to support
positive mental health and well-being in undergraduate engineering programs.
Improving undergraduate mental health in engineering programs will improve
recruitment and retention in engineering programs, which in turn addresses the
national need of training engineers to address grand challenges. The results of
the project will also raise awareness of undergraduate mental health in
engineering programs by facilitating discussions among faculty, staff, and
administrators who directly impact the climate in undergraduate programs. These
discussions will further serve to increase the adoption of research-based
practices and interventions to support mental health and promote student well-
being.

The integrated research and education plan supports the development of a culture
of well-being in engineering undergraduate programs. Though culture and
perceived norms have critical recruitment and retention implications, no
research has examined the role of a high-stress culture, particularly for
underrepresented students who may already face a "chilly climate" or "climate of
intimidation". The project addresses this knowledge gap using a mixed methods
design to connect factors within the control of educators to outcomes seemingly
out of control (mental health). The project studies engineering culture through
the lens of social identity theory to identify key factors in how the high-
stress culture evolves through a longitudinal study that identifies student
stressors and coping mechanisms. The results of the longitudinal study will
identify patterns in student responses to this culture, which will be further
analyzed by qualitative interviews with students from different groups. Further,
the project will identify coping mechanisms utilized by students who resist the
notion of a high stress culture, which will inform proactive trainings to
promote student well-being. Understanding how students positively cope and
thrive in engineering programs will inform proactive trainings and early
interventions to promote mental wellness instead of reactive, deficit-based
approaches. Building communities both locally and nationally will raise
awareness of mental health in engineering, emphasize the need to develop
positive culture, and promote wider implementations of research-based practices
to support student well-being.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.