* 2315450
* Collaborative Research: ELET2: Engaged Learning Environment for Emerging Transportation Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mansoureh Jeihani, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2026
* USD 210,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing a novel
learning platform, Engaged Learning Environment for Emerging Transportation
Technologies (ELET2), to deliver fundamental and up-to-date knowledge on
emerging transportation technologies to undergraduate students. Under the
Engaged Student Learning track, this Level 1 project will employ advanced
simulation, visualization, and modeling techniques to develop the ELET2 platform
that promotes vivid, engaging, and realistic learning experiences and critical
thinking through integrated active and experiential learning processes. Once
completed, ELET2 will be an online, virtual, interactive, open platform. It will
be easily adoptable across a wide variety of relevant STEM fields and will also
promote cross-institutional collaborations while enhancing financial equity,
especially for students in minority-serving institutions. This project will act
as an ambassador connecting undergraduate STEM education with the latest
advances in transformational transportation technologies and preparing the next-
generation workforce to navigate the current and future landscapes of the
transportation industry.

The goal of this project is to improve undergraduate student learning of
emerging transportation technologies using advanced
simulation/visualization/modeling techniques. By leveraging cutting-edge
modeling and simulation approaches, web/mobile-based interactive visualization,
and gamification, the proposed ELET2 learning platform will provide an immersive
learning environment to engage students. Focusing on two vital emerging
transportation technologies, namely Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) and
Shared Mobility, the virtual and interactive ELET2 learning platform is
empowered by four integrated teaching modules targeting essential aspects of
shared mobility and CAV system and infrastructure, their related behavioral
issues, and operations and safety impact. The effectiveness and impact of this
project will be rigorously assessed through independent evaluations focusing on
two fundamental aspects: a) Evaluation of Learning via case-control comparative
studies, classroom observations, and focus group discussions and b) Evaluation
of Motivation and Retention via student exit interviews and longitudinal
surveys. Project results will be disseminated to the transportation engineering
education community through open-source platforms, publications, and
presentations at professional conferences and meetings. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.