* 2315804
* BPC-DP: Developing a Framework and Community for IT Outreach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Wei Jin, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Georgia Gwinnett College (GGC) will expand and broaden the impact of the
Technology Ambassador Program (TAP). TAP was established in 2012 with support
from the NSF-funded STARS Computing Corps program to address the need to
increase the number of students who persist in information technology (IT) or IT
related major, particularly those underrepresented in computing (women, African
Americans, Hispanics, and people with disabilities). In its tenure of more than
10 years, the TAP program has been successful in developing the outreach
expertise to serve the diverse populations of both GGC students and outreach
workshop participants (K-12 and college students). This project will expand and
broaden the impact of the TAP program by sharing the project team's experience
and work products with the public, thereby creating a community dedicated to
promoting IT outreach. To achieve this, the project team will create a framework
and repository for IT outreach activities and use it to broaden and sustain a
community devoted to outreach. In doing this, the project aims to bridge the gap
for persons from groups underrepresented in computing and encourage them to
pursue a career in IT.

This Broadening Participation in Computing Demonstration Project will develop a
framework for IT outreach activities and build outreach IT community. The most
successful products of TAP are the fun and engaging workshop activities created
by TAP students for target populations with diverse knowledge and backgrounds.
These workshops are also testbeds where the TAP students research the
effectiveness of their workshops for outreach and publish these results. Several
of these publications have earned awards at regional and national conferences.
Therefore, the contents of the workshops and the know-how for building them are
the main expertise that TAP provides. The project will disseminate this
expertise by sharing TAP workshop activities on a public online repository so
that anyone can use them for outreach. Finally, a newly created alumni network
will provide career development workshops to nurture the current TAP students
and strengthen this exemplary program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.