* 2315860
* Building a STEM research and education network of GIS and drone mapping for coastal seagrass monitoring
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bo Yang, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 356,086.00

Seagrass suffers from several threats, including wasting disease, that could
impair ecosystems, and accurate and up-to-date mapping of seagrass is critical
for understanding estuary health and resilience to environmental stressors. This
project advances fundamental research using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) to
map seagrass across Northern California to detect disease and analyze temporal
trends in seagrass health and extent. A significant focus of this project is
creating a STEM network between minority-serving institutions and community
colleges to foster collaborations and build capacity, training and mentoring 24
students in 4-year university and 2-year community colleges annually, providing
them with interdisciplinary skills such as UAV piloting, GIS, coastal science,
and scientific communication. Students also develop professional networks and
experience study, promoting long-term engagement in STEM. The goal is to extend
this training program to community organizations, citizen scientists, and
practitioners, aiming to contribute to coastal management and seagrass
conservation.

Efficient, comprehensive monitoring of the seascape-scale impact of seagrass
disease is essential to predict future ecological impacts and implement early
interventions. However, seagrass conditions are rarely quantified in spatial and
temporal domains, and traditional mapping methods are labor-intensive,
expensive, or have a coarse resolution. UAV imaging combined with GIS are
emerging technologies for monitoring coastal seagrass ecosystems because of
their spatial high-resolution, temporal flexibility, and cost-efficiency. Our
project utilizes multi-platform UAV systems with visible, multispectral, and
LiDAR sensors to provide more accurate data for better delineation and
classification of seagrass and predicting disease more effectively. Combined
with ground data and in situ sampling, we develop a UAV and GIS-based platform
for comprehensive monitoring of seagrass ecosystems. The platform aid in the
detection of diseases at an individual leaf scale in prominent seagrass
habitats. Our research includes multi-platform UAV mapping, spatial modeling of
the seagrass disease, temporal analysis of seagrass bed extent changes,
development of AI-based image analysis for species classification and disease
detection, creation of a cloud data hub for real-time data exchange, and
provision of research training and professional development opportunities for
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.