* 2315798
* Decoding the evolutionary dynamics of bacterial regulatory sRNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Allison Hansen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 919,999.00

Small RNAs (sRNAs) play a crucial role in the diversification and adaptation of
bacteria, influencing virulence, environmental responses, and metabolism.
However, the understanding of sRNA evolution in bacteria is typically limited
due to challenges in identifying sRNAs in distantly related species. Recent
research has discovered sRNAs shared among diverse bacteria living inside hosts
and that share a common ancestor. Therefore, the evolution, function and
regulation of these sRNAs can be studied to gain insights into bacterial
interactions with their hosts and environment. Moreover, sRNAs have potential
applications in developing targeted antibiotics and green technologies for
agriculture and public health, to combat antibiotic and pesticide resistance
while minimizing non-target effects. The bacteria studied in this project are
required for their pest insect hosts’ survival. Thus, understanding the role of
sRNAs in maintaining these microbe-pest interactions is crucial for managing
agricultural and disease-transmitting pests. The project's broader impacts
include training and diversity initiatives, engaging undergraduate students in
research, and promoting inclusivity in STEM education. Outreach activities and
public presentations will enhance scientific understanding among the broader
public, especially low-income communities. This project will foster scientific
discovery, train the next generation of researchers, and promote science
communication for the benefit of society.

Understanding how small regulatory RNAs evolve has been challenging due to their
rapid evolution and difficulties in finding related sRNA in diverse bacterial
lineages. Recent research has identified bacteria with conserved small RNAs even
after millions of years of divergence, providing an opportunity to study their
evolution; these bacteria are also of interest because they live inside the
aphids, which feed on plant sap. This proposal aims to investigate the evolution
of sRNA regulation and function in those bacteria since their divergence from a
common ancestor. The researchers will determine how sequence divergence and
binding specificity affect the function and structure of sRNAs that interact
with their target coding sequences. Additionally, the researchers will
investigate the conservation of mRNA targets among divergent sRNA encoded in
genomic locations far from their targets. The findings of this study will
enhance our understanding of the functional roles of sRNAs and how they
contribute to gene regulation in different bacterial lineages. Moreover, it will
provide insights into the evolutionary history of bacteria and their adaptation
to the environment and host cells over time. By unraveling the mechanisms of
sRNA evolution, this research can shed light on the broader process of gene
regulation and adaptation in bacteria. Undergraduate students will be trained in
the course of this project, and researchers will continue to participate in the
annual campus-wide insect festivals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.