* 2315851
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership:CNS:Small:SWEET: Hardware and Software for Sustainable Wearable Edge Intelligence
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bo Ji, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Real-time remote monitoring of physiological indicators and early intervention
can save lives. These critical services require wearable technologies with
strong predictive abilities, fast networks, and fast servers to extract insights
from the collected data. Unfortunately, these technology components are
inaccessible to hundreds of millions of people, specifically those living in
areas with limited broadband connectivity and limited means to invest in local
computing and communication infrastructure. We develop hardware and software for
sustainable and efficient wearable edge intelligence in this project. We address
fundamental accessibility and sustainability challenges of both wearable health
monitoring devices and artificial intelligence services for under-served
communities.

Our research, education, and outreach plans are anchored on a sustainability-
and accessibility-focused view of computer systems research. Health services
based on machine learning lean heavily on vast data stores, fast networks, and
farms of Cloud servers, which are inaccessible to large parts of the world’s
population. This effort's intellectual challenges lie in how to change hardware
and software design to bring advanced machine learning services to unprivileged
users who cannot depend on wireless or Cloud service providers for their well-
being. Underlying this challenge are specific intellectual challenges in (i)
lengthening the lifetime of wearable devices that perform biomedical signal
acquisition and processing while trying to expand their computational and
processing capabilities; (ii) performing more efficient, robust, and trustworthy
machine learning in personal and edge computing devices outside the Cloud; and
(iii) finding scalable and sustainable development and deployment models for
distributed machine learning services, without the robustness and availability
guarantees of Cloud datacenters. The project brings together four research teams
with demonstrated and complementary expertise in wearable sensors and hardware,
software, systems, and algorithms. Our recent research on reducing power
consumption of edge sensors, transprecise computing, serverless computing, and
network systems optimization lays the foundation and serves as a starting point
for this research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.