* 2315770
* The evolution of collective decision-making from childhood to adulthood: markets, networks and institutions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Juan Carrillo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 525,175.00

Adults and children often struggle to achieve optimal outcomes in seemingly
simple two-person interactions. This pattern arises from uncorrected tendencies
and developmental shortcomings, which are heavily influenced by cognitive biases
and limitations. Even more intriguing is the finding that adults perform better
in larger and seemingly more complex situations with less guidance. Some
evidence suggests that behavior in such environments may rely, at least partly,
on skills that are less cognitive and more focused on affective abilities like
perceiving and interpreting emotions and intentions. Interestingly, several
studies on market trading have shown that children of different ages also tend
to reach outcomes with favorable properties. This observation suggests the
possibility that the skills supporting behavior in groups may develop early or
even be innate. This new research explores the developmental trajectory of
decision-making and aggregate outcomes within “small societies” such as markets
and networks. It also aims to uncover the cognitive and non-cognitive skills
that underpin decision-making in these environments. By unraveling the
complexities of decision-making within groups, this research will enhance our
understanding of human behavior and shed light on why group situations are,
paradoxically, more intuitive to humans than two-person interactions.
Additionally, it will help identify the skills that guide our decision-making
processes, enabling us to reach favorable outcomes. Furthermore, the research
will ascertain the extent to which these skills evolve with age. These findings
hold the potential to inform policymaking, education, and societal structures,
thereby fostering improved collective outcomes while promoting individual growth
and development.

The study will employ experimental techniques to test the development of
behavior from childhood to adulthood across four paradigms while assessing their
cognitive and affective skills. To allow for meaningful comparisons across age
groups, a methodology will be developed to ensure participants fully understand
the structure of the groups in which they will make decisions. Specifically, the
research will investigate four paradigms. Firstly, it will examine trade
behavior in markets involving commodities and money, aiming to understand the
types of exchanges observed at different ages, as well as trading frictions,
clearing prices, and final allocations. Subjects will participate in a trading
game, in which they can exchange and purchase goods. The experiment will also
measure how communication technologies between players facilitate exchange.
Secondly, the study will explore how information is aggregated in large groups,
where individuals can only observe the choices made by their immediate
"neighbors". The setting will capture the exchange of information in social
networks. By varying the information structure, the experiment will explore
factors that impact the weight people put to specific kinds of news, and the
ability (or lack of) to infer general knowledge from local information. Thirdly,
the study will analyze children's behavior in social learning environments,
where individuals obtain signals, and they must extract information from the
actions (not the signals) of their peers. It will study whether children of
different ages make rational inferences. Lastly, the project will investigate
how children aggregate the ordinal preferences of their peers and compare their
choices with established rules such as majoritarianism, Borda, and
antiplurality. For each paradigm, the research will also investigate the
relationship between outcomes and skills, aiming to measure the influence of
cognitive and affective development on decision-making. Additionally, the study
will compare outcomes, skills, and their interplay across populations that
differ in environmental factors such as economic status or school curricula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.