* 2315407
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the emerging field of departmental change and empowering an inclusive network of practitioners
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Courtney Ngai, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2025
* USD 82,647.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing understanding of
the central role that departments in higher education institutions play in the
transformation of undergraduate education in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM). Based on team-based models of institutional change, this
IUSE: EDU Track 2 - Institutional and Community Transformation Level 1 project
investigates successful departmental change efforts to identify effective
strategies and elements that support institutionalization and sustainability.
This research and development effort is being conducted by STEM practitioners
and researchers from the National-Louis University, the University of Colorado
at Boulder, Colorado State University, and Western Michigan University.
Establishing a structured network of STEM instructors, institutional
administrators, staff, and education researchers, the project tests the
hypothesis that prior efforts that focused on individual practitioners,
researchers, or courses were largely ineffective. The project team posits that
team-based change models and actions that focus on the department as the engine
of change have the potential to establish and sustain the transformation of
teaching and learning in undergraduate STEM education. The project team proposes
a two-pronged project: (1) A landscape study focusing on undergraduate STEM
education departmental change projects that investigates their methods for
supporting change and (2) catalyzing an inclusive community network for sharing
findings and recommended practices.

The goals of the project are to describe (1) the structures, approaches, and
theoretical frameworks of STEM departmental change projects and (2) the impacts
of networking departmental change agents. The complex and mixed methods research
and development project is guided by a systems approach that (a) is informed by
an organizational learning framework and that (B) integrates a critical theory
and equity/social justice approach to better advance knowledge on departmental
transformation across the many types of student populations and institutions of
higher education that populate the post-secondary education enterprise of the
Nation. Framed by a set of research questions, the team examines a corpus of
data and information that consist of a systematic review of the
literature/existing resources, and an archive depicting departmental change
efforts, interviews with key project leaders, and surveys/interviews/observation
of participants. Data analyses will be guided by deductive and inductive cross-
case approaches to analyzing qualitative data and text-based information
resulting in a partially ordered meta-matrix and a stacking cases approach to
support clustering and condensing cases. The projectâ€™s theory of change and
systems approach are well-aligned with the phenomena under study and the
complexity of the problem.

The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the project supports efforts to transform
and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.