* 2315085
* PIC: Charge Trapped Photonic Devices for Computing, Sensing and Sequencing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mrigendra Rajput, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 540,000.00

The proposal seeks to develop novel hybrid silicon charge trapped photonic
waveguide devices for low (practically zero power) on-chip optical memory,
computation, label-free sensing and genetic sequencing applications. The program
will expose students to interdisciplinary research in photonics, electrical
engineering, biochemistry and microbiology. Together with novel ferroelectric
integration in silicon photonics, demonstration of label-free gene sequencing
using integrated photonics will train undergraduate and graduate students under
a multidisciplinary umbrella integrating silicon photonics with microbiology.
Devices fabricated in a multi-project wafer (MPW) run at a commercial CMOS
foundry will expose students to critical tasks of fabless companies in
submitting layouts for finished designs to commercial foundries for fabrication.
The project will culminate with the feasibility demonstration of charge trapped
silicon photonic devices in diverse applications for next generation on-chip
computing as well as enabling the potential for photonic based readout of
biologically stored data in DNA. Project members will engage in STEM outreach
targeting middle and high school students in greater Dayton, OH and broaden
participation of minority students in STEM education and training. Specific
project activities supported by Intel OASIS have been designed for undergrads
for workforce development in semiconductors. The activities planned here will
expose a larger pool of students in the physical sciences and engineering that
will build industrial manpower to address the significant future US need in the
semiconductor industry not only for chip fabrication but also its applications
in next generation computing and biological stored data readout using photonic
integrated circuits.

Carrier charge modulation in silicon photonics has been used for modulation of
optical signals in integrated photonic p-n doped waveguides and resonators.
During the past decade, storage of non-volatile, adjustable, multi-level weights
in undoped low-loss photonic devices has attracted significant interest for
computing applications. The discovery of ferroelectric properties in thin film
oxides promises the potential for trapping charges in undoped silicon in hybrid
ferroelectric silicon waveguides for integrated photonic non-volatile memory
applications. Such devices can also be used for label-free DNA
sensing/sequencing with ion selective membranes. The intellectual significance
of the proposed activities includes: (a) demonstrating hybrid ferroelectric
silicon photonic waveguides and nanostructured resonators as energy-efficient
non-volatile optical memory for computing; (b) demonstrating multi-level optical
memory; (c) demonstration of high sensitivity proton sensing in ion-sensitive-
photonic-field-effect-waveguide (ISPFEW) devices with ion selective membranes
integrated with photonic waveguides, and d) demonstration of potential for
label-free gene sequencing on a photonic chip, in contrast to labeled methods
elsewhere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.