* 2315024
* Collaborative Research: Overcoming Isolation and Scholarly Devaluation by Bolstering the Collective Agency of Black Discipline-Based Education Researchers
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Monique Ross, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2027
* USD 378,441.00

There is a growing need for scholars specializing in discipline-based education
research (DBER) due to the importance of STEM in preparing the technical
workforce and a science-literate citizenry. DBER is defined as a collection of
related research fields (e.g., physics, biology, engineering, computer science)
executing basic and applied research centered on education research questions
anchored in the context of their specific field of study. The proposed project
aims to advance understanding and mitigate the impact of systemic racism on the
collective agency of Black scholars engaged in DBER focused on engineering and
computer science. The project team conceptualizes systemic racism as the complex
array of practices, policies, and systems of evaluation that contribute to the
de facto segregation and scholarly devaluation of Black scholars. This
combination of challenges presents obstacles for scholars working to maximize
their potential impact as change agents within their disciplines. This project
aims to examine how systemic racism restricts scholars' impact and shapes their
individual and collective agency. The long-term goals of the project are to
foster collaboration among STEM education researchers who are geographically
dispersed across the country; build capacity for culturally-competent STEM
education research and dissemination; enhance the visibility of the work done by
Black scholars; and advocate for field-level changes to practices and policies
that reinforce systemic racism.

The main goal of this project is to advance understanding of the impact
systematic racism has on the individual and collective agency of Black scholars
engaged in DBER. The research team will use an asset-based, trauma-informed,
community-oriented approach. First, the project team will collect, compile,
analyze, and visualize data about the population of Black DBER scholars. Second,
the project will interview a cross-generational subset of late-, mid-, and
early-career Black scholars about the workplace challenges encountered during
their professional journey and the tactics used to overcome them. Finally, the
project will scaffold new collaborations between discipline-based education
researchers through workshops focused on forming and sustaining productive
research collaborations. This project is designed to expand prior literature
about discipline-based education research to include substantial considerations
of race or racism. The research design guiding this study will leverage and
foster authentic partnerships among Black scholars engaged in DBER. This study
design may also serve as a model for subsequent studies on collective agency.

This collaborative project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education
activity (EDU Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice
projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the
improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with
NSFâ€™s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.