* 2315432
* Preparing Undergraduates for Marine Science Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Alyson Busse, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,934.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a pre-research
experience for undergraduate students in marine science to help prepare them to
apply for and be successful in future undergraduate research experiences.
Undergraduate research experiences are a high-impact practice for STEM students,
impacting their persistence in STEM, the kinds of career opportunities available
to them, their professional skills, and self-efficacy. However, not all students
have access to undergraduate research experiences, or to the preparation
necessary to find and successfully apply to them. Particularly in marine
sciences, students' institutional characteristics and personal demographics can
contribute to lack of access to these experiences. This project will develop a
preparatory program for undergraduates interested in marine sciences who
encounter barriers to fully access undergraduate research experiences. Through
mentored projects with practicing marine scientists and community activities,
participants will develop skills, confidence, and networking to overcome
barriers to their participation in research experiences in marine science.

The goals of this project are to serve three cohorts of students with
historically excluded identities in marine science in an intensive week-long
residential experience to prepare them for future research experiences in marine
science. This project builds on the institutional capabilities of Mote Marine
Laboratory to connect students with mentors and projects in marine science, and
to leverage expertise in community building and mentorship to support the
students in developing self-efficacy and networking skills to increase their
ability to find and apply for undergraduate research experiences. The project
will collect rich qualitative data to discover the impact of project activities
on participants and stakeholders, and develop best practices in supporting
minoritized students in marine science. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.