* 2315095
* Rhetorical Engineering Education to Support Proactive Equity Teaching and Outcomes (RESPETO)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Joel Mejia, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,237,769.00

This project will provide a handbook of materials for faculty in engineering to
help them understand language practices (what language is and how it is used) in
engineering education at a Hispanic Serving Institution. The handbook will offer
recommended teaching practices that help students become more aware of how
language is inaccessible to Latinx students. In addition, the handbook will be
available to faculty in a digital format.

This ethnographic project uses raciolinguistics as its theoretical framework. It
will (a) investigate how and in what ways a racialized discourse in engineering
creates barriers for minoritized populations to pursue engineering degrees; (b)
provide engineering faculty and students with tools to recognize, value, and
activate language that challenges dominant racialized discourses in engineering
through critical sociolinguistic awareness; (c) and identify and reflect on
pedagogical practices that challenge racialized discourse and linguistic
practices throughout their work. This project will provide a more nuanced
understanding of the role language and linguistic practices play in perpetuating
inequity and lack of access to engineering spaces.

The project will engage four cohorts of 10 Latinx undergraduate students as
researchers who will co-design, collect, analyze, and disseminate data for the
project. The project will include document analysis of institutional artifacts,
interviews with faculty, staff, and administrators, awareness workshops and
seminars, questionnaires, and reflective journals. Findings will be disseminated
through a digital handbook, social media campaign, seminars, workshops, and
conference presentations. The findings from this project will appeal to the
broader engineering education field, Hispanic Serving Institutions,
Predominantly White Institutions, and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF's
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.