* 2315909
* BPC-DP: Improving Computing Education for Incarcerated College Students
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Leo Porter, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The University of California, San Diego will deploy and assess innovations in
computer science education in prison settings. Mass incarceration
disproportionately impacts people of lower socioeconomic status and people of
color. Participating in education during incarceration, and especially higher
education, is the most effective way known to reduce one’s chances of returning
to prison once released. Higher education programs in prisons are currently
broadly lacking in STEM offerings, and momentum is growing to increase diverse
opportunities as access to higher education is set to increase due to recent
change in legislation. Applying computer science education research in prison
settings will contribute new knowledge to the field pertaining to a unique
population including addressing gaps in academic preparation, the needs of adult
learners, and challenges faced by students with learning disabilities. In
addition, the team will study how to effectively teach computing in a setting
with significant environmental barriers, such as limited access to the internet
and online resources. Expanding and improving computer science education in
prisons will also serve the field of computing by diversifying our student
population and workforce, specifically amongst underrepresented racial, age, and
socioeconomic status groups. This Broadening Participation in Computing
Demonstration Project will broaden participation in computing amongst
incarcerated individuals (and the underrepresented groups that make up the
majority of the prison population). Specifically, this project seeks to discover
and invent best practices for teaching computing at the college-level in
prisons. The research will be informed through the research team's own
instructional interventions and weekly self-reflections from the incarcerated
students in their classes. Through teaching introductory programming courses in
a prison setting, this research will answer the following research questions: 1)
what are the challenges of executing college-level computing courses in a
correctional setting; 2) what are the unique challenges faced by incarcerated
students; and 3) how can the lessons learned from teaching in this environment
improve computing education in general? This new knowledge will help prepare
computing educators across the country to participate in the expansion of higher
education programs in prisons, and best serve the incarcerated students they
teach. In addition, this work will bring attention in the computing education
research community to the unique academic strengths and needs of the
incarcerated student population, and the profound positive impact that computing
education in prisons can have on incarcerated individuals and society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.