* 2315346
* The Effects of World War II on U.S. Management Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michela Giorcelli, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,390.00

Productivity dramatically varies across firms and countries. For instance,
within narrowly-defined US manufacturing industries, the most productive
establishments make almost twice as much output with the same input as the least
productive ones. Recently, economic research has shown that “soft” technologies,
like management, are a key determinant of such outstanding productivity
variations. While investing in management is crucial for stimulating both firm
and aggregate growth, to what extent business school education affects managers’
ability to improve firm performance and their career outcomes remains largely
unknown. This project provides new empirical evidence on this topic, using
evidence from one of the largest managerial education programs in history,
sponsored by the U.S. government during World War II: the Engineering, Science,
and Management War Training (ESMWT). The ESMWT provided free postgraduate
education to engineers, scientists and managers employed at war industrial
facilities. While engineers and scientists received a short training on war-
related production, managers attended an MBA-style program, that offered a
comprehensive business education. The program trained almost 1.8 million
students, 25% of the university population in 1940. A distinctive feature of the
ESMWT is that it prohibited any discrimination based on gender and race, and
therefore gave women and nonwhite workers a unique opportunity to participate in
graduate-level education. The large scale and scope of the ESMWT generate novel
evidence on to what extent managerial education affects managers’ labor market
outcomes and if inclusive government programs may be effective in reducing gaps
between demographic groups. Moreover, it sheds new light on the role of the U.S.
government in shaping business education, as well as scientific human capital
and innovation during and after World War II. Rich archival data on war
facilities, manager career history, and professional networks are used to
elucidate key mechanisms.

This research examines the effects of World War II on US managerial innovation,
using evidence from the Engineering, Science, and Management War Training
(ESMWT). Sponsored by the US government between 1940 and 1945, the ESMWT offered
engineers and scientists employed at war facilities short training on war-
related production; and middle managers and production supervisors a
comprehensive business education via an MBA-style program. This project uses an
unusually detailed newly-assembled dataset linking managers, engineers, and
scientists that participated in the ESMWT, war facilities performance, and
universities that hosted the program. Quasi-natural variation comes from the
fact that workers had to score above an arbitrary threshold in an ESMWT entry-
exam to be admitted. First, this project studies the effects of receiving
business school education on the career outcomes of enrolled managers, relative
to similar managers who scored right below the entry-exam threshold, and on the
performance of war facilities in which they were employed. Moreover, it
investigates whether professional networks formed during ESMWT contributed to
shaping managers' labor market outcomes and if the program helped nonwhite and
female managers to close the occupation gap with their white male colleagues.
Second, this research analyzes whether the ESMWT caused structural changes in
managerial education after the war. It exploits variation in university distance
from war facilities, since only institutions within 50km of them could host
ESMWT courses, and it relies on text analysis methods to compare changes in the
MBA curricula between participating and nonparticipating institutions after the
ESMWT. Third, this project studies if ESMWT classes offered to engineers and
scientists shaped US scientific human capital and long-run innovation and its
interaction with managerial capital. Given the large scale of the ESMWT, these
results not only inform academics about the historical development of business
school education in the US but could be helpful in designing similar educational
programs under national emergencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.