* 2315197
* The Accessible Calculus Project: Advancing Equity by Democratizing Access to Advanced Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* William Crombie, Algebra Project Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,072,633.00

This project is a three-year research collaboration involving the Algebra
Project, the Center for Innovation in STEM Education Research at Kennesaw State
University, and the National Society of Black Engineers. The project aims to
demonstrate that the way in which mathematics curriculum is designed, taught,
and practiced impacts access to and success in Calculus. The project will work
with two teams of math teachers and their students to introduce and develop the
concepts of Calculus in the context of high school Algebra II. This approach has
the potential to raise the level of quantitative literacy for all students and
increase the pool of Calculus-ready and hence STEM-ready students.

The primary goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive, standards-
aligned Algebra II curriculum based upon the Algebra Project’s Polynomial
Calculus and Five-Step Curricular Process. This geometric introduction to
differential and integral calculus does not require the mechanisms of analysis.
And the culturally responsive Five-Step process emphasizes student voice,
drawing on natural language to develop meaningful, connected understandings of
abstract mathematical ideas. A second goal is to enhance the knowledge and
skills of participating teachers and students through this collaborative
curricular development. Both teachers and students will gain a deeper
understanding of mathematics, while teachers also learn culturally responsive
pedagogies and curriculum design. Finally, the project aims to encourage
participants to recognize their voice and expertise, gain agency and a positive
identity in mathematics or mathematics education. Drawing upon the tenets of
Participatory Action Research, the youth, teacher, and expert researcher team
will develop case studies to examine the emergence of voice, agency, and
identity among participants in the project. In addition, the expert research
team will determine the extent to which students and teachers have mastered the
fundamental concepts of the differential and integral calculus, and identify the
critical elements of mathematics instructional practice, both in formal and
informal learning environments, that students and teachers consider valuable.

This collaborative project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education
activity (EDU Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice
projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the
improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with
NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.