* 2315950
* RAPID: The Dynamics of Minority Support for the Supreme Court.
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Jay Krehbiel, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 63,609.00

Public trust in the Supreme Court is vital for the health of American democracy.
Recent controversies, however, have brought unprecedented challenges to the
Court’s legitimacy. With trust in the Court at historic lows and recent research
suggesting the Court’s legitimacy may be more fragile than previously thought,
commentators and scholars alike are raising increasingly dire warnings that the
Court’s decisions in highly salient cases have the potential to erode its
foundation of public support. Largely missing from this growing discussion of
the Court’s public standing, however, is the perspective of the country’s racial
and ethnic minorities. As a result, it is unclear whether minority citizens
continue to hold the Court in high regard and what impact, if any, the Court’s
decisions have on that support.

To explore the dynamics of support for the Supreme Court among minority
citizens, the project will employ a combination of survey research and elite
interviews. A nationally-representative survey of Americans will provide
insights into the state of public support for the Supreme Court, with an
oversampling of African-American, Hispanic, and Native American respondents
allowing for detailed analyses of the Court’s standing among minority citizens.
To understand the effect of a significant Court decision on minority citizens’
views of the Court, the project will further focus on the attitudes of Native
Americans. To do so, the project will leverage the Court’s anticipated 2023
ruling in a high-profile case in two ways. First, Native American survey
respondents will be re-contacted after the Court’s decision with a second wave
of the survey, thereby providing an opportunity to evaluate the impact of the
ruling on the Court’s support among those most directly affected by the
decision. Second, interviews with leaders of Native American tribes both before
and after the Court’s decision will grant insights into the ruling’s impact on
the views of minority communities’ political leaders. The findings from this
research will yield important insights into the Supreme Court’s relationship
with minorities at this critical juncture in American politics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.