* 2315456
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Breaking the Bubble - The Determinants and Effects of Contact
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Muriel Niederle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 25,000.00

The disconnect between political groups has grown rapidly in the last decades,
in the United States and in other democracies. The mistrust between people
holding different political views increasingly affects the selection of one’s
friends, partners, and workplace. These trends, which appear to be closely
linked to social segregation across party lines may pose a threat to the
functioning of democratic institutions. Existing research suggests that
individuals with different political opinions rarely interact. This lack of
contact between distinct groups of partisans may lead to inaccurate stereotypes
about individuals whose views differ from our own; and people may increasingly
think of the political party they support as their social group. This project
aims to answer two research questions: under which circumstances does exposure
to political opponents lead to durable reductions in partisan mistrust? Which
factors determine partisans’ interest to get in contact with individuals holding
different views? To answer these questions, this project draws on several large-
scale field experiments that facilitate conversations between supporters of
opposing parties. The findings from this study will also inform interventions
aimed at reducing discrimination between social groups.

The research team conducts a series of field experiments to examine the causal
effect of contact between political opponents. In the experiments, a randomly
selected treatment group of participants is matched for up to two-hour long
online conversations. The causal effect of conversations and its persistence is
estimated using a series of surveys administered over the course of six months
after the intervention. The surveys include incentivized measures of political
attitudes, partisan labor-market discrimination, and other relevant metrics. The
research team examines the mechanisms that account for the causal effects of
contact by randomizing participants into several treatments that vary features
of the intervention, such as attributes of the assigned partner, the goal of the
interaction, and nudges to guide conversation topics. This project thereby sheds
light on the underpinnings of the link between contact and partisan mistrust and
paves the way for a better design of future interventions aimed at reducing
partisan mistrust. Finally, the research team elicits subjects’ willingness to
engage in contact under various treatment conditions using incentive-compatible
methods. This project will thereby inform future interventions by pinning down
the factors driving people’s interest in making contact with individuals holding
views different from their own.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.