* 2315824
* I-Corps: See-through Technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Sean Wu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to control noise pollution by visualizing sound and
sound sources wherever they may be. There is a direct link between high-dose
noise exposure to the high stresses, high blood pressures, speech interferences,
hearing losses, sleep disruptions, etc. Noise mitigation and control are
mandatory requirements at all levels of governments and industries. The proposed
technology will play a key role in tackling various noise issues at sources,
which is the most cost-effective approach. It is applicable to all industries
ranging from transportation such as cars, trucks, motorcycles, trains,
aircrafts, etc. to household appliances such as vacuum cleaners, dishwashers,
washing machines, etc. where noise is of a primary concern, and it can
supplement artificial intelligence and enhance the visual and hearing senses of
robots to mitigate noise issues.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology to determine the
root causes of noise and vibrations of complex machines. The proposed may
fundamentally change the notions of holography, optical holography, acoustic
holography, near-field acoustic holography, photo-acoustic holography, etc.,
which limit holography to be done in a homogeneous and uniform medium; and it
enables one to visualize a 3D acoustic field without bounds because
visualization of the sound field may be done across different elastic media.
Together with other proprietary algorithms, it is possible for engineers to see
all vibroacoustic quantities, including the acoustic pressure, the acoustic
intensity, the operational deflection shapes of a vibrating structure at any
frequency, visualize the excitation forces acting behind and inside solid
enclosures, establish the interrelationship between sound radiation and
structural vibration, and mitigate noise and vibration issues in the most cost-
effective manner. Using these innovative technologies, engineers will be able to
conduct the targeted noise control to reduce noise emission without adding
masses to complex machines, thus lowering the fuel consumption and overall
costs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.