* 2315348
* Focusing on Science Practices: Assessing Levels of Student Performance
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Renee Cole, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 299,636.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping undergraduate
chemistry students become more proficient in science practices and skills. For
students to move from being introduced to a particular science practice to
demonstrating proficiency with the skill, each practice needs to be experienced
multiple times with varying levels of complexity. While the importance of
engaging students in science practices is well documented, mechanisms for
instructors to assess these practices and to provide regular feedback to
students are not. This project is designed to enhance current efforts to
increase student engagement and development of scientific practices. In addition
to knowledge about how undergraduate chemistry students engage in science
practices while completing course tasks and areas where additional curriculum
development is needed, the project team will develop resources that instructors
can use as a foundation for developing task specific grading rubrics and that
can be shared with students to provide guidance as to expectations for engaging
in science practices.

This project will (1) characterize student behaviors and products when
completing tasks designed to elicit evidence of science practices, and (2)
generate assessment resources that can be used by instructors to document levels
of performance and provide actionable feedback to students. It is important that
assessment and associated feedback provided to students focus on improving
performance, be understandable, and be clearly linked to the desired learning
outcomes. This project will employ a qualitative study design to characterize
the ways in which students engage in science practices and an evidence-centered
design process to create instructor resources. Evidence of student engagement in
scientific practices will come from observations of students working in the
laboratory and student work, such as laboratory reports, quizzes, examinations,
and presentations. Information will be collected from course instructors
regarding their expectations of the ways in which students will engage in
science practices for the different experiments as well as any materials
provided to students to support or assess their engagement in science practices.
To investigate the development of science practice skills across the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum, data will be collected in introductory,
organic, and upper-level chemistry laboratory courses. The utility of the
instructor resources for developing task specific grading rubrics will be
established through interviews and piloting with chemistry instructors in
courses across the curriculum. As professional organizations increase their
expectations for the development and assessment of science practices, the
results of this work have the potential to assist instructors in their adoption
and ongoing modification of instructional approaches that are explicitly
designed to help students develop these key skills. Characterizing the ways in
which students engage in science practices during course-related tasks and
developing resources to aid chemistry instructors in their assessment is
expected to contribute to increasing the emphasis of these skills and enhancing
achievement in chemistry programs. Project findings will be relevant to many
different audiences involved in chemistry education and have the potential to
impact hundreds of faculty members and thousands of students. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.