* 2315437
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Pre-Service Teachers Mathematical Discourse through Co-Design of Teaching Simulation Tools
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* James Bywater, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 149,983.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, implementing,
and evaluating simulations that will improve evidence-based mathematics teaching
practices. The project will create a suite of open-source, freely available
simulations that support teachers to foster rich mathematical discourse in their
classrooms. While doing so, it will advance knowledge of how to design
simulation tools for teacher learning and will articulate design principles for
creating technologies for teacher preparation programs. The project will also
create open data sets of the mathematical dialogue and professional development
materials so that other teacher educators can develop their own customized
scenarios.

The project leverages the web-based AI-based Classroom Teaching Simulation
(ACTS) Core system that enables teacher candidates to rehearse engaging with a
student about a specific mathematical task while interacting with a dynamic
mathematical visualization and then provides automated tailored feedback on
teacher performance. Simulations will be co-designed with mathematics methods
instructors and implemented within pre-service elementary mathematics methods
courses. The goal is to provide automated feedback to pre-service teacher
candidates on the types of mathematical questions they ask and evaluate the
impact on pre-service teacher candidates’ use of productive mathematical
questioning during simulation settings. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program contributed to the
funding of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.