* 2315869
* Collaborative Research: Weaving Together Supports for the Academic Success and Racial Identity Development of  Low Income and First Generation AA&amp;NHPI Students
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Federick Ngo, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 211,470.00

Low-income first-generation Asian American and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
(AA&NHPI) college students are concentrated in the nation’s Asian American and
Native American Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions (AANAPISI), but there is
little research examining how these institutions design and implement services
and support to “serve” their students. This project is a research-practice
partnership (RPP) composed of higher education practitioners, faculty, and
academic researchers in the fields of higher education and learning sciences
designed to generate knowledge about how AANAPISIs enact “servingness.” The
three lines of inquiry include 1) investigating how practitioners define and
enact supports for students (i.e., servingness); 2) understanding how students
experience servingness and how this relates to their academic and psychosocial
outcomes, including racial identity development; and 3) an analysis of the
impact of a tutoring program on multilingual college students’ outcomes.

Through a multiple methods design, our RPP works collaboratively to design,
implement, measure, and assess the efficacy of AANAPISI program’s educational
interventions on academic outcomes and racial identity development among
students. The project also examines how the development of the AANAPISI program
and its stakeholders’ sociocultural cognition supports AA&NHPI students’
academic and racial identity development. While servingness has been
conceptualized as institutional structures and processes that comprehensively
attend to both students’ academic success and positive racial identity
development, there are few studies that have taken developmental perspectives to
examine how institutions learn to design and implement practices that respond to
these goals. By viewing cognition and learning at the institutional-programmatic
level, and facilitating such learning through a RPP, this study examines how
institutions learn to become AANAPISIs and serve their students. Furthermore,
the study is one of few that connects locally designed, culturally-relevant
educational practices to measurable academic and positive racial identity
outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.