* 2315937
* Institutional Transformation: Anticipating Undesirable Consequences of Computer Science Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Katharina Reinecke, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2028
* USD 700,000.00

Computer Science research has greatly contributed to technological progress, but
it has also led to developments that have had unintended and sometimes harmful
effects on society. For the researchers designing computing innovations,
anticipating undesirable consequences of those innovations can be difficult due
to a lack of knowledge and support for how to investigate such consequences.
Thus, the aim of this research project is to enable computer science researchers
to identify and assess the potential undesirable consequences of their
innovations. The project will develop and evaluate a new approach to
anticipating undesirable consequences of digital technology. The approach will
help computing science researchers better understand the processes and resources
for examining the ethical dimensions of their work. The project has the
potential to transform how computing programs and other academic departments
integrate ethics into their curriculum. The research team aims to develop and
test the effectiveness of interventions that incentivize anticipating
undesirable consequences of computer science research projects as early as
possible, when pivoting a project’s approach is still feasible. Specifically,
the team will design a web-based system that enables computer science
researchers to: (a) access and contribute case studies of negative societal
impacts of computing research projects and lessons learned, (b) brainstorm about
undesirable consequences of computing projects and preregister the outcome of
the brainstorming activity including potential mitigation strategies, (c)
involve other researchers in the brainstorming and review of the ethics
preregistration, and (d) have access to an ethics advisory board of individuals
with a broad range of scholarly backgrounds. A key component of the team’s
approach is that ethics preregistrations will be reviewed by other research
groups, which fosters knowledge sharing and collaboration among the groups.

This project is funded by the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering and managed by the ER2 Program of the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.