* 2315747
* Building a Calculus Active Learning Environment Equally Beneficial Across a Diverse Student Population
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2026
* Melinda Lanius, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 12/31/2026
* USD 399,680.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
active learning in a calculus course at Auburn University, a large public
research-intensive university located in Alabama, an Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) state. Inspired by the Merit Program for
Emerging Scholars from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, this
project plans to establish Merit recitation sections at Auburn University. In
this type of recitation, students have extended class time to work
collaboratively in groups on challenging tasks with a highly-trained
facilitator. Recent studies have revealed that in some implementations of active
learning, students from historically disenfranchised groups do not benefit to
the same extent as other groups. This project plans to investigate this
important issue, aiming to establish instructional best practices to enhance
academic outcomes and encourage STEM persistence, with a specific focus on
tapping the full spectrum of diverse talent at the institution. A significant
aspect of this project will incorporate the use of fitness trackers in education
research to inform structural and curricular changes that will enhance student
learning in calculus.

The project’s goals are to build an evidence-based calculus active learning
program and determine stressors during the initial program implementation. The
project intends to develop strategies and interventions, as well as restructure
the active learning environment, to remove unintentional, ungrounded pedagogical
stressors from the learning environment. Further, the project plans to develop
supports to minimize students’ psychological distress during intentionally-
placed instructional stressors. The project team will measure students’ heart
rate variability with a fitness tracker to identify when students might be
experiencing distress during active learning. The program will be refined using
insights gained from students’ heart rate data, self-reported levels of stress,
and academic outcomes. In addition, the project's scope includes contributing to
the burgeoning field of in situ research in educational settings by helping to
establish robust and valid methods for classroom sensor data collection. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.