* 2315879
* BPC-DP: A Spatial Approach to Reduce Inequities in Early Access to CS Education
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Armin Mikler, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2025
* USD 298,450.00

Lack of exposure to computer science is one of the major reasons cited by
teachers behind the underrepresentation of women and students of color in
computing fields. This suggests that educators observe interest among all
student types and that broadening exposure and access might help drive greater
involvement in computing from underrepresented populations. Through this
broadening participation in computing demonstration project, researchers at
Georgia State University aim to examine a multitude of factors, such as
inequitable allocation of resources, that can lead to schools and districts with
unequal opportunities to engage students in computing. The multidisciplinary
project team will develop a method to identify areas in Georgia school districts
that are at a higher risk for lack of exposure to CS education. Government
entities, non-profits, and industry can then leverage this platform to place
limited resources where they are most needed and can have the greatest impact.

This project develops 1) a Co-SEA (Computer Science Education Access) Risk Index
to quantify the need for exposure to computing education; 2) a new methodology
to identify spatial regions, called RICS (Racially Inequitable Computer Science)
Deserts, that are at risk for lack of access to CS education; and 3) a
customizable computational framework for decision-makers to determine placement
of resources and interventions within given constraints. This novel
interdisciplinary approach considers structural factors that collectively limit
access to CS education by integrating multi-source data for the region of
interest. The project team at Georgia State University take a holistic approach
by considering demographic, socio-economic, civil rights, transportation, and
school enrollment data to develop the concept of RICS Deserts and provide a
means for planners to determine where to place their interventions. The
methodology will incorporate sensitivity analysis to evaluate potential biases
introduced by spatial uncertainty. The computational framework developed will be
scalable for application to any area of interest, whether that be at the
community, county, state, regional or national level.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.