* 2315883
* BPC-DP: Embedding Representation, Relevance, and Equity in a Personalized System of Instruction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Richert Wang, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,912.00

This broadening participation in computing demonstration project is a
collaboration between California State University, Chico and University of
California, Santa Barbara. Situated across the two Hispanic-Serving
Institutions, the project team will focus on improving representation,
relevance, and equity in computer science by framing high school instructional
practices from the perspectives of women and Hispanic students. The project will
develop instructional videos that feature university students from marginalized
backgrounds sharing how coding concepts relate to their lived experiences. At
the same time, the project team will embed culturally-relevant instructional
practices into the AP Computer Science classes by partnering with a high school
serving a majority Hispanic student population. The same practices will
simultaneously be incorporated into Chico Stateâ€™s teacher professional
development course to equip future AP CSA teachers with pedagogy and strategies
to increase inclusivity and equity in their classrooms.

This broadening participation in computing demonstration project will develop
and integrate a personalized system of instruction based on culturally
responsive pedagogy, competency-based learning, and multimedia principles of
learning to facilitate diversity, equity, and inclusion in AP CSA courses. The
project objectives include: providing a platform to exhibit diverse
representation and unique perspectives of computing, facilitating an equitable
learning framework in K-12 computing education, and improving self- efficacy and
inclusion in computing. These unique perspectives will be showcased on an online
platform that provides inclusive examples of coding applications with integrated
drill-and-practice. The platform will showcase how coding is meaningful in
culturally relevant contexts. Its hands-on practice interface will provide
automated feedback that will help high school students identify and overcome
errors as they grow in their coding mastery, as modeled by their near-peers. As
a personalized system of instruction, it will track each student's progress and
empower teachers to provide equitable assistance for students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.