* 2315502
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of the hyoid, pharynx and swallowing biomechanics in mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Susan Williams, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2026
* USD 440,379.00

All mammals, including humans, have a bone at the base of the tongue called the
hyoid bone. The hyoid bones vary in shape, size and position relative to the
skull, jaws, and the muscles of the throat, but we do not know why the hyoid
bones show such wide variation, how it evolved, what it means for normal
swallowing function in humans, for medical disorders involving difficulty
swallowing, and for swallowing function in domesticated animals (including pets
and farm animals). This research will use innovative imaging and computational
methods to measure the variation in hyoid and throat anatomy in mammals, as well
as to study how the hyoid moves during swallowing. The research will create
novel databases of three-dimensional static hyoid anatomy and of hyoid and
tongue movements during chewing and swallowing in several species of mammals.
The work will accelerate research into swallowing disorders in humans, their
pets and in farm animals. It will provide opportunities for research experiences
for undergraduate and graduate students traditionally under-represented in STEM
fields. It will also engage in public science education and outreach, through
museums and online platforms, to underserved urban and rural communities in
Chicago and Ohio.

The hyoid apparatus of mammals varies in shape, position, and the degree to
which its connection to the cranium is composed of bones and ligaments. However,
the evolutionary and functional significance of this variation is unknown
because we lack basic information on the full range of variation in hyoid and
pharynx morphology among mammals, and its relationship to variation in hyoid
function during feeding. Hyoid movement is thought to play an important role in
swallowing, but whether mammals with different hyoid anatomy employ the same or
different swallowing mechanisms remains to be established. The proposed research
aims to (1) document the full range of hyoid chain variation in the mammal
clades Euarchontoglires and Laurasiatheria, (2) quantify relationships between
hyoid chain anatomy and anatomy of the soft tissues of the tongue and pharynx
(throat) in species with diverse hyoid chain morphologies, and (3) determine
whether interspecific variation in hyoid, lingual and pharyngeal anatomy is
associated with significant differences in hyolingual biomechanics during
swallowing. Aims (1) and (2) will be addressed using micro-computed tomography
(CT) and diffusible-iodine contrast enhanced CT of the skulls, hyoids and
pharynges of representative species of our focal clades that show the full range
of hyoid anatomy. Aim (3) will be addressed using the XROMM (X-Ray
Reconstruction of Moving Morphology) workflow to collect high-resolution 3D
musculo-skeletal kinematics of hyolingual function in three species of
Euarchontoglires and three species of Laurasiatheria.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.