* 2315905
* Collaborative Research: Navigating change in intergenerational family relationships: Cohort, age, and family role, and social marginalization
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* K Scherrer, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 274,899.00

Understanding how families navigate differences in attitudes about controversial
social and political issues is increasingly important in contemporary society.
This project examines how contentious social issues emerge and create conflict
in family life, as well as identifies family members’ strategies for addressing
these issues. This project uses a case study approach to understand these
issues, by focusing on how families with a socially marginalized family member
navigate family relationships with family members from different generations.
Findings from this research promote understanding about how broader cultural
issues shape intergenerational family relationships. Findings also suggest
potential interventions to facilitate intergenerational dialogue and promote
social support within families.

This research project examines how age, generational context, and family role
(e.g., grandparent, parent, grandchild) shape how family members interact with
one another and address conflict. This project involves collecting qualitative
interviews with 90 people in 30 family systems, where each of the three family
members are from different family roles and generational contexts. Data
collected provide insight about how multiple family members from the same family
system understand and address conflict. Supplementary activities are aimed to
enhance research capacity at the MSI institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.