* 2315809
* Identifying and Understanding the Social and Policy Determinants of Obstetric-Care, Maternal Mortality, and Morbidity
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kathryn Anderson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 340,109.00

Maternal mortality (defined as death during pregnancy or within 1 year of giving
birth) and maternal morbidity (any health condition linked to pregnancy or birth
that causes negative consequences) occur at alarming rates in the United States.
In fact, the U.S. has the highest rates of maternal mortality and morbidity of
all industrialized countries. Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) who
give birth in the U.S. die nearly three times as often as White women. Research
also shows vast, nationwide racial disparities in the access to and use of care
by these groups. The research on this topic generally is done in many
disconnected fields of study, which delays progress toward solutions. This
project addresses limitations in past research by using an innovative, multi-
disciplinary, comprehensive approach to understanding how individual factors
like socioeconomic status, community-level factors like racism, and health
behavior factors like substance use and obesity can interact to increase the
risk of complications during pregnancy and birth. By using a nationally
representative data set, researchers identify how inequality factors can predict
the risk of negative maternal health outcomes and care use. Using the findings
from a vast dataset assists in shaping the interviews with 100 mothers. The
mothers interviewed have lived experience and a variety of risk factors found in
the dataset. The high rates of maternal mortality and morbidity in a nation that
spends over $4 trillion on healthcare are problematic and require both a
statistical and a lived-experience approach to develop solutions for providers,
families, and policymakers.

This project uses a mixed methods approach to analyze maternal health outcomes
across the U.S. First, researchers conduct a statistical analysis of maternal
mortality using data from the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), and
of maternal morbidity and obstetric risk using data from the Pregnancy Risk
Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS). Those findings can assist in informing
participant interviews with 100 women from a Texas, which has the country’s
highest uninsured rates and a complicated history with Medicaid expansion. These
contextual factors and the state’s extensive racial and ethnic diversity make it
a natural laboratory for research into the maternal experiences of pregnancy and
health. Interviews focus on eliciting the experiences and behaviors of people
who give birth in order to understand their access to and utilization of health-
promoting resources and their exposure to social, environmental, and economic
risk factors prior to and after the prenatal period. These interviews provide
information on how health risks are internalized and relate to pregnant and
postpartum people's perceptions of their health status, as well as about their
health behavior and medical care utilization. Likewise, interviews investigate
trust in the care system, as there are stories of women not coming to obstetric
care or to the hospital due to distrust. The mixed-method approach provides a
more comprehensive understanding of maternal risks and how people who give birth
make sense of, experience, and try to manage those risks. Much of the existing
quantitative research in this area examines policies and solutions, without
understanding how people who give birth make sense of their risks and how people
may or may not mitigate the impact of policy. The research team utilizes a
broader understanding of maternal risk to track how these factors affect
maternal health during pregnancy and delivery and up to a year after birth. This
interdisciplinary research team comes from diverse scientific backgrounds with
direct contact with community organizations, enabling them to bring this
research to the public to produce actionable change on these issues. This
project has potential to help improve maternal health policy and practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.