* 2315489
* Collaborative Research: Building A Cybersecurity Mindset Through Continuous Cross-module Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Jiawei Yuan, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a strong
cybersecurity workforce. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics projects that the
growth rate of employment in cybersecurity will be 35% from 2021 to 2031, a rate
that exceeds the average growth rate of all jobs at 5%. Meeting the demand for
qualified cybersecurity professionals requires teaching both technical
cybersecurity skills and developing a cybersecurity mindset. This project will
develop cybersecurity modules using the threat-driven approach resulting in a
transferable laboratory framework with hands-on cybersecurity exercises. The
framework will utilize the "build it, break it, and fix it” concept where
students build applications based on non-cybersecurity course content, then
break the applications by discovering and exploiting vulnerabilities, and then
fixing the applications using appropriate cybersecurity practices.

The goal of this project is to enable effective cross-module learning that
promotes cybersecurity education for computer science students and helps them
build a cybersecurity mindset. The project intends to investigate effective
learning paths for cybersecurity cross-module learning by 1) identifying
appropriate non-cybersecurity computer science courses in which cybersecurity
modules can be integrated, 2) designing multi-level integration strategies, and
3) exploring potential linkages among different courses and modules. This
project plans to develop cybersecurity modules with curriculum materials using
the threat-driven approach to support cross-module learning. This project also
intends to tailor and transform learning modules and tools to support K-12
outreach via webinars, summer camps, and online repositories. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. This project is also supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program,
which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education,
and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students
pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.