* 2315921
* Impact of Enhanced Healthcare on Labor Market Participation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Luisa Blanco Raynal, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 553,930.00

Chronic health conditions, such as diabetes, result in lower workforce
participation, which in turn can affect access to health care and health
insurance. Additionally, the rate of uninsured and underinsured residents in
some regions is also significantly higher than in others. This study
investigates the impact of enhanced diabetes care for uninsured residents on
workforce participation and economic outcomes as well as overall health
outcomes. This study provides critical insights into the impact of chronic
illnesses, such as diabetes, on labor market outcomes and on strategies for
improving diabetes care management.

Researchers partners with community stakeholders to provide enhanced diabetes
care to uninsured individuals through a lottery selection as part of a
randomized control trial (RCT). Individuals selected receive additional diabetes
education, diabetic supplies, and care to help control diabetes and will be
followed for a year to track outcomes. Relevant health outcomes such as diabetic
maintenance, amputations, morbidity, and mortality are measured in addition to
economic indicators. This study addresses questions regarding healthcare
utilization, workforce participation, diabetes management, and other health and
economic outcomes. Ultimately, these results help to inform future programs and
allocation of public health funds in relation to diabetes care, education, and
healthcare resources to improve economic outcomes among underserved communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.