* 2315246
* Empowering Preservice Science Teachers and Science Educators via Phenomenon-based Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alma Rodriguez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing, implementing, and
evaluating the effectiveness of phenomenon-based science instruction on
preservice science teachers’ understanding of science and nature of science.
Since the phenomenon-based learning (PhBL) approach grounds learning in real-
world issues or phenomena of an interdisciplinary nature and centers on the
learners, inquiry, and problem solving, the project hopes that focusing on the
pedagogical aspects of PhBL will prepare participants for teaching science via
this method. As such, this project anticipates that the PhBL experience will
enhance preservice teachers’ performance on pedagogy and content teacher
certification exams and ultimately support their future science teaching.
Building upon several fundamental meta syntheses on best practices for teaching
science and nature of science to Latinx students, the research team will design
robust phenomenon-based activities as a base for creating and implementing PhBL
workshops for prospective teachers, science faculty members, and science
educators. In addition, science faculty members and science educators will
participate in additional workshops and a webinar to learn about PhBL approach
and reflect on the designed activities. The unique geographical location of the
project implementation will increase the likelihood of positively advancing the
science and nature of science knowledge of hundreds of students and teachers
from historically disenfranchised groups and of contributing to the
participation of the full spectrum of diverse talent in the area. This project
falls under the IUSE Track 1: Engaged Student Learning, Level 1.

This project’s goals center on strengthening preservice science teachers’
science content knowledge and nature of science knowledge, enhancing science
teachers’, science educators’, and science faculty’s science pedagogical
knowledge, and influencing the persistence of preservice science teachers in
their program of study and their mastery of pedagogy and science content exams
for teacher certification. The project responds to the call from the Next
Generation Science Standards regarding the significance of preparing materials
and training teachers in anchoring student learning in phenomena to learn,
apply, and build science. By using PhBL, this project embraces the critical need
for preparing science teachers who possess both science and nature of science
knowledge while also being proficient in research-based instructional methods
aligned with standards. First, the project will develop ten PhBL activities and
an accompanying lesson guide for instructors. The development of the guide aims
especially to support science teachers implementing PhBL who lack sufficient
experience with these types of instructional materials. Second, the project will
hold five 16-hour workshops for providing professional development for 125
preservice teachers to learn about PhBL and how to implement it. In addition,
science faculty members and science educators will also participate in this
professional development as well as two additional workshops focused on the
pedagogical aspects of this teaching strategy. Third, this project will use
qualitative methods to investigate the influence of the professional development
on preservice science teachers’ understanding of science and the nature of
science as well as their capacity for designing a PhBL lesson plan. The project
aims to facilitate the use of PhBL as a research-based active learning pedagogy
that increases undergraduate students’ knowledge of science and nature of
science and contributes to their persistence in degree attainment and
completion, especially for those planning to be science teachers. Due to
population demographics in the local area of implementation, research outcomes
should advance the field of science learning and teaching in diverse settings.
The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program has contributed funding to this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.