* 2315698
* Collaborative Research: New to IUSE: EDU DCL:Diversifying Economics Education through Plug and Play Video Modules with Diverse Role Models, Relevant Research, and Active Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Sarah Jacobson, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 12/31/2025
* USD 34,700.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving economics
education in undergraduate programs. Introductory economics courses (taken by a
significant number of undergraduate students) often fall short of their
potential due to outdated teaching methods, classroom practices that are not
inclusive, and a paucity of diverse role models. In comparison to other STEM
fields that have made strides in developing and adopting innovative teaching
approaches that welcome diverse perspectives, economics has lagged behind.
Consequently, the ability of economics to contribute to solving societal
problems is compromised. The lack of diversity not only affects the topics
studied but also limits the exchange of diverse ideas in the classroom,
hindering broader societal progress. This project seeks to address these issues
by developing and evaluating a classroom intervention using evidence-based
methods from STEM education literature, with the goal of broadening perceptions
of economics, enhancing student sense of belonging, and increasing diversity and
retention in the field. The proposed intervention consists of a series of
modules instructors can easily plug into introductory economics courses designed
to expose students to diverse role models and a range of exciting and relevant
topics through professionally produced videos. Accompanying curricular
materials, grounded in evidence-based active learning principles, will deepen
student engagement and learning. The project hypothesizes that this intervention
will positively influence students' perceptions about economics, strengthen
their sense of belonging in economics and their belief in their own abilities,
and improve learning, persistence, and retention, particularly among diverse
students. The modules will also provide professional development opportunities
for economics instructors, enabling them to implement best practices in their
classrooms. By bringing together these evidence-based approaches and delivering
them to the introductory economics classroom, this Tier 1 project aligns with
the IUSE: EDU Program's Engaged Student Learning track, aiming to improve
economics education, engage students through innovative and inclusive practices,
enhance diversity, and prepare students with a comprehensive understanding of
economic principles and their applications. The project also furthers the NSF
mission by expanding knowledge on STEM education and increasing the capacity of
the US to conduct research in economics, a crucial STEM field, by contributing
to a more vibrant and diverse economics workforce.

This project uses a mixed methods research approach by incorporating focus group
input into the development of the project modules and quantitative and
qualitative methods for impact evaluation. The project team plans to deploy the
modules in classes at varied types of institutions in collaboration with
instructors. Each instructor will have a “control” semester in which they do not
use the modules and a “treatment” semester in which they conduct the pre- and
post-surveys that will be used to collect data on constructs such as STEM
identity, self-efficacy, connectedness and belonging, and perceptions of
persistence in economics. Combining that data with institutional data, the
project team will perform difference-in-differences regressions to analyze
project impacts. The intellectual merit of this project lies in leveraging the
existing evidence about active learning and role models to create a novel set of
modules, combining diverse role models, policy relevance, and active learning
techniques to shape diverse students' perceptions, identity, and persistence.
The modules are designed to be adaptable to a wide range of institutions,
facilitating their easy integration into introductory economics classrooms. The
broader goals of this project start in the classroom but extend beyond it,
aiming to create a profession that welcomes economists from all backgrounds to
address society's challenges. The modules this project creates should positively
influence students' experiences in economics education, diversify the pipeline
of economics students, provide professional development opportunities for
instructors, and broaden the voices and perspectives represented in economics.
The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools and to advance our understanding
of persistence in economics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.