* 2315607
* Reimagining Organic Chemistry Labs in Education Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Leyte Winfield, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,687.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, evaluating, and
disseminating an innovative approach to teaching organic chemistry laboratory
courses at a Historically Black College that is globally known for the education
of women, Spelman College. The new approach will be of broad importance as it is
intended to engage students in authentic research activities and connect
chemistry learning to students’ lived experiences and culture. The novel lab
activities will feature topics of interest to a broad range of students such as
materials, polymers, drug discovery, and computational methods in organic
chemistry research. Additionally, the lab activities are intended to center
equity and foster a sense of belonging, which will be accomplished by engaging
students in career exploration, involving role models from industry, and
intentionally prioritizing relevance through connections to students’ lives and
future goals. The project team plans to measure the impact of the modules on
students’ sense of belonging in chemistry and aims to widely share project
materials and study results. By combining course-based research experiences with
an equity-oriented approach to teaching organic chemistry laboratory courses,
this project will provide the chemistry education community with a compelling
strategy for broadening participation in STEM.

This project aims to develop, implement, and assess an equity-oriented course-
based research experience in organic chemistry laboratory courses as a mechanism
to increase student engagement and sense of belonging. The specific objectives
of the project are to: 1) revise the second-semester organic chemistry
laboratory curriculum by introducing four research-based exploratory modules
covering topics of drug discovery, polymer-cosmetic science, polymer-material
science, and a kinetic/mechanistic oxidation study that are each accompanied by
computational and spectroscopy components, 2) evaluate proposed modules by
assessing students’ engagement, sense of belonging for women of color in STEM,
and perceptions of learning in the laboratory, and 3) assess success of course
revisions based on faculty observations during module implementation. Each
module will consist of an innovative curricular approach to organic chemistry
labs by including an experimental study followed by a computational activity to
aid in analyzing experimental data and integrating real-world challenges. The
modules will also be designed to provide opportunities for students to engage in
career exploration, connect with role models from industry, and make connections
between chemistry and their everyday lives. The impact of the curriculum will be
assessed in multiple ways including published tools that have evidence of
validity for measuring constructs such as belonging and self-efficacy. The
results of the project will be disseminated broadly via workshops, peer-reviewed
publications, and conference presentations at the regional and national levels.
By providing an inclusive approach to organic chemistry lab at an all women
Historically Black College, this project has the potential to provide a model
for how to increase student engagement and foster a sense of belonging in
chemistry, and may in turn, be beneficial for other student populations that
have been marginalized in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.