* 2315777
* Empowering engineering students to become more effective and self-regulated learners: A course-integrated intervention to promote the transfer of learning skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Alex Phan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,953.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping transform
engineering students into effective learners through the seamless integration of
learning skills training into their courses. Effective learning skills are vital
in both students’ academic and professional journeys, and they form the
foundation for lifelong learning and successful career trajectories in the ever-
evolving world of technology. Currently, most engineering curricula are
primarily focused on teaching students the technical content, the “what” they
need to know. This project intends to improve “how” students learn, to have them
adopt effective strategies that support the higher-level reasoning required in
engineering. To reach this goal and achieve strong transfer outcomes, this
project will develop innovative pedagogical approaches to actively train
engineering students as effective and self-regulated learners.

The primary goal of this project is to develop and implement learning skill
training that is directly integrated into engineering courses, making it an
integral part of every student's core educational experience. This course-
integrated intervention will be built upon evidence-based practices in
engineering pedagogy, cognitive psychology, and teaching and learning
interventions. Drawing upon a cognitive science framework of self-regulated
learning, it will incorporate evidence-based cognitive learning strategies,
meta-cognitive learning strategies, and the cultivation of a growth mindset.
Based on this framework, the project will develop, implement, and evaluate
learning skill elements that seamlessly integrate into various components of
existing courses, including theory, assignments, assessments, and instructional
support. Special attention will be given to addressing the needs of students
with lower academic performance, underrepresented and underserved groups, and
first-generation students, aiming to make a meaningful impact on their
educational experiences. Validation of the project's effectiveness will be
carried out through its implementation in foundational engineering courses, with
the impact assessed by measuring student learning achievements, attitudes, and
habits. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.