* 2315629
* Constraints, Rigidity, and Risk in Global Supply Chains
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Diego Comin, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 513,809.00

Recent major shocks (e.g., US-China tariff increases and the COVID-19 pandemic)
have reverberated through global supply chains. As a result, there is growing
concern that dependence on foreign inputs exposes firms, and the macro-economy
more broadly, to heightened risks. For example, supply chain disruptions have
been widely blamed for the resurgence of inflation. Moreover, recent policy
reforms have encouraged reshoring of manufacturing production. This project
examines how key microeconomic features of input sourcing, including capacity
constraints, sunk investments, and decision making under uncertainty, give rise
to macroeconomic risks. The findings will enable policymakers to evaluate supply
chain risks more accurately and design policies to manage those risks.

In the first part of the project, the researchers will study how occasionally
binding capacity constraints in the supply chain, and shocks to them, shape
inflation. When domestic or foreign firms exhaust their capacity, they have an
incentive to raise their price, by increasing the markup over marginal cost. In
the aggregate, binding constraints shift domestic and import price Phillips
Curves, like cost-push shocks in reduced form, and thus fuel inflation. Building
this idea into a modern multisector, open economy, New Keynesian model, the
project applies the framework to interpret recent US data and study optimal
monetary policy responses to supply chain disruptions. In the second part of the
project, the researchers investigate how firms invest in their supply chain
capacity, and how those investments matter for the propagation of macroeconomic
shocks. The project develops a framework in which firms undertake irreversible
(sunk) investments to source inputs, which lock buyers into particular suppliers
in the short run, who have limited supply capacity and are subject to shocks. It
then explores how risk averse buyers invest in a portfolio of suppliers to
manage risk. Further, it examines how those investments affect the propagation
of shocks, and whether trade and industrial policies may correct inefficiencies
in risk taking to mitigate aggregate volatility. The novelty of these projects
lies in their synthesis of micro- and macro-perspectives on supply chain risks,
as needed for policy analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.