* 2315401
* Collaborative Research: The Design and Refinement of Modules for Raising Critical Consciousness in Undergraduate Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Robin Anderson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2025
* USD 198,227.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing modules intended
to better prepare prospective grade 6-12 mathematics teachers to teach in
increasingly diverse classrooms while advancing prospective teachers’ own STEM
learning. This project is significant because research indicates that although
student populations in U.S. schools are continuing to increase in diversity,
specifically with respect to race, language, and socio-economic status, teachers
are predominantly white and need additional resources to develop rich STEM
learning experiences that impact outcomes for all learners in STEM fields. This
project hopes to advance the knowledge of how best to support prospective
mathematics teachers in developing the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to
teach in diverse settings and contribute to ongoing efforts to increase access
to much needed research-based resources for mathematics teacher educators.
Mathematics teacher educators' use of these resources should advance prospective
mathematics teachers’ own STEM learning which should lead to better mathematics
instruction in classrooms across the country. As a result, more grade 6-12
students, particularly students from underrepresented groups, will develop an
interest in and be prepared to enter STEM fields.

This project will use improvement science methods to design, refine, and study
the impact of a series of modules for use in grade 6-12 mathematics teaching
methods courses that address prospective teachers’ knowledge, skills, and
dispositions for teaching in diverse settings as outlined in Standards for the
Preparation of Teachers of Mathematics. Specifically, the project will address
two goals as follows: Goal 1. Design and refine a series of modules developed
using critical pedagogies to address: a) the political and historical issues in
mathematics education, b) identity, c) critical consciousness, and d) countering
unproductive practices that marginalize learners by using Plan-Do-Study-Act
(PDSA) cycles at three institutions. After the development of each module
(Plan), the modules will be enacted in a staggered schedule at each institution
(Do) so that between each enactment, data can be shared and analyzed (Study) and
revisions can be made (Act). Throughout the design and refinement process
advisory board members with expertise in mathematics teacher education, access,
equity, culture, justice, curriculum development, and improvement science will
provide feedback. The modules will then be shared with mathematics teacher
educators who are part of the Mathematics Teacher Education Partnership (which
includes 65 programs, including 11 under-resourced institutions and/or minority-
serving institutions) for further refinement and subsequently made available to
all mathematics teacher educators. Goal 2. Studying the impact of the modules on
prospective teachers’ knowledge, skills, and dispositions will be guided by two
research questions: RQ1: What impact does participating in the modules have on
pre-service teachers' understanding of countering practices that marginalize
learners in mathematics? RQ2: How does the consciousness of secondary pre-
service teachers shift while engaged in modules on countering beliefs,
attitudes, actions and practices that devalue learners in the context of
teaching and learning of mathematics? The project will collect quantitative data
using content analysis and pre-and post-module data using the Culturally
Responsive Teaching Outcome Expectancy and Self-Efficacy surveys and qualitative
data from prospective teachers assignments and reflections through coding,
thematic analysis, and using Mathematics with|in conocimientos to determine how
the modules influenced prospective teachers’ multicultural mathematics
dispositions, other emergent understandings related to cultural sensitivity, and
how prospective teachers’ experiences with the modules created changes in their
consciousness. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program has contributed funding to this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.