* 2315576
* The Geography of Educational Opportunity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Rivkin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,640.00

This award funds an innovative research into how location affects long-term
outcomes of young adults in the U.S. We do not yet have a clear understanding of
why location has such significant impacts on later-life outcomes. This project
combines several large data sets from a large state to measure how elementary
and secondary school resources affect the acquisition of cognitive and
noncognitive skills measured by school attendance, receipt of disciplinary
infractions or out-of-school suspensions, and test scores. The researchers then
investigate the relationships between school effects on skill development and
future outcomes including labor market engagement, post-secondary schooling, and
contacts with the criminal justice system. This research helps to clarify the
role that schools play in contributing to the link between place of birth and
adult outcomes. Moreover, by identifying those schools that have the most
beneficial impacts on outcomes in adulthood, this research can illuminate
educational practices that appear be highly effective. The results of this
research will inform human capital investment policies at the local, state, and
federal levels, hence increase economic growth, and improve living standards.

To assess whether previously documented correlations between school quality
measures and local intergenerational mobility reflect the causal contributions
of schools to economic and social mobility, this research takes advantage of
unique administrative data on schooling, earnings, and involvement in the
criminal justice system for a large state that spans over twenty years and
permit the researchers to track students from elementary school through
adulthood. The analysis uses several complementary research designs that have
been used in the estimation of teacher, principal, school, and place effects,
including approaches that take advantage of teacher and student movements across
schools. Each methodology addresses distinct potential biases, including the
potentially confounding influences of neighborhood factors or time-varying
family shocks. In combination with extensive placebo testing and sensitivity
analysis, the estimates will provide rigorous new information on the structure
of school effects and their variability across time and place. Moreover,
estimation of the contributions of differences in teacher and principal
effectiveness will paint a rich picture of the channels through which schools
affect economic and social mobility. The research results will inform human
capital investment policies at the local, state, and federal levels, hence
increase economic growth, and improve living standards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.