* 2315706
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Increasing Charitable Donations Using Subsidies: Theory and Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Neslihan Uler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 21,049.00

This research examines how, and to what extent, subsidies for giving can be used
to increase charitable donations. The U.S. government provides subsidies for
giving using the tax code, by making qualifying donations tax-exempt,
effectively providing donors with a rebate equal to their marginal tax rate.
These subsidies lower the price of giving faced by donors. An alternative method
of subsidizing donations is to “match” donors’ contributions. This is the most
common type of subsidy used by charities. Typically, charities coordinate with a
wealthy donor who agrees to match donations to the charity at some predetermined
rate. For example, for every dollar a donor provides to the charity, the wealthy
donor may agree to provide an additional dollar, making the total donation
received by the charity two dollars. Like rebates, matches lower the price of
giving faced by donors. In fact, for any given rebate, there is a corresponding
match rate that produces the same price of giving. If a rebate and a match
produce the same price of giving, they are said to be price equivalent.
Counterintuitively, previous research has found that donors do not respond
equally to price-equivalent rebates and matches. Instead, holding the price of
giving constant, donations are significantly more responsive to matches than
rebates. This implies that restructuring the U.S. tax system to provide match
subsidies rather than rebate subsidies could significantly increase charitable
donations. However, this research presents new evidence suggesting that matches
may not outperform rebates to the extent reported in previous studies,
particularly in the context of taxes. Using novel experiments, the researchers
examine how individuals respond to subsidies for giving and how behavior varies
depending on the characteristics of the fundraiser, providing valuable guidance
to policymakers and charities interested in increasing donations.

This research is separated into two projects. The first project compares rebate-
and match-price elasticities using laboratory experiments. Previous studies
comparing rebates and matches in laboratory settings have used experimental
designs in which price-equivalent rebates and matches produce disparate budget
sets, potentially biasing price-elasticity estimates. In this study the
investigators develop a novel experimental design in which rebates and matches
are presented within a tax framework and the budget sets for price-equivalent
rebates and matches are identical. This experiment resolves the budget set issue
present in previous studies and is directly relevant for tax policy. Additional
experiments are conducted to further examine the underlying mechanisms driving
donors’ responses to subsidies, as well as to provide insights into the extent
to which experimental design affects observed behavior. The second project
investigates, both theoretically and experimentally, how differences in
fundraiser characteristics affect how donors respond to changes in the match
rate. A theoretical model of giving incorporating fundraiser characteristics is
developed, allowing for match-price elasticities to vary across heterogeneous
fundraisers. Two experiments are used to test the theoretical predictions of the
model. The first experiment exogenously changes the probability with which a
donor’s donation is matched. The second experiment indirectly varies the
probability of being matched by exogenously changing characteristics of the
fundraiser.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.