* 2315235
* Building Social Science Data Analytics and Visualization Skills through Cross-Disciplinary Urban Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Derrick Swinton, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,026,319.00

The primary goal of this research is to promote data analyze skills and apply
data analytics to understand current urban issues in local and global
communities. This project addresses the importance of digital literacy, the
democratization of data knowledge, and cross-disciplinary collaborative research
in the production of knowledge that is relevant to the communities served by
public higher education. The project seeks to understand how cross-disciplinary
research strengthens the understanding of the complexity of contemporary living
in cities with an increasing use of digital technologies and platforms that
inform the delivery of resources, services, and goods. This project fosters
cross-disciplinary research by bringing forward discipline-specific skills in
the social sciences and STEM via educational and research activities to develop
data analytics and visualization tools to address socioeconomic, health,
behavioral, social justice, and climate change challenges confronting urban
communities. Thereby increasing the research and experiential capacity of
faculty and students engaged in relevant and robust urban research supported by
data analytics and visualization tools.

The project utilizes a multi-method program evaluation approach to
quantitatively and qualitatively study educational and research activities
supported by the “Center for Data Analytics and Visualization in Urban
Research.” Among the activities supported and evaluated are data analytics and
visualization workshops and curriculum development, and faculty and student
cross-disciplinary research. The research methods include surveys, informal and
formal interview with The Center leadership, advisory board, faculty, and
students to account for the multiple ways in which The Center’s offerings
support digital literacy, knowledge management, and cross-disciplinary urban
research at Kean University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.