* 2315009
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Poverty Graduation and Business Coordination
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Moritz Poll, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 24,985.00

This award will support research that uses field experiments (randomized
controlled trial [RCT]) to understand how multiple overlapping constraints on
the poor or near poor turn into a poverty trap. The research takes advantage of
the roll-out of a large anti-poverty program to conduct this RCT. The research
then investigates the mechanisms through which the widely used and most
successful anti-poverty program---the graduation program---which offers
recipients monthly cash support, training in entrepreneurship, mentorship, and
one-time business startup takes effect. This research focuses on several
outcomes stemming from the intervention. Unlike previous studies on graduation
programs, this research further studies whether encouraging participants to
start several microenterprises at the same time leads to overcrowding, thus
leading to failure of these enterprises. In addition to direct effects of the
treatment, the researchers will also study the spillover effects of the
treatment. The researchers will collect data from program participants at
regular short intervals on several outcomes that allows them to evaluate
outcomes that are difficult to evaluate at the end of the study. The results of
this study will help improve the design and implementation of anti-poverty
programs and help establish the US as a global leader in poverty reduction
policies.

This research project leverages the roll-out of a large anti-poverty program to
use a randomized control trial (RCT) method to study how multiple overlapping
constraints can turn into a poverty trap and study the mechanisms behind the
success of graduation programs for the ultra-poor. In addition to the direct
effects, the researchers will investigate the indirect effects of the
intervention as well as investigate whether encouraging graduates to start
several microenterprises focusing on similar product or services in the same
neighborhoods induces unnecessary competition and thus lead to failure and
whether coordination help entrepreneurs diversity to achieve success. Thes
questions are tested by exogenously changing the level of competition by
randomly varying the number of treated households at the community level. An
important aspect of this research is the high frequency data that will be
collected that allows the researchers to track the dynamics of graduatesâ€™
decision making and success as well test a shock-based model of poverty traps.
The results of this study will help improve the design and implementation of
anti-poverty programs and help establish the US as a global leader in poverty
reduction policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.