* 2315434
* Modules for Statistics Graduate Teaching Assistants Learning to Teach Equitably with Authentic Data
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Sunghwan Byun, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2026
* USD 275,484.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by designing and assessing
resources for statistics graduate teaching assistants (GTAs). An overall goal is
for GTAs to teach equitably with authentic data. Reforming introductory
statistics is becoming increasingly important since statistical thinking plays a
key role in harnessing the data revolution in a wide range of workplaces and in
a variety of disciplines. Despite a call for introductory statistics instruction
that: (1) integrates real data with a context and a purpose, (2) teaches
statistics as an investigative process, and (3) fosters active learning, many
statistics teaching practices are inconsistent with these recommendations.
Instead, statistics courses often focus on procedural skills, which may not lead
to meaningful understanding of the power of statistical modeling and concepts in
authentic contexts. This project will address the urgent need to improve
introductory statistics instruction by designing and implementing a set of
modules for discipline-specific professional development for statistics GTAs.
The significant outcomes of this project could include the development of GTAs
who teach equitably with authentic data, as well as advancement of the current
understanding of teacher learning of GTAs in professional community settings.

Guided by a design and development research approach, the project will: (1)
design a set of four research-informed modules for statistics GTAs learning to
teach equitably with authentic data (LEAD Modules), (2) implement LEAD Modules
with two GTA communities teaching introductory statistics courses at North
Carolina State University and Michigan State University, and (3) further refine
LEAD Modules based on design-based research that examines GTA development and
their communities. LEAD Modules focus on: (a) teaching statistical thinking, (b)
facilitating the model "launch, explore, and discuss," (c) enacting teacher
discourse moves, and (d) promoting participatory equity. By drawing on the
interdisciplinary expertise of the principal investigators, the project infuses
knowledge bases and resources from statistics education and teacher education to
support statistics GTAs' learning to teach equitably with authentic data. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.