* 2315492
* Learning Map Framework to Align Instruction and Improve Student Learning in STEM Course Sequences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Courtney Giles, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2026
* USD 398,750.00

The aim of this project is to improve academic outcomes for undergraduate
engineering students through an instructional design approach that aligns
learning outcomes, assessments, and instructional materials across STEM course
sequences. The project plans to support successful completion of engineering
degrees by increasing students' mastery of prerequisite course topics and
application of fundamental concepts in subsequent engineering courses. This
project will use an instructional design approach called the Learning Map (LMap)
process to accomplish the project goals. The results of this project will
include publicly available instructional materials, a database of concept
inventories for a typical STEM course sequence (Introductory Physics, Statics,
and Dynamics), and course activities to cultivate broader engineering student
interest in STEM concepts and applications. The products of the research will be
disseminated widely by collaborating with the national Concept Warehouse to give
faculty and students access to collections of validated STEM problems and tests.
Meeting the project goals is important for student success and persistence in
undergraduate engineering degree programs, as well as for reducing the need for
remedial coursework which is a known barrier to student persistence in STEM
degrees. If successful, the proposed framework will provide strategies to
improve student learning, degree completion, and workforce preparation, while
contributing to the retention of students in STEM career pathways.

The project intends to address a common issue in undergraduate engineering
education - mismatch between the desired learning outcomes and the learning
assessments in prerequisite course sequences causing reduced learning and
retention of knowledge. The main objectives are to (1) develop an instructional
design framework based on the Learning Map process, (2) create measures to
assess the impacts of the framework on student learning and instructor
experience, (3) pilot the framework in the Introductory Physics - Statics -
Dynamics course sequence at the University of Vermont, and (4) share the revised
framework and study results with the broader STEM education community. The
proposed LMap process is based on the Analysis, Design, Development,
Implementation, Evaluation (ADDIE) and the Backward Design methodologies and
extends them to course sequences by analyzing learning goals for engineering
courses and aligning them with outcomes from prerequisite courses. The research
systematically analyzes the effectiveness of the LMap process by assessing
knowledge transfer across paired course sequences using summative evaluations of
learning with pre- and post-tests. Once validated, the LMap framework can be
applied to other engineering prerequisite courses in mathematics, chemistry, and
computer science. The research project will be evaluated by an external
assessment expert, and the products of the research will be disseminated widely
using the Concept Warehouse. The project team will initiate a network of LMap
practitioners for broadening the improvement of student experiences in STEM
courses required in engineering programs. This project is jointly funded by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.