* 2315741
* Integrating Imaging Physics into Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bethe Scalettar, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 279,966.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing educational
resources on biomedical imaging -- an engaging, interdisciplinary topic -- for
use in a range of STEM courses. This collaborative project involves
investigators at Lewis & Clark College (Award DUE-2315741) and Portland State
University (Award DUE-2315742). Imaging is everywhere. People use their eyes to
see and cameras to take pictures. Scientists use microscopes to peer into cells,
and telescopes to peer out into space. Physicians use ultrasound, X-rays,
radioisotopes, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to look inside human bodies.
This project will generate engaging, interactive tutorials that will help the
next generation of scientists and non-scientists, and the general public, learn
about and master the scientific foundations, diagnostic and therapeutic
applications, and strengths and weaknesses of key medical imaging techniques,
such as ultrasound and MRI. In addition, the tutorials will enhance engagement,
learning, and retention in STEM by illustrating the pivotal role of STEM
concepts in the fascinating and highly relevant fields of medical imaging and
imaging science.

The multidisciplinary team of investigators will develop, test, and disseminate
a cohesive set of interactive, inquiry-driven teaching simulations that cover
medical imaging and its foundations in science. The simulations, together with
background text, assessment questions, and research-directed surveys, will be
organized into four modules, each covering one of four major medical imaging
modalities: ultrasound, radiography (planar and tomographic X-ray-based
imaging), nuclear imaging (planar and tomographic radionuclide-based imaging),
and MRI. To facilitate broad use in undergraduate education, the modules will be
open-source and designed for use in common online learning management systems
(e.g., Moodle, Canvas). The project team's major goals are (1) to develop the
four modules; (2) to integrate them in two different biomedical physics courses
at two institutions, which have different student populations and teaching
environments; (3) to assess the modules' use by and impact on students at the
two institutions; and (4) to disseminate and maintain the interactive
educational modules, assessment materials, instructor resources, and research
results to support relevant teaching communities. As part of the education
research component of the work, the investigators will conduct survey- and
interview-based research to explore how the modules impact (1) the attitudes of
STEM majors about the importance of an interdisciplinary science background and
(2) the interest of STEM majors in science and careers at the boundaries of
traditional disciplines. The NSF IUSE: EDU program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.