* 2315953
* ARTS: A North American monograph of the powdery mildews (Erysiphaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Donald Pfister, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

Of all organisms, fungi are among the least studied in terms of diversity, with
approximately only 10% of existing fungi currently known. This is especially
true for powdery mildews; these are one of the world’s most common and yet least
studied fungal plant pathogens. Powdery mildews are particularly important
because they cause serious damage to economically important agricultural crops,
such as blueberries, hops, peas, strawberries, wheat, and wine grapes. Powdery
mildews are often host specific, but it is unclear which powdery mildew species
are the causal agents of disease on even some of the most important agricultural
crops. Additionally, for non-specialists it is difficult to ascertain which
sequences, identifications, and species names on publicly available databases
are reliable. Accurate identification of plant pathogens is important because
particular species often require different control methods and applications. In
this work, we will develop a publicly available online powdery mildew
identification manual allowing accurate identification for scientists, farmers,
and horticulturalists around the world. This will contribute to practical
applications as well as research in a wide range of disciplines, including plant
pathology, evolutionary biology, mycology, and systematics. By obtaining
additional sequence data for particularly virulent, invasive species, this work
will also contribute to a better understanding of how pathogens invade new
environments. To accomplish this project, we will assemble and train a team of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers. Fungal biology has
historically failed to recruit diverse researchers. With this in mind, we will
highlight diversity and inclusion in our personnel selection process.

Powdery mildews (Erysiphaceae) are ecologically and economically important
unculturable fungal plant pathogens that have been reported to infect over
10,000 flowering plant species worldwide. Powdery mildews are ubiquitous and
speciose with an estimated 906 species. Although they are one of the world’s
most common plant pathogens, little research has been conducted on the many
species of powdery mildews in North America. The only checklist in the United
States was published in 1989 and included ~70 species. In contrast, preliminary
research at 10 botanical gardens across North America revealed ~130 species, ~30
that were previously unknown. Continued exploration in the field, in botanical
gardens and in herbaria will contribute valuable information to the mycological
and plant pathological communities. We propose to identify, sequence and
phylogenetically investigate the diverse array of powdery mildews from
throughout North America. The following objectives will be the focus of the
project: (1) To acquire molecular sequence data to fill existing gaps in the
Erysiphaceae phylogeny, (2) To sequence multiple genomic regions to obtain
higher level taxonomic resolution and resolve common species complexes, which
have so far been unresolved in this fungal group; (3) To write the first
comprehensive monograph of the Erysiphaceae of North America; (4) To develop a
website to electronically disseminate the compiled data to the scientific and
general public. Our research will form a foundation for future studies on the
Erysiphaceae.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.