* 2315756
* Developing Virtual Reality-Mediated Representational Tools for Supporting and Enhancing Deep Mathematical Understanding of Linear Algebra Relationships
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Ferdinand Rivera, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2026
* USD 399,984.00

This project at San Jose State University, a Native American Pacific Islander
Serving Institution (AANAPISI) and Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), aims to
serve the national interest by improving student's mathematical experiences in
undergraduate linear algebra courses. Linear algebra subject matter provides
important content and concepts that are pertinent to undergraduate majors across
several STEM disciplines, including, but not restricted to, mathematics,
computer science, physics, and most engineering disciplines. The project will
develop, implement, investigate, refine, and disseminate a suite of virtual
reality (VR) tools and resources that will be designed to support student growth
with 21st century mathematical skills and competencies. These tools and
resources will be practical, and also will be focused on promoting deep thinking
and understanding. The VR tools will be computer-generated and will provide
fully immersive representations that enable students to gain equitable access to
experience constructing, manipulating, simulating, and understanding objects and
concepts, primarily in two-dimensional and three-dimensional frameworks. It is
through these efforts that results will then be extended to include higher-
dimensional settings. The first two years of the project involve developing,
testing, and refining the VR tools and supplemental instructional resources. The
third year of the project will involve implementing a proof-of-concept study of
the impact of the VR tools and resources. An underlying outcome will be to
enhance students' 21st century mathematical skills, critical and analytical
thinking, and high-level conceptual understanding to meet the demands of the
society of the future.

This project will pursue several goals related to improving student experiences
and successes in mathematics, in general, and linear algebra, in particular.
Goal 1 is to develop tools and resources to implement an innovative VR-mediated
learning environment to capture the interest and enhance the engagement of
students. A second goal is to study this setting to increase the knowledge base
on how to better support students in developing skills and a deep comprehension
of linear algebra concepts, calculations, applications, and theoretical
underpinnings. Too often, students only realize a peripheral understanding
related to these features. A third and related goal is to advance the current
state of knowledge on how to capitalize on the central role of imagery and
visual representations in communicating about and reasoning in mathematics,
particularly linear algebra. Goal 4 is to provide research-based findings on the
potentially transformative power of VR for deep learning of mathematical
concepts and processes. A fifth goal is to disseminate outcomes and research
findings while making project tools and resources available to the STEM
education community. An initial impetus will be to examine topics such as
vectors, matrices, linear transformations, and linear algebra simulations in
two- and three-dimensional Cartesian Coordinate systems. The setting will then
be extended to more general n-dimensional systems by establishing a relationship
between the use of VR tools and, for example, projections, lower dimensional
approximations, dimensional reduction, and data compression. The project will be
guided by the following two research questions (RQs): (RQ1) To what extent does
a visual-geometric and action-oriented VR-mediated intervention support and
enhance a deep learning of linear algebra concepts and the ability to manipulate
within this context? (RQ2) What is the nature of student reasoning elicited in a
VR-mediated environment for learning linear algebra? This project will utilize a
design-based mixed-methods research implementation in establishing and refining
the VR tools and in implementing and investigating classroom teaching
experiments. Project assessment items will be used to compare the post-test
performance across control and treatment groups. In addition, students'
responses in video recorded clinical interviews, assessments, and surveys will
be coded and analyzed. Project results will be proactively disseminated through
publications in high-impact peer reviewed education journals, presentations at
conferences and annual meetings, webinars, colloquia, professional development
workshops, articulation sessions with colleagues, maintenance of a public
project website, and public demonstrations in science and technology museums. In
concert with this dissemination plan, tools, materials, and resources that
emanate from the project will be made freely available online. The NSF IUSE:EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.