* 2315232
* Pausing, inhalation, and language structure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Kristopher Kyle, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,957.00

It is difficult to imagine how what individuals plan to say in conversation
interacts with breathing because language is so clearly a high-level cognitive
function, and breathing is so clearly a basic physiological function. Yet,
planning for language and motor planning for breathing do interact. During
speaking, inhalations are timed to coincide with important grammatical
junctures, like sentence boundaries. Also, the length of sentences that speakers
produce can be predicted from the depth of the breaths taken before speaking.
This project focuses on how language and breathing interact during speaking. The
goal is to advance psycholinguistic theory and, with it, the conceptual models
that frame understanding and treatment of communication disorders. Importantly,
no current theories of language production address speech breathing despite its
fundamental role in speaking: all of sound production, from whispers to shouts,
depends on air flowing out from the lungs. Thus, this project addresses a
substantial gap in understanding how spoken language works.

The research team's hypothesis is that language and speech motor processes, such
as speech-related breathing, influence one another because they develop together
and are used together in communication. This position motivates the
developmental approach taken in this project. School-aged children and adults
engage in different spoken language tasks while their speech is audio recorded
and their breathing (chest and abdominal) movements are measured. The
spontaneous speech elicited from the tasks the tasks is segmented into pause-
delimited utterances, with pauses coded for the presence or absence of
inhalation and, when inhalations are present, for inhalation depth. At the same
time, the utterances are transcribed and then tagged for part-of-speech and
other linguistic information. Using the tools of corpus linguistics and model
comparison, the researchers identify language factors that best explain the
inhalation data. The researchers predict that discourse structure and language
habits provide a better account of inhalation patterns than syntactic boundary
strength or syntactic complexity—the language factors most often discussed in
relation to inhalation. Additionally, physiology (e.g., measures of lung
function and body size) likely provides a better account of children’s speech
breathing patterns than adult speech breathing patterns because children’s
discourse structure is flatter than adults’ and their language habits are less
entrenched than adult language habits. The project establishes a developmental
corpus of spontaneous speech marked out for inhalation patterns that other
researchers can use to investigate speech breathing from different theoretical
perspectives. The researchers also make publicly available the in-house software
developed for the project. Finally, the research team engages in science
education through community outreach and by providing undergraduate students
with research experience in a setting that fosters cross-disciplinary
interactions between students who pursue study in linguistics and psychology and
those who pursue study in communication disorders and sciences or in disability
studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.