* 2315056
* Collaborative Research: Collaborating with Mathematicians to Enhance Teaching (COMET)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lisa Carbone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2026
* USD 258,562.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
active learning pedagogy in university mathematics classes. Evidence-based
active learning pedagogy can improve student learning outcomes in mathematics,
yet the active learning pedagogy developed by mathematics educators is not
widely used by mathematicians. One reason for this lack of uptake is that this
active learning pedagogy was developed without consultation with mathematicians
and thus may not align with mathematicians’ goals and values. This project will
create a collaborative community in which mathematicians and mathematics
educators work together to develop active learning pedagogy, implement this
pedagogy in linear algebra classrooms, and discuss what transpired. The
importance of this project is a practical model of how mathematics educators and
mathematicians can collaborate to improve instructional practice and a
theoretical model of how collaboration can improve mathematician’s teaching
practice.

The project will follow the design research paradigm in which the research team
will simultaneously achieve the practical goal of organizing a collaboration
that changes mathematicians’ pedagogical practice and a theoretical goal of
developing a theoretical model for how mathematician’s pedagogical practice can
change. The project will identify reasons why mathematicians may choose to use
or not to use particular evidence-based active learning strategies in terms of
mathematicians’ goals, values, and obligations to their students, discipline,
and institution. When mathematicians prefer not to use a particular active
learning pedagogical strategy, the project will show how this strategy can be
modified to meet the goals of both mathematicians and mathematics educators and
will identify the support that is needed for mathematicians to use the
pedagogical strategy effectively. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation Track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.