* 2315277
* Building Capacity to Institutionalize Equity in Outdoor and Environmental Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Craig Strang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,701,416.00

This project aims to advance racial equity in outdoor and environmental science
education (OESE) by co-developing, implementing, and studying a replicable model
for organizational capacity building and transformation. This project will
increase the capacity of organizations to build more racially just and equitable
work environments for Professionals of Color in OESE. It is a collaboration
among a research and learning design team at a large public university (the
Lawrence Hall of Science at the University of California, Berkeley), a
community-based racial and environmental justice organization (Justice Outside),
and a data and strategic consultancy firm (Informing Change). The project will
support a team of leaders from five organizations to facilitate and guide
organization-wide discussions related to racial equity. Through this work, the
project will develop and formalize a Racial Equity Transformation Tool Kit to
activate field-wide change. The Tool Kit will include three components: 1)
Facilitator's Reflection Guide, 2) Foundations of Racial Equity Guide, and 3)
Organization Systems Change Tools. The project includes collaborative and
interconnected research and evaluation components to inform project activities,
assess the effectiveness of the capacity-building model, and examine how race
and power shape the everyday experiences of Professionals of Color and the
organizational journey to advance systems change.

Drawing on a racialized conditions of systems change framework, research
findings will build on theoretical and practical understandings of how
racialized conditions shape the enactment of organizational transformation
towards a more racially just and equitable work environment, namely for
Professionals of Color.). The project will explore three research questions
using a qualitative, case study approach: (RQ1) What are the conditions
necessary in OESE organizations to move towards a racially equitable and just
work environment for Professionals of Color, and what can transformative change
look like?; (RQ2) What are meaningful indicators for Professionals of Color of a
racially just and equitable work environment in OESE organizations?; and (RQ3)
How do Professionals of Color make meaning of their experiences in the field-at-
large, and what factors shape the experiences of Professionals of Color? The
evaluation will utilize a mixed-methods design to explore the key design and
implementation features that can employ critical levers or address barriers to
position participants to authentically engage in organizational transformation.
Collectively, the research and evaluation will lead to new understandings of how
to conceptualize, enact, and assess systems change in OESE organizations, which
can offer critical insights to STEM education more broadly. By bridging research
and evaluation, the project will provide insight with respect to Racialized
Conditions of Systems Change framework, exploring the interplay between the
social, institutional, cultural, and individual factors and organizational
conditions to identify key indicators of systems change.

This project is funded through the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity (EDU
Racial Equity). The activity supports research and practice projects that
investigate how considerations of racial equity factor into the improvement of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and
workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge, and
experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by
systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This activity aligns with NSF's
core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from
across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Programs across EDU contribute funds to the Racial Equity
activity in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective
research and development thrusts of the four divisions of the directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.