* 2316583
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maternal Energetic Strategies During Human Pregnancy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Herman Pontzer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 27,286.00

Human newborns are relatively altricial – or, developmentally immature – in many
ways compared to those of our closest living relatives. This may be due to
evolutionary constraints on the length of human gestation, specifically,
energetic costs that human mothers may be unable to bear beyond nine months. An
approach centered on energetics provides a way to investigate constraints of
human pregnancy from a physiological perspective, which offers an important
complement to more traditional and anatomically focused views on understanding
pregnancy length. This doctoral dissertation research project pairs and
evaluates daily physical activity and energy expenditure measures in highly
active pregnant women, and further builds out a deeper understanding of these
processes with a study design that includes repeated measures on the same women
throughout their pregnancies. The results of this research contribute to the
study of the evolution of human pregnancy, and to the urgent need to understand
the physiology of human pregnancy and birth, due to the high rates of poor
maternal and infant health outcomes in the United States and globally.

This project tests the associations between daily physical activity, energy
expenditure, gestational weight gain, and pregnancy outcomes in a highly active
sample of pregnant mothers. Gestational weight gain and maternal metabolic
parameters are measured twice during pregnancy, and physical activity data are
collected daily. Measurements of total daily energy expenditure, basal metabolic
rate, and body composition are used to test associations between maternal
physical activity, metabolic parameters, and pregnancy outcomes. Results address
the maternal metabolic limits hypotheses regarding pregnancy length in
relationship to maternal activity levels and can inform strategies that promote
physical activity and healthy pregnancy outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.