* 2316675
* CAREER: Data-driven dynamic adaptive optimization for next generation power system operation
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Xu Sun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 223,406.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project
is to create a set of novel optimization models and algorithms for the operation
of future electric power systems. The approach is to (1) develop efficient and
robust algorithms for optimizing power flow and power network topology, which
will be significantly faster, more accurate, and more scalable than the state-
of-the-art approaches; (2) develop new techniques for harnessing large amount of
data for modeling uncertainties in power system; (3) develop decision making
algorithms for the real-time operation of power systems with substantial
renewable, demand response, and distributed generation resources. The
intellectual merits of the project lie in (1) the development of new insights
and understanding of some key mathematical structures of a broad class of hard
optimization problems involving networks, which are intrinsic to optimal power
flow, network topology control, and dynamic decision making, and (2) leveraging
these mathematical understanding to design rigorous and efficient algorithms for
the mentioned problems. If successful, this research will not only provide
transformative technologies for the operations of power grid, but will also
strengthen intellectual ties between power engineering and industrial &
operations engineering. The project will directly benefit the society at large
by creating the next generation of operational tools to manage the future power
grids, to help reduce power system operational cost, and to increase power
system reliability and flexibility. The methodological contributions of the
project will provide new tools for applications beyond electric power systems,
such as for the operation of water and natural-gas networks and coordination of
interconnected energy systems. The PI will actively pursue opportunities to
bring power industry, academia, government, and national labs together to form
synergistic discussions and collaborations on developing analytical methods for
electric energy systems. The PI will also develop new education curriculum and
outreach activities to contribute to the development of a new generation of
multidisciplinary workforce for the nation's infrastructure industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.