* 2316240
* HCC: Small: Making Virtual Reality Safe
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Kevin Desai, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Although consumer-level virtual reality head-mounted displays have become
affordable enough for a broad user base to purchase, there are still serious
concerns about safety. Head-mounted displays block out the surrounding real
world, which can hide obstacles, such as tables, pets, walls, or other potential
collision hazards. Current approaches to avoiding collisions depend on the user
to define play area boundaries; this process is subject to user error and thus
can lead to injury. Moreover, current approaches are ineffective for games that
require fast motions, as the systems may not react in time to prevent injury. To
address these problems, the investigators will create camera-based methods for
detecting potential collisions in real time and evaluate feedback techniques to
reduce the incidence of injury when using virtual reality headsets. This
approach has the potential to make the use of virtual reality much safer in
real-world environments.

The objective of this project is to create and evaluate reconstruction,
segmentation, and motion-prediction techniques to inform obstacle avoidance
feedback and reduce the incidence of injury to people using virtual reality head
mounted displays. Providing feedback tailored to the specific locations of the
user's body that are in proximity to real obstacles will, ideally, reduce user
collisions with real-world objects compared to prior approaches. Specifically,
the team will 1) determine the best approaches to real obstacle detection and
segmentation, 2) investigate the efficacy of full body motion prediction
approaches, 3) ascertain the optimal modality and locations of real obstacle
alerts to maximize presence while minimizing collisions, and 4) evaluate the
longitudinal impact of real obstacle alert systems in virtual reality systems.
Ultimately, this research will result in human motion datasets that can be used
for future motion prediction in virtual reality research, as well as open-source
plugins that will make current virtual reality experiences safer by reducing
injuries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.