* 2316882
* Cellular and molecular dissection of a stem cell niche in a marine invertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Elaine Seaver, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 760,000.00

Stem cells have a unique ability to produce new cells to replace aging or
injured tissues. Many animals distributed across the tree of life have excellent
regeneration abilities, whose regeneration success depends in part on the
presence of resident stem cells. In these animals, the population of stem cells
can generate multiple tissues and cell types, and it is important to build an
understanding of how these stem cells are regulated in natural environment of
the animal (versus in a dish in the lab). A putative stem cell niche was
identified in the marine worm Capitella teleta, an animal that not only has
robust regenerative abilities but also renews its germline, the cells that form
eggs in females and sperm in males, throughout life. This finding offers a
unique opportunity to investigate the relationship between germline and somatic
stem cells. Capitella has numerous experimental advantages including optical
clarity, a slow evolving and annotated genome, and available tools to manipulate
gene function. Outreach activities include laboratory training of the next
generation of researchers and development of a life-long learning module to
inform adults on empirically based science and environmental stewardship. The
proposed study emphasizes the value of studying a diversity of animals to
understand major trends in animal evolution.

Adult stem cells function during tissue homeostasis, growth, and repair in
response to injury. In some contexts, stem cells reside in specific locations
within the body and in others, an entire tissue or body functions as a
supportive environment for stem cells. This work in the annelid Capitella teleta
will explore the relationship between germline and somatic stem cells. Capitella
has favorable characteristics for in vivo studies of stem cell biology,
including a sequenced genome, a stereotypic cleavage program and associated fate
map and availability of functional genomic tools. Through expression analysis of
multipotency cell program genes, a putative stem cell niche was identified in
Capitella with a discrete location within the body. The proposed work seeks to
address the hypothesis that this putative stem cell niche can generate both
somatic and germline cells. The function of the cluster will be investigated
through direct experimental manipulations, live cell imaging, and functional
genomic approaches. Cellular responses to injury will be compared with behavior
of cells in this cluster in steady state conditions. The proposed experiments
will help unravel the molecular regulation underlying the evolutionary
relationship between somatic and germline stem cells. These studies will also
provide insight into mechanistic differences that regulate localized stem cell
populations in somatic and germ line microenvironments versus dispersed stem
cell populations present in other animals. The broader impacts include
development of life-long learning modules for adults to engage and educate the
growing Florida population on biodiversity and evolutionary concepts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.