* 2316474
* Components, Correlates and Mechanisms of Object Recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Isabel Gauthier, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 07/31/2026
* USD 386,744.00

Visual decisions play a crucial role in various occupations, impacting experts
who make these decisions countless times each day. The project aims to
understand how and why people vary their ability to make visual decisions. By
analyzing the performance of large groups of participants across multiple tasks,
the project seeks to uncover different aspects of visual abilities, particularly
in relation to perception and memory. It compares general object recognition
with other abilities routinely measured by psychologists and explores how visual
abilities can help predict an individual's potential to become a perceptual
expert. Additional activities engage high school students and teach them about
the benefits of using less culturally-biased abilities for aptitude testing. The
findings hold the potential to impact occupations reliant on visual decision-
making, such as forensics and medical imaging, fostering inclusivity in testing
and advancing research in visual cognition.

Employing a multivariate and latent variables approach, in which each construct
is measured by several tasks, the project explores the structure of abilities
that support object recognition. It explores how they relate to established
abilities, how they predict the acquisition of expertise, and what mechanisms
underlie these individual differences. The project develops a broad range of
tasks with good psychometric properties for the study of object recognition,
testing for a distinction between perceptual and mnemonic components. The work
assesses the incremental predictive power of object recognition abilities over
existing abilities, both general (like intelligence) and perceptual (like
spatial processing) in the prediction of expertise acquired through multi-
session learning. Collaborations with experts in detecting green gas emissions
in satellite images and in dermatology training provide real-world situations in
which to assess the predictive validity of the measures. The project also
investigates three mechanisms through studies that explore the interaction
between visual abilities and manipulations targeting well-known mechanisms of
increasing complexity: Perceptual Differentiation, Statistical Learning, and
Dimensional Learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.