* 2316986
* LEAPS-MPS: Number-Theoretic and Combinatorial Properties of Increasing Sequences of Positive Integers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Geremias Polanco, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 245,354.00

This project aims to study increasing sequences of positive integers, such as
the evens, the odds, prime numbers, and Fibonacci numbers. We will study
increasing sequences by exploring complementary sequences, that is, sequences
such that every integer appears in one of them and no integer appears in both.
Any increasing sequence of positive integers can be thought of as part of a
complementary pair by taking the other set to be all positive integers that are
not in the given increasing sequence. Complementary sequences also may have
applications in other areas. For instance, the so-called Beatty sequences have
applications in pure and applied mathematics, music, biology, computer graphics,
linear filters, and quasi-crystallography. Mathematicians use greedy algorithms,
such as the minimum Excluded (MEX) algorithm, to generate complementary
sequences. In previous work, the PI discovered some surprising connections
between the use of the MEX algorithm to generate Beatty sequences and continued
fractions. This project will extend these findings to general complementary
sequences. The significance of this research lies in uncovering new properties
of positive integers and providing insights into problems studied using the MEX
algorithm and continued fractions. These discoveries could also shed light on
the applications of complementary sequences. Additionally, the PI will engage in
educational and outreach activities enhancing diversity in mathematics,
including forming an undergraduate research group and mentoring math-PhD-bound
post baccalaureate students at Smith College (home to the Center for Women in
Mathematics), and conducting math outreach for middle/high-school students. The
PI will also continue with his work in mentorship and engagement with people of
Dominican descent in the US.

More precisely, this research project can be described as follows: Classical
results and recent developments in number theory, combinatorics, graph theory,
combinatorial game theory and theoretical computer science are obtained by
applying the MEX algorithm and generating complementary sets. Recently the PI
introduced a novel generalization of the MEX algorithm which reveals,
surprisingly, that applying the MEX algorithm to generate Beatty complementary
sequences is equivalent to prepending digits to the continued fractions of
irrational numbers. The PI has also shown that iterating the MEX algorithm gives
rise to a dynamical system whose orbits have a parametric family of fixed points
that are quadratic irrationals. These results lead naturally to the property
that the even and the odd positive integers are invariant when applying the MEX
to generate complementary sequences. The goal of this project is to study these
connections between complementary sequences, the MEX algorithm, continued
fractions, and dynamical systems, extending them to general complementary
sequences, which includes all increasing sequences of positive integers. We will
use combinatorial methods and standard techniques from analytic and additive
number theory, following strategies that have been already employed by the PI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.