* 2316181
* LEAPS-MPS: Algebraic and Combinatorial Methods in Permutation Enumeration
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Yan Zhuang, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 246,686.00

Permutation enumeration is the branch of enumerative and algebraic combinatorics
concerned with counting permutations: linear arrangements of distinct objects.
Questions in permutation enumeration are often motivated by other branches of
mathematics—such as algebra, probability theory, and geometry—and have
applications to scientific domains including theoretical computer science,
genomics, and statistical mechanics. Enumerative results can be a sign of deeper
mathematical structure, which sometimes can be expressed via algebraic objects
called combinatorial Hopf algebras; in turn, this algebraic structure can be
exploited to derive new enumerative results. This interplay between
combinatorics and algebra is central to the first goal of this project, which is
to advance the development and application of Hopf-algebraic methods in
permutation enumeration. The second goal of this project is to establish DREAM
(Discovering Research and Expanding Access to Mathematics), a summer experience
for Davidson College students integrating mathematical research, professional
development, and educational outreach.

This project builds on previous work at the intersection of permutation
enumeration, symmetric function theory, and combinatorial Hopf algebras. A
classical result in this domain is Gessel’s run theorem, a reciprocity formula
involving noncommutative symmetric functions which gives a systematic method for
the enumeration of permutations with prescribed run lengths. One research
objective is to lift the run theorem to the setting of noncommutative colored
symmetric functions, which would lead to a general method for counting colored
permutations with restrictions on colored run lengths. Another research
objective is to study the distributions of inverse statistics (such as the
inverse descent number and the inverse peak number) over alternating
permutations and reverse-alternating permutations. The research component of the
DREAM program focuses on combinatorial proofs in permutation enumeration, and
student participants will engage in readings centered around the role of
community in mathematics and DEIJ issues facing the mathematical community.
DREAM participants will also work with the PI and collaborators from William A.
Hough High School to organize an outreach event for the EOS program at Hough,
which serves students of color and low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.