* 2316547
* Collaborative Research: Research: An exploration of how faculty mentoring influences doctoral student psychological safety and the impact on work-related outcomes
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Karin Jensen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2026
* USD 152,219.00

There is a need to better understand how engineering departments can cultivate
more inclusive, psychologically safe environments in which doctoral students
feel safe to engage in interpersonal risk-taking, especially in research
settings. A psychologically safe environment is characterized by people who feel
safe to voice ideas and concerns, willingly seek feedback, have positive
intentions to one another, engage in constructive confrontation, and feel safe
to take risks and experiment, all of which are inherently risky interpersonal
behaviors. In academic research environments, faculty have a major leadership
role in cultivating a psychologically safe environment within research groups.
While engineering faculty possess strong research skills, they often receive
minimal to no training on how to effectively provide psychosocial support to
graduate students and how to create a positive team climate. The literature
suggests women and other underrepresented groups still frequently encounter
“chilly” academic climates in STEM, or experience a lack of sense of belonging,
leading to negative outcomes such as increased psychological distress and/or a
fear of intellectual risk-taking that is essential to learning, creativity, and
innovation. These outcomes hamper graduate students’ ability to fulfill their
academic responsibilities, may dissuade them from continuing with their degree
program, and contribute to a growing mental health crisis that is already
plaguing graduate education. This study will further our understanding of
psychological safety in academic research settings and inform the development of
pragmatic strategies and interventions on how to cultivate inclusive,
psychologically-safe research climates that support a wide-range of work
outcomes. Identifying effective approaches to establishing psychological safety
in graduate education contexts can lead to increased student learning and
performance, which will support the professional formation of engineers and the
production of innovative engineering research. Improved mentoring relationships
and research climates will also support graduate student wellbeing, retention,
and broadening participation.

The overarching purpose of this study is thus to further our understanding of
psychological safety in engineering graduate research settings and develop
proactive solutions that can further promote doctoral students’ psychological
safety in their research groups and mentoring relationship. Considerable
research evidence in industry settings suggests psychological safety supports
individual/group learning, performance, and innovation, and mitigates work-
related stress. Yet there is no research that has been conducted to study the
impact of psychological safety in research labs, nor how it is effectively
developed by faculty. The proposed study leverages an explanatory mixed methods
design coupled with longitudinal interviews. The explanatory mixed methods
design will utilize surveys followed by two sets of interviews to examine the
role of faculty mentorship in psychological safety of doctoral students in
research groups and associated work outcomes such as learning and mental health.
The survey will first characterize relationships between faculty advisor
mentoring, doctoral student psychological safety, and subsequent positive and
negative work-related outcomes and how these differ for students from different
demographic backgrounds. The first set of interviews will explore the
relationships identified by the surveys (explanatory design). The longitudinal
interviews will document the experience of incoming doctoral students who join a
research group and how faculty advisors communicate policies, norms, and values
that impact the psychological safety of research group members. The results of
this research will be leveraged to develop educational resources, including
scenario-based training workshops for faculty advisors to support research group
psychological safety and an educational module for graduate students to learn
about psychological safety.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.