* 2316197
* Conference: Privileged Logics: Interrogating Foundations and Practices in Research Ethics
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* David Hartmann, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,792.00

Privilege in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) is
pervasive, introducing bias into scientists’ working assumptions and research
practices, including how they educate and mentor the next generation. This
conference will gather a diverse group from the STEM and responsible conduct in
research (RCR) education communities to raise awareness about these issues,
generate useful concepts for understanding them, and identify broadly applicable
recommendations for addressing them that build on inclusive mentoring and other
promising practices that already exist in research ethics. This project promotes
fairness and equity in science, in alignment with NSF’s mission, by expanding
knowledge about the negative impacts of privilege in research and identifying
effective strategies for mitigating them.

The research team’s team goal is to assemble a network of experts who want to
develop a standard ER2 proposal using ideas from the conference to generate new
topics in ethical and responsible research (ER2) and new standards for STEM
research and RCR training. To ensure broad participation and robust
conversations at the conference, the research team will target invitations to
historically Black colleges and universities (HCBUs) in the region and to
academic and community groups serving underrepresented groups. The conference
will feature a keynote speaker to focus workshop conversations around successful
strategies for remedying biases resulting from privilege in STEM research, in
addition to concurrent workshop sessions. The team will disseminate the
conference summary directly to the larger group of invitees, as well as to the
actual conference participants. The summary will be archived within one year at
the Qualitative Data Repository. After the conference, the research team will
post the summary online and maintain an open blog for at least one year to
encourage ongoing contact among participants to share ideas, report on
activities, and develop long-term collaborative relationships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.