* 2316659
* LEAPS-MPS: Geometrization with Positive Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Xiaolong Li, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

A fundamental theme in geometry is to study the relationship between the
curvature and the shape of the space. This project will investigate in
dimensions four and higher how “positivity curvature” determines, partially or
in full, the global shape of the underlying space, aiming to extend the famous
Gauss-Bonnet Theorem in dimension two and Hamilton and Perelman’s work on
geometrization in dimension three to higher dimensions. In this project, the PI
will expand the study of geometrization to manifolds of dimensions four and
higher, making use of tools such as curvature operators and Ricci flows. In
addition, the PI will organize a variety of activities for middle and high
school students in the local Wichita area and engage in mentoring programs for
undergraduate and graduate students at Wichita State University aimed at
broadening participation, especially amongst underrepresented minority students.
The research objective of this project is to investigate the classification of
four and higher-dimensional spaces, including compact Riemannian manifolds,
Einstein manifolds, and shrinking gradient Ricci solitons, whose curvature
satisfies a positivity condition, such as positive isotropic curvature, positive
sectional curvature, positive Ricci curvature, and positive curvature operator
of the second kind. The outcome is a better understanding of the relationship
between curvature and topology. Primary strategies include analyzing solutions
to the Ricci flow, applying the maximum principle to partial differential
equations satisfied by geometric quantities, and understanding the relationship
between various notions of positive curvature via tensor algebra and Lie
algebra.

This project is jointly funded by the Launching Early-Career Academic Pathways
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (LEAPS) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.