* 2316552
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The shape of hands and feet and the transition to upright walking
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 34,163.00

Researchers have long hypothesized that the transition to upright walking on two
legs (bipedalism) in humans was facilitated in our distant, non-primate
ancestors by an increased reliance on the hind limb while walking on four legs.
As a pivotal part of our evolutionary trajectory, it is proposed that once our
ancestorsâ€™ hands were freed from involvement in walking, they were able to be
used for other purposes such as tool use, grooming, and carrying. Previous
research on the transition to upright walking in human ancestors has largely
focused on non-human primates. To better understand whether the relationship
between reliance on hind limbs while walking on four legs and the emergence of
bipedalism is unique to human evolution, this doctoral dissertation research
project casts a broad comparative net and includes a comparison between primates
and carnivores. This project offers opportunities for undergraduate students to
gain exposure to STEM-discipline focused ideas and research questions, and to
receive transferable technical training and experience.

This project tests the hypothesis that the development of a dominant limb is
associated with morphological and functional diversification of the non-dominant
limb. This project tests this and related hypotheses in three ways: (1) testing
if increased reliance on the hind limb allows for diversification of the
forelimb by tracking co-variation of hand and foot bones across an expansive
sample of extant primate taxa; (2) assessing the effect of limb dominance on
functional diversity in an independent mammalian clade (Carnivora) that is
thought not to have been characterized by hind limb dominance during its early
evolution; and (3) conducting a large-scale comparison of primate and mammalian
carnivoran hand and foot bones to track rates of shape variation across both
orders. Understanding the ways that the bones of the hands and feet of these
groups have evolved helps to elucidate a better understanding of the underlying
processes that took place in primates millions of years ago shaping the
trajectory of modern human evolution. The broad perspective used in this study
is innovative and informative for better understanding of the evolution of
bipedalism in humans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.