* 2316843
* LEAPS-MPS: Splitting All-At-Once Approach to Inverse Medium Scattering Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Thanh Nguyen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 212,933.00

Inverse scattering theory plays a key role in technologies, such as ultrasounds,
ground penetrating radars, and microwave imaging. It is widely used in
applications such as medical imaging, geophysical exploration, and detection of
unexploded ordnance. Inversion algorithms in the inverse scattering theory aim
to reconstruct geometrical and material properties of objects, which are
referred to as scatterers, from indirect and noninvasive measurements of the
interaction between the scatterers and incoming waves. The investigator will
develop and implement new robust and computationally efficient inversion
algorithms. The project will provide research mentoring and training
opportunities in mathematics and scientific computing for undergraduate and
graduate students.

This project will develop new splitting all-at-once inversion algorithms for
reconstructing a material property of a scatterer using multi-frequency or
multi-source scattering data associated with a scalar wave equation. These
algorithms will determine both the scatterer’s material property and the state
variable, which is the solution of the wave equation, by minimizing an objective
functional whose variables include both the scatterer’s material property and
the state variable. Alternating minimization methods will be used to determine
the scatterer’s material property and the state variable in an alternative
procedure. The project has two main objectives. The first is to reduce the
dimension of the variable of the objective functional by splitting the operator
of the forward scattering model into operators in spaces of smaller dimensions.
The second objective aims to create a convex objective functional for the case
when the forward scattering model is nonlinear, by introducing a Carleman
weighted objective functional. Theoretical investigations will be focused on
Carleman estimates, the convexity of the objective functional, the global
convergence and convergence rate of the proposed inversion algorithms. Parallel
implementation and accuracy of the developed algorithms in both objectives will
be investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.