* 2316672
* Collaborative Research: Workshop: Challenges and Prospects for the Next 10 Years of Nanochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Katherine Willets, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 7,710.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professors Stephan Link of William Marsh Rice
University, Jill Millstone of the University of Pittsburgh, and Katherine
Willets of Temple University will organize a workshop on nanochemistry. The goal
of the workshop is to bring together a scientifically and demographically
diverse group of researchers across multiple sub-disciplines of chemistry,
materials science, and engineering to identify and define the principal
challenges and opportunities in nanochemistry research today. The discussion
themes aim to promote efficient, sustainable, and translatable advancements in
the synthesis and characterization of nanostructures and to advance fundamental
chemistry knowledge of these systems, particularly toward their application in
nanoelectronics, semiconducting materials, clean energy research and technology,
sensing, catalysis, and quantum information science. The workshop outcomes will
be broadly disseminated in an Open Access journal article.

The workshop is planned for the summer of 2023. The workshop will bring together
about 35 participants, including both theoreticians and experimental
researchers, to identify underexplored, yet promising, research directions in
nanochemistry and roadblocks to those advancements. Participants, with expertise
ranging from synthesis and assembly to spectroscopy and nanoscale imaging, will
discuss innovative approaches and challenges to the synthesis of nanostructures
and to making high impact single entity measurements and their connections to
ensemble properties. They will also consider the knowledge gaps in and new
perspectives on nanostructure surface chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.