* 2316101
* Building Ethical Resilience Among College Students Using Metacognitive Approaches
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Carol Nemeroff, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 398,161.00

Training the next generation of college students early and effectively in
research ethics is a crucial component of their education. This project will
develop, implement, and test a college-level course in ethical decision-making
for emerging science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
professionals to better prepare them for the pressures they may encounter in the
workplace. This project expands on traditional approaches to teaching ethical
decision-making by focusing on psychological and social factors that impact
human behavior. The project will create learning experiences for students to
practice their ethical decision-making skills. The training provided through
this project aims to prevent threats to research integrity and encourage future
STEM professionals to behave ethically.

This project focuses on psychological processes known collectively as
metacognition. Metacognition includes processes such as mindful reflection,
self-monitoring, and recursive thinking. Though discussion of metacognition
appears in the ethics education field, the project has a unique approach in that
it examines conditions of emotionality, uncertainty, stress, and the influence
of social factors such as institutional and cultural norms that can impact a
researcher's metacognitive ethical reasoning. The research team will develop and
test a course curriculum that integrates advanced reasoning and reflection about
social cognition and heuristic-based decision making under stress. Features of
the research team’s approach include incorporating experiential simulations
constructed to mimic typical pressures in educational and research settings, and
having students learn how to overcome ethical challenges they may confront. The
impact of the project’s curriculum will be assessed at the beginning and at the
end of the course, and six-months after course completion. The research team
will develop a train-the-trainer component and share it with educators
interested in adopting this model for STEM ethics education.

This project is jointly funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, and the Directorate for STEM Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.