* 2316535
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Vortex-beam Spectroscopy of Type-II Superconductors in the THz Regime
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vladimir Martinez, martinez, vladimir A
* Fellowship Award
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Abstract

Vladimir Martinez is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend). The host institution for the
fellowship is New Jersey Institute of Technology, and the sponsoring scientist
is Dr. Andrei Sirenko from the physics department. This project targets the
interaction between infrared light with wavelengths of about 1 mm and high-
temperature superconductors. High-temperature superconductors, which are known
to expel magnetic field and conduct currents without dissipation, form magnetic
whirlpools when subject to magnetic fields of a certain strength. The specially
conditioned light, also known as vortex beams, has a profile similar to these
whirlpools in superconductors. This combination allows the study and control of
their enhanced interaction. The insight provided by this study can lead to
breakthroughs in superconductor-based technologies like maglev trains, particle
accelerators and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs).
Additionally, the project aims at broadening participation amongst
underrepresented groups in STEM and quantum sciences by collaborating with the
host institution to recruit students from local high schools to join in a series
of interactive demonstrations using superconductors and other quantum
experiments.

Technical Abstract:

This project investigates type-II superconductors using vortex beams of coherent
synchrotron radiation in the THz and infrared spectral ranges at low
temperatures and high magnetic fields. Vortex beams have a doughnut-shaped
intensity distribution and spiral structure of the wave fronts, which are
analogous to superconducting vortices, with superconducting rings surrounding
normal metal cores. The project will yield insight into the development of
superconducting vortices and the electrodynamics of the vortex state and its
topologically-enhanced interactions with vortex light. The PI will also
contribute to an ongoing collaboration between the New Jersey Institute of
Technology and the Pingry high school (K-12) to increase interest and
participation among high school students in quantum sciences through demos and
experiments Progress in the interconnected fields of quantum computing,
cryptography, and materials hinges on a new generation of scientists and
engineers interested and ready to meet these new demands and challenges. The
principal investigator will present interactive demonstrations using
superconductors and vortex beams and other experiments in acoustic and nonlinear
quantum optics and will increase BIPOC (Black Indigenous and People of Color)
participation in the activities by recruiting students from the surrounding high
school systems including his hometown of Elizabeth, NJ.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.