* 2316892
* LEAPS-MPS: Noncommutative Geometry and Topology of Quantum Metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Konrad Aguilar, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 08/31/2025
* USD 189,661.00

This project in noncommutative metric geometry focuses on the theme of
approximation, a fundamental notion in mathematics and the physical sciences, in
which one seeks to understand a complex object by studying its simpler relatives
which are “nearby” according to some measure of distance. The Gromov-Hausdorff
distance -- an important tool from metric geometry which measures the distance
between subsets of a space, rather than just individual elements -- has seen
many applications across the mathematical and physical sciences. This project
will employ generalizations of the Gromov-Hausdorff distance to develop new
approaches to the approximation of infinite-dimensional algebras arising from
quantum mechanics (known as C*-algebras) by their finite-dimensional
counterparts. These new methods will advance the state of the art in
noncommutative metric geometry and build connections with the structure theory
of C*-algebras as well as quantum information theory. The PI will offer research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students, who will play a
central role in the project. A diverse group of students will be recruited, with
a focus on professional development and a view toward broadening participation
in mathematics and science in the next generation.

Noncommutative metric geometry (NCMG) was largely motivated and built by
structures arising from noncommutative topology (NCT) and noncommutative
geometry (NCG), and this project aims to provide further connections between
these three areas. The importance of this pursuit lies in the fact that the
classical counterparts of metric geometry, topology, and differential geometry
have many connections, and finding analogous results in the noncommutative realm
to results in the classical realm has proven to advance mathematics overall. In
particular, NCT and the classification of C*-algebras rely heavily on
C*-algebras arising as inductive/direct limits of C*-algebras, and due to
quantum versions of the Gromov-Hausdorff distance provided by NCMG, one can show
that these inductive limits are limits in a metric sense and even establish
metric convergence of sequences of inductive limits. However, in various cases
including the case of approximately finite-dimensional (AF) algebras,
convergence of certain sequences of inductive limits has only been attained
using purely NCMG and NCT structure without using natural structures arising
from NCG like spectral triples. A primary goal of this project is to enrich
these results with spectral triple data and thus produce a missing connection
among these areas in the noncommutative realm. This project will also
investigate other classes of inductive limits and their finite-dimensional
approximations as well as further associated structures such as Hilbert
C*-modules. A focused look at some of the individual quantum metric spaces
arising from these investigations yields connections to metric geometry and
quantum information theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.