* 2316666
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Coarse-Grained Modeling of Aggrecan- Mimetic Copolymers: Polymer Design and Architecture Effects on Structure and Phase Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jason Madinya, Madinya, Jason J
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvio May
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The proposed work will lead to the development of a materials design framework
that uses molecular dynamics simulations and machine learning to design
candidate polymeric materials that mimics the biomolecule aggrecan. Aggrecan is
found in cartilage tissue, and the degradation of aggrecan has been implicated
in the onset and progression of the disease osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis is a
disease that afflicts the joints, where the cartilage tissue in the joint is
deteriorated leading to pain, inflammation, and dysfunction of the joint. This
disease affects senior citizens in particular, and it is believed to affect 10%
of the population over the age of 60 and costs the US economy over $60 billion
dollars annually. Aggrecan mimetic polymers are seen as a promising approach to
regenerative treatment for osteoarthritis. There are several challenges in
developing treatments using aggrecan mimics that must be overcome. Key
properties the candidate treatments must possess to overcome these challenges
include injectability, biocompatibility, and immobility once in the treatment
area. This work will develop computational methods, using simulation and machine
learning to design candidate polymers that possess the desired properties for
use in cartilage treatment. This design framework can be further utilized to
design materials for a variety of challenges in health and consumer products.
The PI will work with their mentor and institution to broaden participation
amongst underrepresented groups through an established training program for
aspiring materials scientists as well as outreach activities aimed at providing
community college students with guidance and exposure to STEM graduate education
and research. These efforts of the PI to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM will also be informed by their past
participation in diversity, equity and inclusion programs and past experiences
as a community college student.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The goal of the proposed work is to develop a computational model for designing
aggrecan mimetic copolymers, that uses coarse-grained molecular simulations and
machine learning methods, and is informed and validated by experimental data.
The proposed copolymer will be made up of a thermoresponsive component and a
charged component to effectively mimic the proteoglycan aggrecan, while
achieving necessary material properties for use as an injection treatment. The
candidate must be biocompatible, injectable, and once in the treatment area, and
must remain immobile in the target tissue. The PI proposes a copolymer made with
the biocompatible and charged polymer poly(sodium-4-styrene sulfonate) (PSSNa)
and the thermoresponsive polymer poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm). The goal
is to design a copolymer that possesses the charge density of aggrecan and
undergoes a sol-gel transition at physiological temperatures. The latter will
ensure that the material is injectable at room temperature and is immobilized at
body temperature in the treatment area. The PI will develop a coarse-grained
model for the proposed copolymer, that will be parameterized and validated by
experimental results provided by the collaborator on the proposed project. The
PI will use the coarse-grained model in molecular dynamics simulations to model
copolymers with a variety of copolymer design parameters, such as the copolymer
architecture, sidechain grafting density, side chain length, and molecular
weight. The simulation and experimental data will be used to develop a data-
driven forward and inverse model that can predict optimal polymer design for
desired solution behavior and polymer chain conformation properties. The
simulation and data-driven models will be used to generate candidate materials
to serve as potential injection treatments for restoring cartilage damaged by
the progression of osteoarthritis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.