* 2316223
* RCN-UBE: Sustainable, nationwide network to promote reproducible big-data analysis in biology programs within community colleges and minority-serving institutions
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Chitra Raju-Nayak, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2028
* USD 498,823.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by equipping undergraduate
students with essential skills in big data analytics, bridging a gap that exists
at some community college and minority-serving institutions. By providing
training in this highly relevant and sought-after skill set, this project aims
to empower students from diverse backgrounds to thrive in the data-driven
landscape of modern life sciences and STEM-related fields. To achieve this
objective, we will support and train faculty members from community colleges and
minority-serving institutions, working with them in integrating computational
skills and big data analytic techniques into their existing life science
curricula. Furthermore, this project will establish a sustainable and nationwide
network dedicated to developing, adopting, curating, and maintaining
computational and pedagogical resources, enabling a wide range of undergraduate
students to engage in the analysis of real-world biological data.

The rapid advancement of high throughput technologies has transformed the way
research is conducted in the life sciences, with computational tools playing a
crucial role. In order to effectively navigate and gain insights from large
datasets, 21st-century biologists heavily rely on big data analytic techniques
(BDAT). However, at teaching-focused institutions such as community colleges and
some minority-serving institutions, faculty face numerous challenges to
incorporating BDAT into the life sciences curricula. To address these barriers,
we propose a targeted effort by a dedicated group of faculty members with
appointments both in life science research at four-year universities and in life
science units at community colleges and minority-serving institutions. This
project will develop a sustainable, nationwide network for implementing
effective course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) focused on
BDAT, with a particular emphasis on best practices for improving reproducibility
in life sciences research. To achieve this overarching goal, the project will
focus on three main objectives: 1) Develop, adopt, curate, and maintain
computational and pedagogical resources for the Consortium of Biological Data
Science Education (CBSE); 2) Develop faculty training strategies for life
science instructors who lack departmental integration and institutional support
for BDAT; and 3) Evaluate teaching, learning, and assessment strategies for BDAT
skills and reproducibility concepts in life science education. By addressing
these objectives, this effort will provide an effective approach to teaching
BDAT skills at community colleges and minority-serving institutions, empowering
undergraduate students with upper-division educational and workforce-ready
computational and data science skill sets. This project is being jointly funded
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for STEM Education, Division of
Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed
in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.