* 2316958
* Conference: 2023 Coastal Ocean Dynamics: Coastal Ocean Physics and its Connections to Marine Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Weifeng Zhang, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 26,050.00

The Gordon Research Conferences has a long history of providing an international
forum for the presentation and discussion of frontier research in a variety of
science and engineering fields, including in coastal ocean dynamics. This
project provides partial support for the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Coastal Ocean Dynamics, to be held at the
Bryant University on June 17-23, 2023. The financial support from NSF will be
used to support the attendance of students, postdocs, early career researchers,
invited speakers and discussion leaders, and to expand the demographic,
professional and geographic diversity of participants. Coastal oceans play a
major role in the Earth’s system for reasons such as transforming nutrient-rich
and often polluted freshwater discharge from land and dissipating large amounts
of tidal energy. Understanding the processes in the coastal ocean offers great
promise for linking scientific research to societal needs and to anthropogenic
impact in the global ocean. Studying the interconnectedness of the physical,
geological, chemical, and biological aspects of the coastal oceans is
fundamental to developing sound practices for the protection of the marine
ecosystem and public health. The 2023 GRC and GRS on Coastal Ocean Dynamics
strives to provide a platform to foster communication on interdisciplinary
thinking and nurture rapport between senior researchers and students/junior
researchers. It is organized with a special emphasis on diversity and equity in
gender balance, URM community representation and international participation to
provide a better range of perspectives on the scientific topics. Besides the
regular conference communication, there will be a structured “Power Hour” event
focused specifically on different aspects diversity and equity. The 2023 GRC and
GRS on Coastal Ocean Dynamics will continue a long-standing record of informing
and inspiring researchers that will ultimately comprise the technically skilled
and creative research workforce required to meet future challenges in applied
coastal ocean dynamics research.

The theme of the 2023 GRC on Coastal Ocean Dynamics is coastal ocean physics and
its connections to marine ecosystems, and the associated GRS, a 2-day seminar
before the GRC, targets professional development of students and early career
scientists. The elected co-Chairs of the 2023 GRC Coastal Ocean Dynamics are
Kristen Davis and Weifeng (Gordon) Zhang; the elected co-Vice Chairs are Melanie
Fewings and Hans Burchard. The co-Chairs and co-Vice Chairs together form the
chairing committee. The elected chair of the 2023 GRS Coastal Ocean Dynamics is
Elizabeth Brasseale. They have worked together to form the scientific program of
the 2023 GRC and convened a Program Committee comprised of a broad spectrum of
professional experiences. The field of coastal physical oceanography has greatly
advanced on a variety of fronts in recent years. Progress in observational
methods, modeling techniques and model-observation integration have helped to
improve our understanding of fundamental processes and interactions among
different aspects of the coastal systems, and coastal ocean prediction. The 2023
GRC Coastal Ocean Dynamics and the associated GRS have been designed to bring
the community together to discuss a variety of topics, including nearshore and
estuarine dynamics, shelf-ocean exchange, coastal ocean prediction and sea level
change, high-latitude shelf dynamics, and climate impacts. The goal of the
conference is to synthesize these recent advances, cultivate novel ideas, push
the field of coastal oceanography forward.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.