* 2316830
* Conference: Gordon Research Conference on Biomechanics in Vascular Biology and Disease; South Hadley, Massachusetts; 6-11 August 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Hanjoong Jo, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,200.00

This award supports the 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Biomechanics in
Vascular Biology and Disease, which will be held 6-11 August 2023, at Mount
Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts, through support of registration
fees for selected students, postdoctoral fellows, and early-stage investigators
studying in the US to attend. The objective is to broaden the participation of a
diverse group of students, postdocs, and early-stage investigators (assistant
professors appointed within the last three years), including women,
underrepresented minorities, disabled, and disadvantaged groups. Consideration
in the selection process will be given to the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups, the diversity of institutions that the participants
represent, and the diversity of programs representing broad areas of engineering
and biology. This brand-new 2023 GRC Meeting will bring researchers together to
discuss the topics involved in cardiovascular biomechanics, mechanobiology, and
their roles in cardiovascular disease while promoting active engagement across
all participant groups, especially young investigators, students, women,
underrepresented, and disadvantaged groups to ensure future growth.

The 2023 GRC meeting is a significant expansion of the International Symposium
on Cardiovascular Biology and Disease, which has been held annually as a small
transatlantic conference. The Symposium activity began in 2005 as the Shear
stress symposium by the cardiovascular biomechanics and imaging group in
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. The Symposium has been gradually expanding and
evolving as International Symposium on Biomechanics in Cardiovascular Biology
and Disease meetings since 2012. The 2023 GRC aims to provide a forum to bring
together engineers, biologists, and clinicians who study biomechanics in
cardiovascular biology and disease in the nation and internationally. The
Program will have a keynote session, eight sessions, four poster sessions, and a
Power Hour session, which will discuss the effect of biomechanical forces,
including shear stress and wall stress, on the pathophysiology of
atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and aneurysms.

This project is supported by Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (BMMB) program in
the CMMI division and Engineering of Biomedical Systems (EBMS) program in the
CBET division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.