* 2316748
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Probing small galactic scales in large volumes with the Rubin Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Francisco Mercado, Mercado, Francisco J
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Francisco Javier Mercado is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and education at Pomona College. Francisco plans to utilize a state-of-
the-art, galaxy formation simulation of a large portion of the Universe to
develop a better understanding of the internal structure of low mass (faint)
galaxies. His work will provide important predictions that can then be tested by
observations of real galaxies with telescopes like the Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope at the Vera C. Rubin Observatory and the James Webb Space Telescope
(JWST). Mercado will also work with faculty and students at Pomona College to
establish a bilingual (English and Spanish) planetarium series in service of
nearby communities of color.

Mercado will utilize FIREbox, a novel large-volume cosmological simulation to
investigate the morphologies, structure, and scaling relations of a
statistically significant sample of simulated low-mass galaxies (including
ultra-faint dwarf galaxies). The large and diverse sample of simulated galaxies
in FIREbox will allow Mercado to make predictions for future observations as a
function of galactic environment. Additionally, Francisco will work to establish
a sustainable planetarium series in English and Spanish. The goal of this
program is twofold: (1) to help Pomona College students gain experience in
presenting complex astronomical phenomena in a way that is digestible for
general audiences of diverse backgrounds and (2) to increase the participation
of the general public (specifically communities of color in the surrounding
areas) in conversations regarding current developments in the field of
astronomy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.