* 2316289
* LEAPS-MPS: Network Statistics of Rupturing Foams
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Joseph Klobusicky, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 12/31/2025
* USD 214,899.00

Foams form when pockets of air are trapped inside a liquid or solid material.
The structures and symmetries found in foams have drawn the attention of pure
mathematicians for centuries, but physical properties of foams, both desirable
and undesirable, are also highly relevant in industry and manufacturing. This
project will study statistical properties of two-dimensional foams in a
controlled setting through compressing a soap foam between two transparent
plates and heating to induce edge breaking. The network dynamics will be then
captured through image processing algorithms. The underlying differential
equations for modeling ruptures, a variation of the so-called coagulation
equations describing sticky particle aggregation, will also be rigorously
analyzed. Because the elimination of foam is vital in multiple industrial
processes such as in the production of detergents, the project aims to generate
data directly related to rates of foam reduction to shed light on how to
optimize this process. The project includes undergraduate research training
opportunities and outreach activities to local high schools focused on data
science.

The study of microstructure, or composition of materials at small scales, is
critical for understanding material properties at the macroscopic level. While
much has been written about the coarsening of microstructure via gas diffusion
across cell walls, this project will focus on the experimental generation and
theoretical modeling of two-dimensional foams with edge rupture induced by
heating. Using cell-tracking algorithms commonly found in morphology, the
project will examine the evolving network statistics such as topological
frequencies, coarsening rates, and the creation and growth of massive cells.
Because the second-order reaction of cell merging resulting from rupture can be
modeled through processes like the Smoluchowski coagulation equation, this
project will consider a class of these equations inspired by this merging and
will focus on rigorously deriving properties of the resulting cluster
statistics. The long-term goal being to use the experimental, computational, and
theoretical methods developed in this study for constructing a general theory of
coarsening processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.