* 2316854
* LEAPS-MPS: It Takes a Village: Synergistic Assembly of Naphthodithiophene-Based Organic Macrocycles and Metallomacrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Zacharias Kinney, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 11/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Zacharias
Kinney and his students at Oakland University will perform studies that aim to
develop new organic macrocycles and metallomacrocycles to serve as photoactive
materials with unique optoelectronic properties. As society continues to search
for efficient and sustainable energy solutions a growing area of interest are
primarily low-cost organic materials that display unique photophysical
properties. The Kinney lab’s efforts are focused on synthesizing molecules that
are emissive and can serve as the core photoactive component in optoelectronic
materials such as solar cells and organic light-emitting diodes. To accomplish
this task the Kinney lab employs multiple types of interactions – namely
covalent, non-covalent, and metal-ligand bonding – to assemble macrocyclic
structures containing multiple thiophene-based monomers. Ultimately, their
studies aim to improve our understanding of structure-property relationships in
photoactive materials containing macrocyclic components while elucidating their
potential applications as sustainable materials. Central to this program will be
broadening participation in STEM by providing an equitable opportunity for
Oakland Community College (OCC) students to gain an authentic research
experience while pursuing their associates degree.

Professor Kinney and his research team will investigate and elucidate the
structure-property relationships of isomeric naphthodithiophenes for use in
optoelectronic devices. By employing angular naphthodithiophene building blocks
predictable discrete, shape-persistent macrocycles and metallomacrocycles can be
synthesized under facile conditions. These macrocyclic products afford extended
pi-conjugation, allowing for unique photophysical properties. Researchers will
be tasked with synthesizing and characterizing these molecules in both the
solution- and solid-state. The macrocyclic nature of these molecules yields an
interior cavity lined with heteroatoms, providing additional opportunities for
post-synthetic modulation of the molecules photophysical properties through
host-guest interactions. A section of this work will be completed by OCC
students through the advent of a paid research internship during the summer;
wherein students are able to participate in an authentic research experience in
a synthetic chemistry laboratory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.