* 2316842
* LEAPS-MPS: Biomass-Derived Depolymerizable and Degradable Polymers as Sustainable Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Hao Sun, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,592.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Hao Sun and
his students at the University of New Haven will perform studies that aim to
develop biomass-derived depolymerizable and degradable polymer materials with
highly tunable thermomechanical properties. The ubiquity of commodity vinyl
polymers and polyolefins in modern society has caused negative environmental
impacts because of their non-degradable carbon-carbon backbones. Professor Sun
and his students will tackle this challenge by developing polymer using biomass-
derived monomers that can break down as needed (i.e. depolymerizable and
degradable). Their studies could lead to establishing a relationship between the
degradable polymer structure and thermomechanical properties to evaluate their
potential in industrial applications. The project will also contribute to STEM
education and broadened participation in polymer science and sustainability
through recruiting underrepresented minority student researchers, developing a
new undergraduate lab course about degradable polymers, and reaching out to
local high schools.

Professor Sun and his students will develop synthetic approaches to
depolymerizable and degradable polymer materials from readily available biomass
resources. Two classes of biomass-derived polymers will be designed and
synthesized, including depolymerizable polyolefins and degradable poly(enol
ether)s. The employment of ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP)
technique in their approaches will generate well-defined degradable polymers
with modular molecular structure and tunable molecular weights, enabling the
establishment of structure-depolymerization and structure-degradation
relationships. Understanding these correlations will give rise to polymer
materials with programmable depolymerization or degradation kinetics for various
applications such as drug delivery systems and stimuli-responsive materials.
Furthermore, Professor Sun will systematically evaluate the thermomechanical
properties of proposed polymers, with the goal of advancing these biomass-
derived polymers as a new kind of sustainable and responsive materials for
industrial applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.