* 2316669
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Elucidation of Peptide Scrambling in Collision Induced Dissociation: Energetic and Mechanistic Analysis via Guided Ion Beam Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Evan Perez, Perez, Evan Hunt
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Evan H. Perez is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Perez supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Elucidation of Peptide Scrambling in Collision
Induced Dissociation: Energetic and Mechanistic Analysis via Guided Ion Beam
Mass Spectrometry” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Utah, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Peter B. Armentrout.

This proposal seeks to deepen the understanding of peptide fragmentation and
rearrangement mechanisms by using Guided Ion Beam Mass Spectrometry to observe
energy-resolved collision events and model these energies using electronic
structure calculations. The proposal will use polyglycine polymer ions to
perform competitive threshold analysis and electronic structure calculations to
elucidate the key chemical pathways for the observed fragmentation events. The
proposed research will investigate the role of the peptide length from
tetraglycine up to hexaglycine in the formation of macrocyclic structures which
precedes the intramolecular fragmentation events known as “scrambling.” The work
will implement traveling wave ion mobility SLIM (Structures for Lossless Ion
Manipulation) experiments to allow for conformation specific fragmentation
analysis as well as conformer analysis of the fragment ions. The proposed
studies will enable comparison of fragmentation methods (hard single collision
versus soft collisional heating) and correlation of conformation with mechanism.
Successful implementation of this work may lead to improved understanding of
peptide sequencing by mass spectrometry which could have significant impacts on
determining protein sequences and advancing the proteomics field.

The PI plans to mentor undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
minority groups in research projects involving training in mass spectrometric
techniques and learning quantum chemical calculations. The PI intends to
participate with the STEM Action Center of the University of Utah in potential
recruiting activities and mentoring of students from underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.