* 2316017
* WORKSHOP: HRI Pioneers at the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Daniel Szafir, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support a workshop (doctoral consortium) of approximately 21
students (18 graduate participants, one undergraduate participant, and two
student organizers), along with distinguished research faculty. The full-day
hybrid event will take place on March 13, 2023, in conjunction with the 18th
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction (HRI 2023), to be
held March 13-16 in Stockholm, Sweden, and which is jointly sponsored by ACM and
IEEE. HRI is the premier conference for showcasing the very best
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research on human-robot interaction,
with roots in diverse fields including robotics, artificial intelligence, social
psychology, cognitive science, human-computer interaction, human factors,
engineering, and many more. It is a highly selective annual event whose theme
for 2023 is “HRI for all” with a focus on key HRI theories, methods, designs,
studies, and technical advances that aim to understand and promote inclusion and
diversity in HRI. More information about the conference is available online at
https://humanrobotinteraction.org/2023.

Intellectual Merit The Pioneers Workshop is designed to complement the
conference by affording a unique opportunity for the best of the next generation
of researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to and discuss current
and relevant topics as they are being studied in several different research
communities. Participants are encouraged to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development, to form collaborative relationships, and to generate new research
questions to be addressed during the coming years. Participants also gain
leadership and service experience, as the workshop is student organized and
student led. The workshop provides a forum for students and recent graduates in
the field of HRI to share their current research with their peers and a panel of
senior researchers in a setting that is less formal and more interactive than
the conference. During the workshop, participants talk about the important
upcoming research themes in the field. The formation of collaborative
relationships across disciplines and geographic boundaries is encouraged; to
these ends, the workshop format encompasses a variety of activities. Because the
workshop is co-located with the conference, participants are able to attend
both.

Broader Impacts The organizers will strive to ensure that the workshop involves
students from institutions having historically large numbers of minorities and
limited research opportunities. Furthermore, the organizers have a strong
commitment to recruiting women and members from under-represented groups, and to
attracting students and postdocs from different areas of the world and from
diverse areas of research. To further ensure diversity, no more than two student
participants will be accepted from a particular institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.