* 2316812
* LEAPS-MPS: Water-soluble Afterglow Luminescent Nanocomposites for Bioimaging and Bioanalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Steven Wu, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,128.00

In this project, co-funded by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Steven Wu and his
students at the University of South Dakota will perform studies that aim to
develop a range of water-soluble afterglow luminescent nanocomposites for
bioimaging and bioanalysis, using carbon dots (CDs) and semiconducting polymer
nanoparticles (SPNs). Due to the strong autofluorescence from biosamples and
limited light penetration depth, it is still a challenge to eliminate background
noise during optical bioimaging and bioanalysis to achieve high sensitivity and
accuracy. Dr. Wu and his students will investigate the synthesis,
characterization, and afterglow luminescent mechanisms of the CDs@SPN
nanocomposites and will work to demonstrate their potential in bioimaging and
bioanalysis. Their studies are expected to provide insight into the design of
afterglow luminescent probes with reduced background noise for bioimaging and
bioanalysis, thereby improving detection sensitivity and accuracy. In addition,
Dr. Wu and his team will reach out to Tribal Colleges and Universities in South
Dakota and provide opportunities for underrepresented undergraduate students to
participate in research projects and encourage them to consider science as a
career option.

Under this award, the Wu research team at the University of South Dakota
proposes to address the challenges of strong background noise during optical
bioimaging and bioanalysis using afterglow luminescent nanomaterials. They will
perform chemical synthesis, characterization and mechanistic investigations of
the afterglow nanomaterials that they are developing for bioimaging
applications. The technical objectives of this project are four-fold: (i)
synthesis of of a spectrum of afterglow carbon dots by adjusting the doping
elements and carbonization level; (ii) synthesis of afterglow carbon dot-doped
semiconducting polymer nanoparticles (CD@SPNs), which could constitute a general
approach to fabricating water-soluble afterglow luminescent probes based on
Fӧrster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between CDs and SPNs; (iii)
investigating the mechanism of afterglow luminescence and (iv) implementation of
afterglow luminescent nanoprobes in bioimaging and bioanalysis to achieve high
sensitivity and accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.