* 2316631
* LEAPS-MPS: Optimal Design of Therapeutic Phage Cocktails: a Data-Driven Mathematical Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Qimin Huang, College of Wooster
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 189,811.00

Antimicrobial resistance has been described as one of the biggest threats to
human health in the twenty-first century. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria, found
in people, animals, plants, and the environment, have rapidly emerged and spread
throughout the world. Bacteriophages, or phages for short, are viruses that have
evolved to infect and kill bacteria. Before the widespread use of antibiotics,
phage therapy was successfully applied for the treatment of a variety of
infections in the 1920s and 1930s. As a century-old infection remedy, phage
therapy is currently viewed as a potential antibiotic alternative and is being
widely redeveloped to treat multidrug-resistance infections. There are millions
of phages in existence, each with different properties, it is therefore
impossible to experimentally test them for efficacy against individual clinical
pathogens. Mathematical models can help identify characteristics that would
suggest that a phage is a promising therapeutic candidate. This project will
lead to the development of an optimal combination phage cocktail and antibiotic
therapy and further reduce the health risks at the human-animal-plant-ecosystem
interface caused by antimicrobial resistance. The project will engage
undergraduate students with different research backgrounds and interests and
support underrepresented students in STEM at The College of Wooster. Students
will benefit from receiving year-round interdisciplinary training in formulating
genuine life science questions into standard mathematical problems. The project
will additionally advance curricular and program development, which will enhance
the institution's research environment and further establish a sustained,
student-focused, and interdisciplinary research program in mathematical biology
at Wooster.

The project will explore the treatment efficacies of single, double
simultaneous, and double sequential administration strategies with three
Pseudomonas phages by using nonlinear ordinary differential equations to model
the density-dependent interactions between multiple-phage and bacteria. Unlike
previous studies that focused on the phage-killing aspect of phage therapy, this
project will incorporate both phage-killing and the evolution of bacterial phage
resistance. Understanding both is important for the future development of a
combination phage cocktail and antibiotic therapy. The investigator will
consider a more biologically realistic mixing than the commonly used linear
interaction, as adsorption rate is linked to bacterial growth, investigate the
stochastic modeling approach to capture the emergence of phage-resistant
bacteria, and analyze the structure of the model using bifurcation and
sensitivity analyses to inform further modeling modifications. The modeling
framework has many inferential and exploratory uses for clinical investigation
such as identifying the most sensitive model parameters, corresponding to phage
characteristics, for phage selection as well as exploring different treatment
regimens. The species-specific and phage-specific modeling studies can be used
as predictive analytics tools to assist in the design of future clinical studies
and to improve the understanding of experimental data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.