* 2316772
* LEAPS-MPS: Conformational Inversion in Heterotriangulenes for Ferroelectric Switching
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Ren Wiscons, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 247,249.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The generation of new and access to existing digital information is critical to
the continued advancement of society. Cloud data storage offers global access to
digital information and allows portable devices to generate and interface with
data that need not be stored locally; however, the negative impacts of Cloud
storage facilities include energy inefficiency, land use allocation, and
resource management. While global information sharing is an appropriate use of
Cloud storage strategies, compensating for limited local storage capacity is,
fundamentally, a challenge that can be addressed by increasing the storage
density of data storage materials. With this LEAPS-MPS award, the research team
investigates a new class of carbon-based molecular materials for non-volatile
digital information storage with the potential to decrease the size of a bit of
data by several orders of magnitude relative to traditional ferroelectric
technologies and an order of magnitude relative to leading memory capacitor
technologies. Ferroelectricity is a phenomenon by which information can be
stored within the electronic polarization vector of a material. The potential
use of this use of these materials would enable a technology that works by
encoding information into the three-dimensional shape of a single molecule that
can be modified with the application of an electric field. As part of this
LEAPS-MPS project, undergraduate students at Amherst College learn advanced
materials synthesis and engineering strategies. Additionally, this research
encourages discussion of the sustainability, equity, and accessibility of local
and remote data storage structures and inspires a reimagining of how these
issues may be addressed.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The investigation of organic materials for practical information storage
applications has long been precluded by the lack of organic ferroelectric
systems that operate at or near room temperature. Ferroelectricity in organic
crystals generally arises from collective rotation and/or displacement of
molecules in the solid-state in response to an applied electric field. However,
such mechanisms are sensitive to the details of crystal packing, which cannot
yet be reliably predicted in silico. This project, supported by a LEAPS-MPS
award, seeks to develop fundamental mechanistic insight for a new class of
organic ferroelectrics that take advantage of the conformational inversion of
bowl-shaped heteroatom-centered triangulene compounds (heterotriangulenes) for
ferroelectric switching. Researchers investigate whether ferroelectric switching
in the solid state is strongly correlated with the energetics of molecular
conformational inversion rather than unpredictable subtleties of crystal
packing, and subsequently study the tunability of ferroelectric performance
through molecular design principles. The results of this research establish the
foundation for a new class of ferroelectrics with the potential to approach the
single-molecule limit for data storage. This research is conducted by a diverse
and cross-disciplinary team of undergraduate researchers who receive training in
organic and materials syntheses, X-ray crystallography, and device fabrication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.