* 2316869
* LEAPS-MPS: Design and discovery of new magnetic Weyl semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Halyna Hodovanets, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,132.00

Non-technical abstract: Technological progress in electronics depend on the
discovery and development of novel quantum materials. Recently discovered Weyl
semimetals are a promising new class of materials with potentially wide-ranging
technological applications. However, many of the currently known Weyl semimetals
require the application of an external magnetic field or pressure to reveal
their novel behavior, which is a drawback in applications where none can be
applied. In that respect, new intrinsically magnetic Weyl semimetals are
desirable, but only a few such materials are known. This project aims to explore
and characterize a new family of proposed magnetic Weyl semimetals through
single crystal growth and magneto-electrical transport measurements. It will
unlock the key ingredients necessary for discovery and design of new magnetic
Weyl semimetals. The project includes a comprehensive outreach strategy and
provides important training in material synthesis and characterization for high-
school, undergraduate, and graduate students.

Technical Abstract: Magnetic Weyl semimetals, characterized by broken spatial
inversion and time-reversal symmetries whose quasiparticle excitations are Weyl
fermions, have recently attracted much attention because they show a variety of
new topological states that are promising for diverse technological
applications, including quantum bits. Despite significant theoretical and
experimental work, only a few such materials are known. The objective of this
project is to discover and design such materials through the investigation of
families of magnetic strongly correlated intermetallic compounds via single
crystal growth and measurement of magnetotransport properties (i.e., the Hall
effect). Together with theoretical calculations and angle-resolved photo-
emission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements, this project will provide deeper
insight into how Weyl fermions manifest in condensed matter systems, broaden the
current research field by discovering many new magnetic Weyl semimetal families,
and study the interplay between Weyl fermions, electron-electron correlations
and quantum criticality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.