* 2316136
* Collaborative Research: The influence of incoming plate structure and fluids on arc melt generation at the Lesser Antilles subduction system
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Robert Evans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,731,838.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate is pushed beneath another, are known
areas of abundant volcanic and seismic hazard. The Antilles islands are the
result of such volcanic activity at a subduction zone. As the Atlantic seafloor
is pushed down into the earth, it sinks, carrying with it a large, but unknown
volume of water that is released, either squeezed from cracks, or lost from
minerals as they heat up in the warmer interior of the earth. Released fluids
play a role in controlling earthquake generation and enhancing the process of
magma generation, with the magma formed moving upwards and feeding the volcanoes
that create the islands. This project will use electromagnetic methods to image
the Antilles subduction system. These data will be used to identify areas of
high fluid content including both water and magma in the oceanic plate that is
subducting beneath the Antilles. Broader impacts include international
collaborations with Germany and France and support for early career researchers
graduate students, and undergraduates. Students from the University of Puerto
Rico will participate in the field programs.

The Antilles is viewed as an end-member system with subduction of oceanic crust
formed at the slow spreading Mid-Atlantic Ridge expected to carry large volumes
of water bound within serpentinized upper-mantle. Seismic imaging of the
incoming plate shows a high degree of structural variability that suggests that
high fluxes of fluids into the mantle wedge will be localized. This project will
link these localized areas of high fluid flux to the generation of melts that
feed the volcanic arc. Electromagnetic (EM) methods are ideal for characterizing
the transport of fluids into a subduction system and the subsequent release of
those fluids into the overlying decollement and mantle wedge. EM methods broadly
fall into two categories: the passive magnetotelluric (MT) method, which uses
naturally occurring signals to look to great depth (up to 200 km or more); and
controlled source electromagnetic (CSEM) sounding, in which a transmitter is
towed behind a ship and generates an artificial EM signal that is recorded by an
array of seafloor instruments. CSEM is useful for quantifying fluids in the
crust and uppermost mantle. This project will acquire a MT/CSEM survey across
the Antilles subduction system that will test the hypothesis that higher fluid
contents stored in the incoming plate results in a substantial water flux into
the forearc crust and arc mantle wedge above the downgoing slab. Variations in
fluid input along strike will be manifested as variations in mantle
conductivity, with regions of high flux being substantially more conductive as a
result of the larger volume of fluids released and hydrous melts generated. The
field program will consist of two research cruises and land acquisition.

This project is supported by the Marine Geology and Geophysics program in the
Division of Ocean Sciences and the Geophysics program in the Division of Earth
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.