* 2316991
* LEAPS-MPS: Heterogeneous Asymmetric Catalysis with Chiral Metal Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* ANINDITA DAS, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,897.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Anindita Das
and her students at Southern Methodist University will perform studies that aim
to transpose ligand-directed asymmetric catalysis from homogeneous to
heterogeneous systems by installing new chiral ligands on the surfaces of metal
clusters. Asymmetric catalytic reactions represent a powerful way to synthesize
optically active compounds which have tremendous implications in medicine. For
instance, more than 75% of the small-molecule drugs approved by the FDA in the
last 5 years are chiral compounds. Over the years, chemists have achieved
tremendous success in developing homogeneous asymmetric organocatalysts as well
as transition-metal complex catalysts by rationally designing chiral ligands
which mimic the active sites of enzymes. However, using this strategy for
industrially relevant heterogeneous metal nanoparticle-based catalysts to
achieve “predictive heterogeneous asymmetric catalysis” is a longstanding
challenge owing to the inherent polydispersity of nanoparticles synthesized by
conventional routes. To address this limitation, Professor Das and her students
will develop atomically precise model metal clusters the surfaces of which will
feature new chiral ligands to tune their catalytic activity, analogous to
homogeneous asymmetric catalysts. Their studies could help identify the critical
parameters related to asymmetric catalytic activity of metal cluster-based model
catalysts leading to better heterogeneous catalyst design in future. This
research is integrated with numerous outreach activities to engage and encourage
underrepresented, first-generation, or low-income students to pursue STEM
degrees and careers. These include organizing workshops and demo-experiments at
nearby high schools and MSIs to promote public literacy about science and
research. Additionally, trainings on hidden implicit biases and cultivating
cultural intelligence will be undertaken to create an inclusive and supportive
lab environment.

Professor Das and her students will synthesize and characterize a series of
atomically precise metal clusters protected by new chiral ligands. The synthetic
mechanisms of these clusters will be investigated by various techniques such as
single crystal X-ray crystallography, NMR, UV-visible and fluorescence
spectroscopy, circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, electrochemical analysis,
and mass spectrometry. These synthetic guidelines will then be applied to
bimetallic chiral metal clusters to study the effects of cooperative
interactions in model asymmetric transformations. Ultimately, the design rules
generated from this research may be broadly applied to other classes of
heterogeneous nanomaterials to understand and tailor their asymmetric catalytic
properties with atomic precision.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.