* 2316258
* RCN-UBE Incubator: An Interdisciplinary Network in Hawai'i to Develop, Support, and Assess Pathways into STEM Through Research Experiences in Marine Science (REMS)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Summer Maunakea, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 09/30/2024
* USD 74,988.00

The purpose of the Research Experiences in Marine Science (REMS) Research
Coordination Network incubator project is to build and strengthen science
pathways through the development of cumulative, culturally responsive, course-
based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) in marine science in Hawai‘i.
This project will coordinate an interdisciplinary gathering of communities that
seek to empower students from groups historically excluded from STEM in Hawai‘i,
with particular focus on Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander populations.
University of Hawai'i (Hawai'i) students, and in particular Native Hawaiian
students, face high rates of attrition and low representation in STEM academic
and career pathways, but place-based research experiences that are culturally
grounded, relevant, responsible, and sustainable may promote persistence.

This network seeks to foster a culturally and professionally diverse community
of marine science researchers and educators by conducting workshops to
facilitate knowledge exchanges among network partners and outline network needs
and creating and piloting novel modules for a marine science CURE. The network
activities will center around the REMS Summer Program, a place-based CURE
designed to support Hawaiʻi students (including high representation of Native
Hawaiian and Pacific Islander students) as they transition into undergraduate
STEM pathways. Professional development workshops that highlight place-based
practices, laulima (community work/service) days at community partner sites, and
a student research symposium hosted during the REMS program will be used to
promote equitable and reciprocal relationships amongst network participants and
REMS community partners. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.