* 2316443
* Conference: University of Idaho Institute for Health in the Human Ecosystem Biology of Vector-borne Diseases Course
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Edwin Lewis, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2028
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of the Biology of Vector-borne Diseases (BVBD) course is to train
graduate students and faculty, health practitioners, government workers, and
policymakers to view the biological interactions and parallels among plant,
animal, and human health in complex ecosystems as a basis for novel
interventions to diseases that currently burden hundreds of millions of people
across the globe. Vector-borne diseases are caused by pathogens transmitted by
one organism, often an insect, to another organism with disease resulting from
pathogen infection. The majority of these diseases have few to no effective
interventions for control. Through short presentations, case studies, hands-on
modeling exercises, and group discussions of “wicked challenges”, participants
learn about the biological connections across plant, animal, and human vector-
borne diseases from the subcellular to the ecosystem scale. The annual BVBD
course is taught by internationally recognized experts to diverse participants
from across the US and around the world, connecting individuals from all
impacted regions. The BVBD course is unique in its content and approach to
inspire diverse stakeholders and actors to concurrently and holistically address
plant, animal, and human vector-borne diseases as interconnected health
challenges.

Plant, animal, and human vector-borne diseases drive food insecurity across
continents, devastate livestock production and cause the deaths of millions each
year. These pathosystems are intricately connected in complex ecosystems that
range from areas of dense urbanization, agricultural production from the
pastoralist to industrial scales, managed forests and deforestation, and large
regions that are increasingly subjected to extreme wildfire, drought,
temperature shifts and catastrophic weather events. Within these environments,
the shared biology and common drivers of plant, animal, and human vector-borne
diseases enable not only pathosystem persistence, but also migration and
invasion of new species of plants and animals that can fuel disease emergence
and re-emergence. There is growing recognition that these connections across
multiple biological scales can and should be leveraged concurrently to increase
efficiency, sustainability, and efficacy of new control programs to improve
health outcomes across all organisms. However, we face substantial intellectual
and logistical obstacles in effecting these changes. The BVBD course delivers an
integrated framework to break down intellectual and communication barriers that
impede our ability to address these disease challenges in complex ecosystems.
Because vector-borne diseases disproportionately burden the most under-served
and under-resourced populations and regions, it is critical that BVBD
participants and instructors reflect both the diversity of populations impacted
by these diseases and a range of expertise and experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.