* 2316598
* Nonequilibrium quantum mechanics of strongly correlated systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2027
* Aditi Mitra, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 03/31/2027
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research on complex quantum systems that are in
a highly excited or nonequilibrium state. One of the main challenges of such
systems is that they heat to a high temperature, a situation which is
detrimental to observing any non-trivial quantum phenomena. Nevertheless, if the
system has some symmetries, this can limit heating. The award will explore how
symmetries, and generalizing the notion of symmetries, can lead to phenomena out
of equilibrium that are immune to heating. The project will bring together
methods from mathematical physics, statistical mechanics, and condensed matter
physics with the common goal being to study generalized symmetries, out of
equilibrium. One consequence of generalized symmetries is that the quantum
system can host objects known as "non-abelian anyons". These objects can be used
to store memory that is stable for long times. The project will explore how non-
abelian anyons can be realized in experimental platforms such as the so-called
"Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum" devices.

The project has a strong educational component as it will involve the active
participation of a graduate student, an undergraduate student, and a
postdoctoral research scientist. Recent developments in generalized symmetries
have brought together concepts from mathematical physics, statistical mechanics,
condensed matter, and high energy physics. The PI will adapt her course on
theoretical condensed matter physics to introduce students to these recent
developments. In addition, the PI and the junior research scientists will
broaden participation by mentoring high school students through the NYU-GSTEM
program.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research on nonequilibrium phenomena in strongly
correlated quantum systems. The focus will be twofold. One is to develop methods
to study non-abelian excitations, essential for quantum computing, in a highly
non-equilibrium setting, realizable in current Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum
(NISQ) devices. The second is to develop methods to study information theoretic
measures that quantify how an initial decoherence grows, and entanglement
spreads.

In the first major thrust, the PI will study Floquet models built out of a
fusion category. In these models, the role of topological defects, operators
that can be deformed in the space and time direction without changing the
physics, will be explored. When the topological defects are invertible, these
are unitary symmetries. When the topological defects are non-invertible, these
act as projectors, are non-abelian, and are examples of non-invertible
symmetries. The latter are also examples of generalized symmetries, and their
effect on quantum dynamics will be explored. The Floquet circuits to be studied
will include unitary circuits, non-unitary circuits, and dual-unitary circuits,
without integrability being a key requirement. When several topological defects
are applied to the circuit, creating junctions, its effect on the dynamics will
be studied. The implementation of topological defects in NISQ devices will be
explored. In the second thrust, the PI will employ an augmented Schwinger-
Keldysh formalism to study the space-time propagation of information theoretic
measures such as out of time ordered correlators. The goal will be to understand
how intrinsic noise can affect propagation of the butterfly front. In addition,
how proximity to localization-delocalization transitions affects information
propagation will be explored.

The project has a strong educational component as it will involve the active
participation of a graduate student, an undergraduate student, and a
postdoctoral research scientist. Recent developments in generalized symmetries
have brought together concepts from mathematical physics, statistical mechanics,
condensed matter, and high energy physics. The PI will adapt her course on
theoretical condensed matter physics to introduce students to these recent
developments. In addition, the PI and the junior research scientists will
broaden participation by mentoring high school students through the NYU-GSTEM
program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.