* 2316692
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Radiation Behavior of Complexion Containing Nanocrystalline Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* William Cunningham, Cunningham, William Streit
* Fellowship Award
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Growing energy demands worldwide have driven a need for clean energy sources;
next-generation nuclear reactors promise to fulfill this need by serving as a
stable, high production energy source with low emissions. Furthermore, the
extreme internal conditions predicted for these next-generation nuclear reactors
have led to considerable interest in the development of novel metal alloys
capable of withstanding high temperatures, mechanical stresses, and radiation
damage. This proposal is exploring the behavior of a new class of metal alloys,
called complexion-containing alloys, that promise exceptional stability under
high temperatures and radiation due to their unique structure. Cutting-edge
microscopy techniques are being utilized to examine the structural changes
caused by radiation and determine the feasibility of using complexion-containing
alloys within the extreme environment of next-generation nuclear reactors. In
addition, this project incorporates opportunities for community engagement, such
as participation in Research Experiences for Undergraduates Programs,
collaborations with existing programs at the University of California, Santa
Barbara that cater to students from underrepresented communities in STEM, and
the development of a website for disseminating education resources for immigrant
student/researchers.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project explores the fundamental mechanisms that govern thermal stability
and radiation tolerance in novel nanocrystalline complexion-containing alloys.
Targeted ion irradiation studies coupled with in-situ testing tools in high-
resolution transmission electron microscopes are being utilized to investigate
the influence of ion irradiation induced damage on complexions and the
subsequent implications for material properties exhibited during, and post-,
irradiation. The objectives of the proposed research are: (a) design and create
a model nanocrystalline alloy containing complexions, (b) probe microstructural
changes pre- and post-irradiation as a function of temperature and dose to
explore the influence of radiation defects on complexion behavior, and (c)
utilize a suite of in-situ irradiation, heating, and mechanical testing
techniques to develop an understanding of the underlying mechanisms through
real-time visualization. In addition to its research endeavors, this proposal is
expanding opportunities for underrepresented communities in STEM fields through
mentoring opportunities at the undergraduate level, education programs for K-12
schools, and providing educational resources for immigrant student/researchers,
with a particular focus on expanding educational and research pathways between
the U.S. and Brazil.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.