* 2316295
* Collaborative Research: RII Track-2 FEC: Supporting rural livelihoods in the water-stressed Central High Plains: Microbial innovations for climate-resilient agriculture (MICRA)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Gaurav Jha, Kansas State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Casonya Johnson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,418,382.00

Supporting rural communities in the Central High Plains region of the Midwest is
critical. Agriculture is responsible for direct economic impacts of $21.3B,
$26.3B, and $7.6B in Kansas, Nebraska, and Oklahoma, respectively (USDA ERS data
for 2021). This agricultural region is facing increased frequency and severity
of drought due to climate change; as an example, in October 2022, 100% of
Nebraska, 98.5% of Kansas, and 100% of Oklahoma experienced drought conditions,
according to the University of Nebraska-Lincoln: U.S. Drought Monitor. The MICRA
project brings together researchers from Kansas State University (KSU), the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), and Langston University (LU) with a wide
range of expertise (e.g., engineering, science, agricultural science, and social
science). The project team will conduct research with the goal to preserve soil
moisture and improve water quality under drought conditions. Corn is the target
crop for study due to its economic importance in the Midwest, and its
substantial demand for water and nutrients. Researchers will investigate the
impacts of adding amendments to improve the soil (i.e., soil wetting bacteria,
Bacillus subtilis, and biochar); understand plants’ behavior in response to
drought; understand the impacts of climate change on agricultural workers; and
determine farmers' willingness to adopt new irrigation practices relative to
differing water rights and policies. The MICRA project will investigate the
impacts of soil amendments at the lab-scale, greenhouse-scale, and field-scale,
and will conduct surveys and focus groups. The MICRA team will recruit students
from historically excluded groups; mentor and train undergraduate and graduate
students to conduct interdisciplinary research; teach interdisciplinary courses
at the graduate level; support early career faculty at KSU, UNL, and LU; and
conduct educational outreach to rural K-12 science teachers.

The MICRA team will generate fundamental knowledge regarding the impacts of soil
amendments (i.e., soil wetting bacteria, B. subtilis, and biochar) to increase
the water holding capacity of soil, thereby improving agroecosystem productivity
as water becomes more limited due to climate-change-driven droughts.
Interdisciplinary research is focused in three research thrusts. Research Thrust
1 will test the hypothesis that spatial and temporal soil wetting behavior of B.
subtilis is driven by soil type, initial soil moisture levels, soil
hydrophobicity, and administration methods, thereby generating new knowledge
regarding soil wetting, evapotranspiration, and development of predictive,
genome-scale metabolic models for soil-microbial interactions. The central
hypothesis of Thrust 2 is that B. subtilis-mediated surfactant production (i.e.,
which changes the surface tension of water), when combined with biochar-mediated
soil aggregation, can synergistically improve soil water retention. Thrust 2
will determine the impacts of soil wetting bacteria and biochar on water-holding
capacity, nutrient transformation, and the rhizobiome under deficit irrigation.
Thrust 3 focuses on the hypotheses that producers (i.e., farmers) having lower
quality soils (e.g., high sand content) will be more willing to adopt new
precision irrigation technologies and practices, particularly in regions where
curtailments to historical water use amounts have been put in place. Focus group
and survey data will yield fundamental insights regarding irrigator’s
perceptions regarding soil amendments and irrigation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.