* 2316749
* LEAPS-MPS: Describing Compactifications of Moduli Spaces of Varieties and Pairs.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Patricio Gallardo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 233,452.00

Algebraic geometry is an area of mathematics that explores the geometry
associated with the solution sets of polynomials. As the coefficients of these
polynomials often vary, this, in turn, changes the geometry of their solution
sets. Moreover, these geometric shapes carry linear data, known as their Hodge
structures, which typically identify them. The PI will study the behavior of
such geometric and linear data when these coefficients shift toward infinity.
Particular focus is given to geometric cases that arise from applications to
other mathematical areas like combinatorics and mathematical physics.
Additionally, the researcher aims to foster an inclusive and diverse learning
environment, providing students with training in geometric and computational
tools, thereby empowering them to become scholars. This focus is particularly
essential for first-generation students and underrepresented minorities, for
whom the path to academia is often more uncertain.

This project will study GIT, Hodge theoretic, and KSBA compactifications for the
moduli space of surfaces of a general type and log pairs, such as the ones
associated with configurations of plane conics and log del Pezzo surfaces with
their anticanonical divisors. In particular, the PI will describe well-behaved
degenerations from a Hodge theory perspective and utilize techniques such as
eigenspace decompositions for studying the Limiting Mixed Hodge structures of
the varieties parametrized by the relevant compact moduli spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.