* 2316050
* 2023 National Science Foundation (NSF) Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Principal Investigator (PI) Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Daniela Raicu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 218,964.00

This project will support the planning, organization, participation, and
evaluation of the 2023 National Science Foundation (NSF) Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Principal Investigator (PI) Workshop. The three-day
workshop has four main goals: (1) provide opportunities for new and existing NSF
CISE REU PIs and Co-PIs to share experiences directing undergraduate research
programs and offer suggestions for improving all sites, (2) discuss best
practices and challenges associated with the administration of an undergraduate
research program, (3) provide networking and community-building opportunities
for REU PIs, recognizing individual and group dedication to the importance of
undergraduate research beyond home institutions, and (4) discuss the transfer of
lessons learned from virtual to in-person REUs. The meeting will prepare
attendees to host more impactful, inclusive, and research-generating REU sites.
Resources will be shared in a publicly available website and summarized in a
report and shared with all participants and the NSF community, as well as via
the workshop website and Slack REU Site PIs workspace.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.