* 2316699
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Fluid Dynamics and Chemotaxis on Curved Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rosa Maria Fuster Aguilera, Fuster Aguilera, Rosa Maria
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Dr. Rosa Maria (Padi) Fuster Aguilera is awarded a National Science Foundation
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research, education, and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship supports the research project entitled "Fluid Equations and
Chemotaxis on Manifolds". The project activities will be conducted at the host
institution, University of Colorado Boulder, under the mentorship of Dr.
Magdalena Czubak. This project includes research on two related topics in
partial differential equations (PDE) and differential geometry. The first one is
the search for an intrinsic viscosity operator on a general Riemannian manifold
which is of great importance for understanding the appropriate formulation of
the Navier-Stokes equations on curved manifolds. The second one is the study of
the qualitative behavior of solutions for a PDE model for chemotaxis in curved
manifolds with an application to tumor growth in organs. The broadening
participation activities for this project include "Meet a Mathematician" and the
"Math For All" conference. Meet a Mathematician is a collection of video
interviews of mathematicians from diverse backgrounds where their personal
stories as well as the mathematical research that they do is highlighted with
the aim of providing role models for students. Math For All is a nationwide
mathematical conference featuring speakers from diverse backgrounds with the
main goal of creating a friendly and welcoming environment to discuss
mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.