* 2316093
* Conference: Tech Topology Summer School 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* John Etnyre, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 45,000.00

The Tech Topology Summer School, to be held July 24-28, 2023, at the Georgia
Institute of Technology is the second installment of a biennial summer school.
The 2023 summer school will focus on a fundamental conjecture in low-dimensional
topology, called the L-space conjecture, that relates three very different areas
within this field. There will be mini-courses introducing these areas,
complemented by research talks. Students and postdoctoral researchers will have
an opportunity to give five-minute lighting talks to advertise their work to a
large audience. There will also be problem sessions where students can get help
with material presented in the lectures and other activities geared to stimulate
interest and spur collaboration among the participants. The summer school is
expected to provide a large group of early career mathematicians with
mathematical tools to start contributing to this exciting area of modern
research.

The Tech Topology Summer School will open with a talk by Cameron Gordon
(University of Texas, Austin) on the state of the L-space conjecture, outlining
major progress of the past several years. The L-space conjecture posits a
relationship between three distinct yet related topics, which will be the focus
of the mini-courses taught by Adam Clay (University of Manitoba), Irving Dai
(Stanford University), and Rachel Roberts (Washington University in St. Louis).
These topics are: Heegaard Floer homology, orderability of fundamental groups,
and taut foliations. The mini-courses will be complemented by research talks by
Nathan Dunfield (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign), Jonathan Hanselman
(Princeton University), Tao Li (Boston College), and Hannah Turner (Georgia
Institute of Technology). Problem sessions will be held in the afternoons. The
mathematical value lies both in the lectures and talks as well as in the
discussions that take place between the talks, leading to new collaborations and
mentoring relationships. More information can be found at the summer school
website https://sites.gatech.edu/ttss23/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.