* 2316793
* LEAPS-MPS: Light Tunable Redox-Active Hybrid Nanomaterial with Ultrahigh Catalytic Activity for Colorimetric Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Tuhina Banerjee, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2025
* USD 249,567.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Tuhina
Banerjee and her students at Missouri State University will be developing a
series of light-responsive nanoscale enzyme mimics for colorimetric
applications. This research will provide fundamental understanding about the
important physicochemical properties of the nanomaterials, structure-activity
relationships and basics of reaction kinetics mechanisms. Synthesized
nanomaterials and their catalytic activity will be investigated using a
combination of experimental and theoretical approaches. The proposed research
will find broader application in the development of ultrasensitive colorimetric
assays for bioanalysis, environment and biomarker detection. This project will
provide scientific opportunities to diverse cohort of students especially
members of underrepresented minority groups through cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research experiences. Further, the research will be integrated
in undergraduate curriculum at Missouri State, where students will acquire
diverse skills sets and get trained in synthetic and characterization techniques
that will have huge impact on their overall career development. Outreach
activities will also be initiated for local high school students through
workshops and lab experiences with the aim of encouraging diverse students to
consider STEM careers. Prof. Banerjee will develop a new approach for enhancing
the catalytic performance of nanomaterials that in particular exhibit mixed-
redox states. She and her students will synthesize a series of light responsive
cerium oxide-based nanozymes and explore the surface chemistry of cerium oxide,
and investigate how its catalytic activity changes with plasmonic tunability.
These new hybrid redox-active nanostructures will offer advantages over
nanoscale enzyme mimics and natural peroxidases that have low catalytic
efficiency. Further, plasmonic characteristics in these nanostructures opens up
the possibility of achieving ultrahigh catalytic activity in the presence of
visible light through plasmonic excitations and introduces an innovative
approach of controlling reaction kinetics in a precise fashion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.