* 2316845
* LEAPS-MPS: Investigation of Electrochromic Polymer Induced Plasmon Switching on Gold Nanocrystals and its Application for Smart Windows
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Gang Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,957.00

In this project, funded by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Gang Chen
and his students at the University of Central Florida will perform studies that
aim to integrate electrochromic polymer with plasmonic nanoparticles to build a
new type of smart windows with improved performance. Smart windows, whose
transmittance/reflection of sunlight can be selectively adjusted, can
dramatically improve the comfortability and security of living, and drastically
reduce the energy consumptions of air conditioning in buildings and automobile
vehicles. The performance of smart windows mainly depends on chromic materials,
and polymer electrochromic materials are of great commercial value because of
their high coloration efficiency, fast response speed, and high processability.
However, electrochromic polymers will deteriorate under high applied
electrochemical potentials. The deterioration will affect their long-term
cyclability and lower their color contrast, which prevents the commercialization
of the polymer electrochromic materials. Professor Chen and his students will
tackle this challenge by developing hybrid materials consisting of plasmonic
nanoparticle and electrochromic polymer that can be used to fabricate smart-
window devices with improved color-switching characteristics. This project
intends to expose smart materials research for a new generation so that they
will take a leading role in future scientific innovation. Prof. Chen plans to
involve graduate and undergraduate students, especially underrepresented
minority students in STEM fields, as well as high school students in the project
to broaden the integration of research and participation-oriented outreach
activities.

Plasmonic nanoparticles, including gold, silver, and copper, have strong light
absorption and scattering at their plasmon wavelengths, which can be
synthetically tuned from visible to near infrared. The plasmonic properties are
strongly dependent on their dielectric environments and thereafter can be easily
varied by the dielectric change brought by the transition between bleached and
colored states of electrochromic polymer. The introduction of plasmonic
nanoparticles is expected to largely improve the color contrast of
electrochromic polymer under different states and therefore avoid its possible
electrochemical deterioration. This study will further our understanding on
electrochromic polymer-induced plasmonic switching behaviors of plasmonic
nanoparticles. Smart-window devices fabricated from plasmonic
nanoparticles/electrochromic polymer hybrid nanostructures are expected to have
improved color-switching characteristics. The knowledge gained from this study
will also be useful for designing many other plasmon-based optical devices for
controlling and directing light for a wide range of areas such as information
displays, anti-counterfeiting inks, and photothermal systems for cancer therapy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.