* 2316576
* Conference: Support student and early professional attendance to the Species on the Move international conference
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Brett Scheffers, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 43,740.00

Practically all species will be impacted by climate change. Some will be
affected a lot and some a little, but there is much debate about which will be
which because predicting responses to changing climate is enormously
complicated. It will require the combined efforts of scientists from many
disciplines, working together to develop new models and other cutting-edge
tools. This award will fund a conference in Florida to foster international
collaboration on ways in which ecological and evolutionary impacts of climate
change can be predicted and perhaps mitigated.

The conference will bring together scientists with expertise in molecular
biology, genetics, physiology, microbiology, and the -omics fields, as well as
evolution, ecology, and ecosystems biology to address pressing gaps in knowledge
related to the evolution of traits, species, and communities in the context of
climate change. Attendees will address cornerstone and emerging issues
pertaining to who is moving due to climate change, where they are moving to and
from, and why they are moving. The conference is organized with plenary talks
each morning featuring cutting edge research across each of 12 core themes.
Panel discussions during the morning plenary sessions will be designed and
structured to maximize exchange between academics, managers and professionals by
engaging on a shared topic of interest. Each afternoon will consist of 3-4
concurrent sessions, across the 12 themes. There will be mentoring events and a
pre-conference workshop to attract, train and support early-career scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.