* 2316334
* Conference: 2023 Developmental Biology GRC and GRS Developmental Origin of Form and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Swathi Arur, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 34,500.00

The Gordon Research Seminar and Conference (GRS and GRC) on Developmental
Biology will be held from June 24-25 and 25-30, 2023, respectively at Mount
Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts. The conference will bring together
scientists across various career stages and identities to discuss and advance
the frontiers of science in the field of developmental biology. GRS is a trainee
specific mini meeting held immediately before the GRC and provides a platform
for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to network and openly discuss
their research and ideas in a highly stimulating and non-intimidating
environment; the opportunities from this setting for early career scientists
leads to long term collaborations and enriches their scientific experience
paving the way for a lifetime of scientific success. The GRS/GRC will host talks
from invited speakers and speakers chosen from submitted abstracts, poster
sessions and afternoon free time to facilitate informal discussions and
interactions. Both GRS and GRC requires platform speakers and poster presenters
to discuss unpublished work ensuring that the attendees share fresh ideas,
innovations, and the latest research with each other â€“ thus enabling seamless
incorporation of new and emerging technologies and concepts empowering rapid
forward movement of science. The meeting will include a power hour discussion on
challenges women face in science and dinner table discussions on topics such as
dealing with impostor syndrome in science, impact of COVID-19 on scientific
communication, and more thus providing space to discuss various facets of
scientific research and responsibility.

Understanding how an organism is built and coordinates its mechanical design
with physiological functions requires interdisciplinary research spanning across
diverse fields and organisms. To this end, the meeting will feature speakers
from varied disciplines such as embryology, biochemistry, genetics,
computational biology, physics, mathematics and engineering, and research using
various invertebrate and vertebrate organisms as well as plants. Topics will
cover various aspects of developmental biology such as metabolic fluxes in
development, transgenerational inheritance, gene regulation, dynamics of
signalling, regeneration, tissue mechanics and developmental diseases. The GRS
will especially focus on quantitative approaches to studying development at
different spatial-temporal scales using new techniques and technologies. Rapid
advances and application of varied range of approaches requires consistent
communication and exchange of ideas across leaders with diverse expertise.
Importantly, the GRS and GRC will also include important sections devoted to
addressing barriers women face in science and dealing with imposter syndrome in
science. This will provide opportunities for thoughtful discussion and idea
generation for ways to help better the scientific community. GRS and GRC will
provide a platform for just that and will help accelerate progress and advance
the mechanistic interrogation of developmental processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.