* 2316689
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Ring-opening of Cyclic Ethers Facilitated by Main-group Lewis Acids.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Nathanael Hunter, Hunter, Nathanael H
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Nathanael Hunter is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Hunter supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Ring-opening of Cyclic Ethers Facilitated by Main-
group Lewis Acids” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is Texas A&M University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. François Gabbaï.

This proposal intends to develop organoantimony (V) and organo-bismuth (III)
compounds as Lewis acid tunable catalysts to facilitate the ring opening of
oxetane including copolymerization with carbon dioxide. These catalysts will
lead to better selectivity and to the development of new chemical
transformations. The organo-bismuth catalysts, through a coordinating phosphine
donor, will allow the introduction of a chiral ligand to the bismuth center,
which will generate chiral oxetane ring-opening products. The low environmental
hazards associated with bismuth will also push this chemistry in a more
sustainable direction.

The PI intends to participate in outreach activities to further increase the
diversity, equity and inclusion all people studying chemistry. The PI plans to
continue mentoring undergraduate and early graduate students at Texas A&M
University, with a specific goal to increase the participation of students from
underrepresented groups in graduate-level research in chemistry. The PI plans to
join several outreach programs to educate primary and secondary school students
about chemistry at a young age, to further engage the interest of future
chemists. The PI also plans to develop a new hands-on educational program at
Texas A&M University to prepare high school students in the greater Brazos
County area for future careers in the chemical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.