* 2316541
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Development of Selective Reaction Schemes for Photoactivation of Alcohols
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Robert Martin, Martin, Robert Thompson
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Robert T. Martin is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Martin supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Development of Selective Reaction Schemes for
Photoactivation of Alcohols” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The
host institution for the fellowship is Princeton University, and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. David W. C. MacMillan.

This proposal intends to develop organic synthetic methodologies to expand the
scope of carbon-carbon bond formation reactions using alcohols as starting
materials. Alcohols are among the most naturally abundant and synthetically
practical substrates, but organic synthetic methodology using alcohols is
underdeveloped. The proposed work will develop two novel reaction manifolds for
the activation and functionalization of unsaturated and aliphatic alcohols.
Successful implementation of this work may allow for broadening the scope of the
cross-coupling reactivity of alcohols and providing a framework for further
development of synthetic methodologies for alcohols that can incorporate and
expand the use of radical cascades and radical sorting.

The PI intends to form an organization that engages in outreach activities to
students from underrepresented groups with local teachers to provide supplies,
professional development, and seminars from scientists of diverse backgrounds.
The PI will also work with the “Chem-STEM Outreach Initiative” and the Alliance
for Diversity in Science and Engineering (ADSE) at Princeton University to hold
panels and discussions with local high school students about careers in STEM.
The PI will also continue working as a computational and experimental mentor
with the iCARBON Summer Program initially co-founded and co-organized by the PI,
to provide resources to students from across the country and from disparate
backgrounds to participate in computational chemical research virtually, without
the barrier of meeting in person.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.