* 2316157
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Large: A Full-stack Approach to Declarative Analytics at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Thomas Gilray, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,566,631.00

The project investigates full-stack implementation methodologies for expressive
programming systems that effectively bridge the gap between human-level
specification and high-performance implementation of complex reasoning tasks at
scale. Declarative languages permit a programmer to provide high-level rules and
declarations that define some sought-after solution as a latent implication to
be materialized automatically by the computer. The project's novelties are to
scale this vision of high-performance declarative reasoning both to structured,
higher-order, and probabilistic formulations and to the next generation of
supercomputers and cloud-based clusters. The project's impacts are on
application designers and programmers in key application areas, including
precision medicine, stochastic modeling, software verification, graph analytics,
and security. The project is developing open-source tools, programming
languages, and frameworks capable of enabling truly scalable reasoning for users
across disciplines.

The complexities of next-generation exascale systems pose key challenges:
managing increased parallelism, heterogeneity, graphic processing units (GPUs),
deep memory hierarchies, and performance tuning across the full software stack.
With this increasing complexity and diversity in the hardware configuration of
upcoming high-performance computing systems, it becomes difficult to write
maintainable and scalable applications by hand. Modern chain-forward reasoning
systems are being extended with structured, higher-order data, probabilistic
semantics, lattice orderings, recursive aggregation, and first-order theories,
posing key implementation challenges - especially in a parallel setting. In this
project, the investigators are developing a unified, and tunable, full-stack
foundation for highly expressive chain-forward programming to be deployed at
scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.