* 2316758
* Conference: Workshop: 2023 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work &amp; Social Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Susan Wyche, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 19,956.00

This award provides funding to support about 12 promising graduate students to
participate in a two-day Doctoral Research Symposium to be held on Oct 14-15,
2023 in conjunction with the ACM 2023 Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW) in Minneapolis, MN. CSCW is the
premier international forum for research investigating the design and use of
technologies that affect groups, organizations, communities, and networks. CSCW
research spans a wide range of work, civic, and everyday life activities, as
well as a wide range of computing technologies and academic disciplines. The
CSCW doctoral consortia, which began in 1992, serve to bring together students
and mentors across the wide range of topics, devices, institutions, and
disciplines the CSCW community encompasses, providing an important place for
exchange of ideas in the broader community. These events have long helped young
doctoral scholars both refine their research and advance their professional
development within the CSCW community under the guidance of experienced mentors
in the field.

Goals of the doctoral consortium include building a cohort group of new
researchers who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the
world, guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the research
field mentor them and provide constructive advice, and making it possible for
promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference.
Students will give brief presentations about their research, followed by
discussion and constructive feedback both from members of the faculty panel and
other student participants. The feedback will be geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other CSCW
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Mentors will discuss
different aspects of research the research profession, including career paths,
funding, work-life balance, and related topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.