* 2316807
* LEAPS-MPS: Constraining Supernova Explosion Models by Alpha Elements in Metal Poor Galaxies and the Intracluster Medium
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Shing Chi Leung, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 248,329.00

Once the universe cooled sufficiently for neutral atoms to form (~378,000 years
after the Big Bang), its initial chemical composition was limited to hydrogen,
helium, and lithium. The other elements in the periodic table necessary for
everything from planets to life were all forged over the subsequent 14-billion
years in stars, both during their lifetimes and in their cataclysmic self-
destruction as supernovae (SNe), with the latter dispersing the newly formed
elements. These products can be observed directly via spectroscopy of SNe
remnants and stars, as well as the gas filling the space between stars
(interstellar medium; ISM) and cluster galaxies (intracluster medium; ICM), and
constrain the history of enrichment in the universe. Recent observations of
metal poor galaxies, as well as the Perseus cluster ICM, find systematic
mismatches between the abundances of alpha elements synthesized in core-collapse
(Type II) SNe (i.e., O, Ne, Si, S, Ar, and Ca) and model predictions. The
principal investigator (PI) will lead a team of undergraduate researchers to
identify the physical processes responsible for this mismatch and develop a new
series of SNe models to better account for the observed abundance patterns. The
project will recruit underrepresented students for participation in research
internships (six per year) and a summer program, as well as enabling public
science talks by the PI.

The PI and his team will develop a SNe model "pipeline" that includes (1) an
advanced stellar evolution code for computing a sequence of massive star models
up to the onset of core-collapse, (2) 1-D and multi-dimensional hydrodynamics
codes for modeling the explosion phase, and (3) post-processing nucleosynthesis.
The team will explore the effects of model parameters such as mixing, explosion
energy, and reaction rates, on the production of alpha-elements and use
observational data to place constraints on these parameters. They will select
the parameter set where the chemical abundances can be well reproduced and use
it as a basis to generate a catalogue of stellar models with chemical yields of
various parameters, such as the progenitor mass and metallicity. They will also
maintain a library of numerical SNe to help astronomers identify the origin of
SNe identified by future observatories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.