* 2316432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavioral flexibility and space use in nonhuman primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Crickette Sanz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 31,412.00

Behavioral flexibility, or the ability to change oneâ€™s behavior in different
contexts, is a key human trait, but how this trait emerged in our lineage is
less understood. Research shows that non-human primates show more behavioral
flexibility than previously assumed. One way to approach the question of the
emergence and nature of human behavioral flexibility is through a comparative
study of how spaces are used, as representations of the range of behavioral
decisions shown among our close nonhuman primate relatives. In particular,
understanding the capability of different primates to modify their behavior in
response to the fluctuating availability of food resources or changes in social
relationships has the potential to provide valuable insights into promotes
behavioral variation among primates, the importance of such variability in human
evolution, and the behavioral capabilities of our human ancestors. This doctoral
dissertation research project examines space use strategies of wild groups of a
close human relative, to investigate how natural variation in food availability
and changes in social dynamics can explain differences in space use. This
project contributes to the training of graduate and undergraduate students as
well as primate conservation.

This study uses home range specific resource availability collected across the
home ranges of five nonhuman primate groups, all occurrences of interactions
between them, and daily follows of focal individuals to document initiations of
group movements within their home ranges. These data are used to address three
main questions: what differences in home range specific resource access promotes
variation in space use strategies, whether differences in ranging overlap is
linked to differences in social relationships between groups, and whether
differences in group size and leadership influence group movement decisions. In
addition to addressing the growing demand for investigations into behavioral
variation from both anthropology and cognitive sciences, this research
implements new technological approaches in data collection and analyses. A
combination of spatially explicit resource modelling, social network analyses,
and group-level comparisons are used to evaluate flexibility in primate space
use strategies. This research not only addresses long-standing questions on the
evolution of behavioral variation but can also be used to inform conservation
strategies aimed at protecting non-human primates across the world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.