* 2316831
* LEAPS-MPS: Exploring New Materials for Efficient Waste-Heat Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Demet Usanmaz, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2025
* USD 249,999.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This LEAPS-MPS award supports computational research and education activities
with an aim to develop a systematic approach for designing new "thermoelectric"
materials, which can create electricity from heat. Good thermoelectric materials
conduct electricity well, but they should also be poor conductors of heat, a
combination which is challenging to achieve simultaneously. The global energy
need is increasing rapidly, and searching for new materials to enable efficient,
environment-friendly, and durable technologies for clean energy production and
conservation requires urgent attention. Today, more than 60% of the energy
generated by nonrenewable sources becomes waste heat, which can be scavenged
with thermoelectric technology. Advancement in such technologies requires the
design and discovery of new high-performance thermoelectric materials. In this
project, the PI and her team will use state-of-the-art computational methods to
search for new thermoelectric materials, in which heat and electronic transport
can effectively be decoupled from each other to enable efficient generation of
electricity while the material remains thermally insulating. This award also
supports the training of undergraduate and master's students in computational
materials science. The PI will partner with various programs at Kettering
University to reach out to underrepresented minority as well as K-12 students
and recruit them to work on the project.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This LEAPS-MPS award supports computational research and education activities
with an aim to develop a systematic approach for designing new high-performance
thermoelectric materials. Advancement in thermoelectric technology depends on
identifying new materials with high efficiency by using novel approaches to
design new materials to minimize strong interdependency between different
features, such as electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and Seebeck
coefficient. These include large dataset screening and advanced thermodynamic,
electronic, and structural property investigations. Using high-throughput
density functional theory calculations and cluster expansion methods, the PI and
her team will investigate whether self-assembled nanostructures based on
topological materials can be found that would allow electron and phonon
transport decoupling to improve thermoelectric efficiency. The main idea is to
find appropriate matching materials with a small energy barrier and lattice
continuity between the nanostructure and the parent material, which would help
in retaining high carrier mobility while scattering phonons to enhance
thermoelectric performance. This award also supports the training of
undergraduate and master's students in computational materials science. The PI
will partner with various programs at Kettering University to reach out to
underrepresented minority as well as K-12 students and recruit them to work on
the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.