* 2316773
* Combining Multiple Investigative Approaches to the Geographic Spread of Pastoralism
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Katherine Brunson, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2027
* USD 222,011.00

New laboratory methods for extracting and sequencing ancient DNA preserved in
animal bones have led to exciting new genomic perspectives for the study of
animal domestication and the deep histories of herd animals. The research group
combines paleogenomic methods with archaeological approaches to investigate the
history of cattle, sheep, and goats. These animals were first domesticated in
the Middle East over 10,000 years ago. They were then introduced to East Asia
about 5000-6000 years ago through trans-Eurasian exchange networks. The goal of
this research project is to clarify the timing of the adoption of cattle, sheep,
and goats explore their genetic histories, and investigate the long-term
cultural and environmental dimensions of expanding pastoralism in the region. Of
special interest is the question of whether ancient people experimented with
managing wild bovid populations such as the extinct wild aurochs. Because little
paleogenomic research has been done on herd animals, this work adds a critical
missing dimension to the scholarly understanding of animal domestication.
Ancient DNA and animal bones also provide an exciting avenue for introducing
students and members of the public to archaeological science. The project offers
opportunities for student participation in fieldwork and laboratory research,
courses that teach STEM through archaeology, and archaeological public outreach
activities.

This collaborative research project focuses on animal bones excavated from
Neolithic and Bronze Age archaeological sites. The project team conducts
comprehensive zooarchaeological analyses of animal bones from sites representing
multiple time periods and selects key bone samples for direct radiocarbon
dating. Ancient DNA is extracted and sequenced from bone samples, and the
research team uses bioinformatics methods to identify evidence of admixture
between wild and domesticated bovid populations. Finally, the project team
combines the zooarchaeological and ancient DNA data to address social and
environmental questions about the emergence of pastoralism. Among the most
important of these questions is how the expansion of pastoralism changed native
habitats and altered distributions of native animal species. These approaches
contribute to ongoing archaeological research on the spread of pastoralism and
the environmental impacts of animal management systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.