* 2316294
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Corporeal Cybersecurity: Improving End-User Security and Privacy with Physicalized Computing Interface
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Sauvik Das, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 409,995.00

Encouraging pro-cybersecurity and privacy (S&P) behaviors remains a persistently
important societal challenge. Indeed, in 2018, McAfee estimated that the global
economic damages caused by cybercrime was 600 billion USD, with as many as
2/3rds of all Internet users having been affected by personal data breaches.
Moreover, many of these breaches were the result of human error. Prior work in
usable privacy and security has identified three barriers that help explain why
pro-S&P behaviors remain rare: awareness, motivation and ability. The
overarching hypothesis of this proposal is that it should be possible to address
these barriers to pro-S&P behaviors by creating corporeal security and privacy
interfaces (CSPIs) that allow people to take advantage of their corporeal threat
perception (e.g., intuitively understanding that walking in a dimly lit area is
less safe than walking in a well-lit area) and their natural understanding of
the physics-based affordances of the physical world (e.g., whispering to reduce
the range of who can hear one’s voice) in digital S&P-relevant contexts. To test
this hypothesis, this project proposes to design, implement and evaluate three
novel CSPIs. First, Bit Whisperer is a wireless communication protocol that
situates digital communications on physical surfaces to raise people’s awareness
of the audience of and threats to their wireless communications. Second, Spidey
Sense is a smartwatch wristband that delivers affective haptic feedback to
motivate heightened responses to S&P warnings. Third, Horcrux is a tangible
smart mat that improves people’s ability to collaboratively author access
control policies for collectively owned and shared digital resources. This
research, if successful, could significantly improve the widespread adoption of
pro-S&P behaviors and, in turn, mitigate vulnerabilities that result from human
error.

This proposal marries ideas from tangible, wearable, and haptic computing with
challenges in end-user cybersecurity and privacy. The proposed work will
encompass some of the first attempts to integrate state-of-the-art tangible
interaction techniques designed to address the awareness, ability and motivation
barriers to pro-S&P behaviors, by asking research questions such as: (a) How
might situated digital communications improve people’s awareness of the range of
their wireless communications and the threats thereof? (b) How might affective
haptics improve end-users’ motivation to respond to S&P warnings? (c) How might
tangible user interfaces improve the ability of social groups to collaboratively
author access control policies for shared accounts and resources? In exploring
these questions, the research will make the following high-level intellectual
contributions: (i) the iterative design and implementation of three CSPIs---Bit
Whisperer, Spidey Sense and Horcrux; (ii) rigorous empirical studies in which we
will explore the effectiveness of these CSPIs in addressing the awareness,
motivation and ability barriers to pro-S&P behaviors; and (iii) a synthesized
set of design opportunities and challenges for CSPIs in the context of usable
S&P. The outputs of this project will serve as a foundation for a new cross-
disciplinary collaboration between scholars in the HCI, S&P and Tangible
Computing communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.