* 2316108
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Estimating adult age-at-death from the pelvis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* GINESSE LISTI, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 15,908.00

Skeletal age estimation methods are applied to gain insights into past and
present populations and individual lives. Existing estimation methods are based,
in general, on the visible wear of joint surfaces that occurs with age. This
doctoral dissertation research project expands current age-at-death estimation
capabilities by generating and validating new methods of age estimation based on
multiple joint surfaces in the pelvis, using scanning technology and deep
learning models. The results of this project help to 1) reduce subjectivity in
estimating age based on skeletal markers, 2) provide consistent results in
estimation of age by practitioners regardless of degree of experience, and 3)
increase the precision of age range estimates for older adult populations. The
project supports undergraduate and graduate mentoring, training, and research
opportunities in STEM, the development of open-source deep learning models, and
online training workshops for practitioners, researchers, and general education
communities.

Traditional qualitative methods for age estimation are problematic in that they
are heavily reliant on the practitionersâ€™ level of experience for accurate
assessment of the changes that occur with age. Additionally, traditional methods
cannot differentiate age-related features in older adults (e.g., individuals
over 50 years), resulting in broad age ranges that do not allow a detailed
reconstruction of adult life history in relationship to aspects of population
structure, health, and the environment. This project applies statistical
analyses and AI modeling to measurements from 3D scans and photographs taken of
the pelvic joints and provides an important methodological resource for
standardizing skeletal methods for age estimation. Improved age estimation
methods enhance the understanding of past and present population demographics
and enable a more thorough understanding of senescent changes to pelvic joint
surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.