* 2316114
* RAPID: Immediate Post-Fire Carbon Balance of Boreal Peat-Wetland Mosaics
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Kyle Arndt, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 142,307.00

Due to climate warming, perennially frozen soil, or permafrost, is thawing in
tundra and boreal environments. Fires are also becoming more frequent and
intense in a warmer world, affecting how these landscapes exchange greenhouse
gasses with the atmosphere. While previous studies have been conducted after
fire, this study will provide an understanding of ecosystem function, both
before and after fire at the same site. The study will take place at a
greenhouse gas measuring site in a boreal forest peatland underlain by
permafrost and adjacent wetlands in the Northwest Territories, Canada, that
burned in October 2022. The site has a 9- year data record of carbon dioxide,
methane, and water exchange between the land and the atmosphere. The study will
involve a close working relationship with the Łı́ı́dlı̨ı̨ Kų́ę́ First Nation,
who run the research site.

The co-impacts of permafrost thaw and fire in boreal ecosystems is poorly
understood. With fires becoming more common and severe in high-latitude
ecosystems, understanding the joint response of fire and permafrost thaw is
vital to understanding the land-atmosphere exchange of carbon. A carbon flux
monitoring site in the Northwest Territories, Canada, was burned in October
2022, presenting a rare opportunity to study pre- and post-fire fluxes over the
same landscape. The investigators will rebuild the carbon flux monitoring tower
to measure the land-atmosphere exchange of carbon dioxide and methane, and a
suite of environmental measurements to understand what drives fluxes before and
after fire. The investigators will collaborate with the Łı́ı́dlı̨ı̨ Kų́ę́ First
Nation, who run the research site, and the collaboration will foster a strong
knowledge exchange between the scientists and the First Nations peoples.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.