* 2316630
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Spin Magnetohydrodynamics: Spin and Strong Magnetic Fields in Nuclear Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Ingles, Ingles, Kevin C
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Kevin Ingles is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Ingles supports his research project entitled “Postdoctoral
Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Spin Magnetohydrodynamics: Spin and Strong Magnetic
Fields in Nuclear Collisions” under the mentorship of sponsoring scientists. The
host institution for the fellowship is the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jacquelyn Noronha-Hostler.

Dr. Ingles will pursue a research project to develop numerical studies of the
effects of the strong dynamical magnetic fields or particles spins in the
evolution of the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP) formed in heavy ion collisions (HIC)s.
These numerical studies will help resolve inconsistencies between theory and
recent spin polarization measurements and will also be useful in studies of the
dense matter formed in neutron star mergers.

Dr. Ingles will participate in outreach and mentoring activities focusing on
undergraduates and graduate students from historically excluded groups through
involving them computational physics research, helping them develop their
science identities, and mentor students through existing programs at UIUC such
as the Young Scholars Program, the Guidance for Physics Students (GPS), and the
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Access (IDEA) Institute.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.