* 2316011
* Collaborative Research: Cost-Efficient and Confident Sampling for Modern Scientific Discovery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yuhan Ding, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

There are now novel sources of high-quality data for tackling a broad array of
pressing scientific and engineering problems that need to be solved to improve
our quality of life. However, such high-fidelity data often comes from costly
simulations, limiting the available data. Thus, developing cost-efficient
sampling methods combined with rigorous, data-driven error measures for the
resulting models is critically important. This project combines ideas from
computational mathematics and statistics to discover these cost-efficient and
confident sampling methods. Students involved in this project will be educated
to become the next generation of science-based computational researchers who can
adeptly work in diverse and multi-disciplinary scientific teams pushing forward
the frontiers of scientific knowledge.

This project develops a framework featuring methodologies (with supporting
theory and algorithms) that extend classical low discrepancy (i.e., highly
stratified) sampling techniques for a broad range of challenging scenarios
encountered in modern scientific problems, including cost-efficient Bayesian
inference, efficient subsampling of massive data, multi-fidelity modeling, and
density estimation. These methodologies include Bayesian sampling for expensive
posteriors, adaptive multifidelity algorithms, big data subsampling, and
distribution, density, and quantile estimation. The major emphasis is to
demonstrate the effectiveness of these methods for accelerating scientific
discoveries, especially for the PIs’ ongoing collaborations on the study of
heavy-ion collisions and real-time engine control of unmanned aircraft vehicles,
but also for new collaborations that will be developed over the project. Such
collaborations will be further strengthened via our open-source Python QMC
library QMCPy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.