* 2316126
* Collaborative Research: RII Track-2 FEC: Where We Live: Local and Place Based Adaptation to Climate Change in Underserved Rural Communities
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Alistair Smith, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,214,122.00

Adaptation consists of a set of behaviors and activities that occur from
individual to institutional scales. Such adaptation results in the ability to
remain healthy, effective and prosperous, despite changes that occur in the
biophysical environment. Adaptation is also predicated on accurate perception of
change, a set of abilities embedded in human cognition. Perception has been
extensively studied in the context of risk and acute climate events such as
flooding and wildfire, but data show that perceiving risk does not lead to
successful adaptation which is critical for everything from human health to
national security. Current approaches of hazard, vulnerability and risk mapping
are ineffective; they do not accelerate adaptation and data show that they may
even drive maladaptive behaviors. Rural communities constitute nearly 84% of the
United States (US) land area and are home to 14% of the population. These areas
serve as critical sources of food, freshwater, habitat, and energy as well as
supporting carbon sequestration, education, recreation, and tourism but have
been effectively left out of climate dialogues. Moreover, they are models for
settlements in other parts of the world. Despite the rapid progress of
technologies that can facilitate adaptation to climate change, widespread
actions remain elusive. The need to understand the gap between knowing and
experiencing the effects of a rapidly changing earth system and the behaviors
that successfully respond to them has never been greater. When perception varies
significantly from real world dynamics, it refers to a large gap (or
difference), which may be associated with maladaptive behavior. The project
hypothesize that the size of this gap is a key measure that determines both
adaptive capacity, i.e., the potential to take actions that minimize the
negative effects of climate change and adaptation. This project's research team
will use participatory socio-environmental systems mapping, engaging the
residents of rural communities as well as advanced computational modeling to
project futures under different scenarios of change and responses to it. This
project will lead to precise understanding of the mechanisms between
perceptions, cultures and adaptation which will enable both better planning by
increasing the diversity of knowledge as well as lead to more successful
implementation in areas and regions that are central to our Nation’s
sustainability, security and thrivability.

The RII Track-2: Where We Live (W2L) Local and Place Based Adaptation to Climate
Change in Underserved Rural Communities project builds national research
competitiveness and capacity to addressing the critical national need of
proactively addressing climate change in underserved rural communities. The W2L
project advances research, education, workforce development, and partnerships
among the Idaho, Nevada, and South Carolina EPSCoR jurisdictions. W2L leverages
and enhances linkages in community engagement, computational modeling,
engineering, physical sciences, and social sciences. The goal of W2L is to build
the needed capacity to achieve adaptation mapping—the ability to leverage agent-
based models to determine how small adaptation actions produce community-scale
resilience, a novel contribution to tackling the climate challenge. The scope of
the project involves communities and landscapes experiencing drought, heat, and
wildfires in Idaho, Nevada, and South Carolina, areas of growing local and
national concern. The project advances novel science and training by working
collaboratively with underserved rural communities to advance understanding of
how perceptions, values, and knowledge promote or impede adaptation to chronic
(slow) and acute (fast) climate-induced changes. The project uses integrative
approaches that bring together climate science, social science, computational
modeling, and stakeholder engagement. Methods include development of community
data oversight groups in each jurisdiction; and use of a structured workshop
called the quadrant-enabled Delphi method to support co-development of knowledge
by community members and researchers. Quantification of the delta between
perceptions of change and instrumented measures of climate change will use data
mining of historical climate data and categorical data analysis from the
structured workshops. The identification of adaptation pathways with communities
will involve a set of iteratively developed scenarios for each type of climate-
induced change supported by climate projections that are looked at by
communities though a dialogues of change activity. Dialogues of change are used
to support adaptation mapping for drought, heat, and wildfire. The W2L project
emphasizes community engagement and the co-production of knowledge and
implements multiple initiatives to increase the participation of members of
underserved rural communities in research and in STEM. W2L will support
workforce development, early-career advancement, and student training through
high-context, community-engaged interdisciplinary science, co-created with
community members. The potential contributions of W2L are to build convergence-
science through collaborative approaches with community groups; to quantify and
analyze the convergence and/or divergence between perceptions of climate-induced
changes and instrument measured changes in those changes; and to build pathways
for adaptive capacity and adaptation options in rural underserved communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.