* 2316355
* RII Track-2 FEC: Sustainable Engineering Infrastructures and Solutions for Tribal Energy Sovereignty
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Wayne Seames, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Tribal communities often consist of rural, spread-out populations with
distributed, smaller-scale power, heat and fuel energy systems, which are less
reliable and may be less resilient to anticipated shifts in weather patterns and
severity due to climate change. To assist in addressing this issue and to
strengthen the research infrastructure of the North Dakota and Kansas EPSCoR
jurisdictions, the University of North Dakota in collaboration with North Dakota
State University and Kansas State University, with participation by Haskell
Indian Nations University, Turtle Mountain Community College, Nueta Hidatsa
Sahnish College, and the Tribal Research Network Group will research
technologies and methods to provide sustainable, reliable and efficient
engineering infrastructures and solutions for tribal energy sovereignty. The
project also encompasses educational activities, including tasks that will train
tribal members to develop tribal nation workforces and expand their technical
capacity to implement renewable energy sources for building tribal energy
resiliency and independence. This innovative project will be developed in
partnership with tribal nations in Kansas and North Dakota and its outcomes will
be assessed from environmental, economic, and social perspectives for both the
short- and long-term.

An inter-related suite of technologies will be explored to provide potential
solutions for tribal communities including: 1) widely scalable photovoltaic-
thermal systems for both heat and power; 2) robust on-demand energy storage
systems for power, heating, and cooling; 3) the production of renewable fuels
and power from waste materials (e.g. plastics) and non-food agricultural
resources (e.g. corn stover, wheat straw, waste and crop oils) in small scale,
nearly self-sufficient processes; and 4) power microgrid technologies with both
on- and off-grid modes depending on demands and surpluses. The associated
economic, sustainability, and social impact will be defined for use by tribal
nations to support their energy sovereignty. This project will also seek to
expand the understanding of how to best support native students in STEM at
traditional research universities with the creation of a program that will be
developed in collaboration with three tribal colleges and implemented at the
three participating research universities. The INgineering program focuses on
enhancing pathways into STEM careers for native students. This RII EPSCoR
Track-2 project also includes workforce development for native STEM students and
K-12 teacher professional development using project-based learning of culturally
relevant engineering design. Development and mentoring for junior and mid-career
faculty participants and graduate students are also key aspects of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.