* 2316746
* LEAPS-MPS: Importance, Significance, and Fairness in Large-Scale Estimation and Testing of Heteroscedastic Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Luella Fu, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,999.00

The proposed research addresses two issues of increasing concern in the
scientific community. One is that data has become so cheap and easy to collect
that it is all too often difficult or impossible to reproduce these data or even
entire studies. The second is that algorithms often encode biases with
unintended consequences. The so-called reproducibility crisis and algorithmic
fairness problems each have multiple causes, but one that they share is grounded
in the unequal variability of most large-scale data such as their
heteroscedasticity. Ameliorating these issues in modern data problems requires
two fields of statistics for large-scale data: multiple testing and large-scale
estimation. Advances in both fields are combined as they have not been
previously to create powerful, theoretically backed statistical methodology. The
economic, moral, and social impacts affect STEM research, public policy, and
technology, as well as entertainment, finance, and sports, fields from which we
analyze data in this proposal. The broader impacts and wide application of this
project also provide underrepresented minority (URM) students with opportunities
to produce scholarly work; bolster research infrastructure at a primarily
undergraduate institute (PUI) and Hispanic Serving Institute (HSI); train URM
members in professional development to help remove barriers to their
participation in technological innovation; and invite the industry sector into
the academic research feedback loop.

This project focuses on developing new inferential procedures for estimating,
selecting, and ranking heteroscedastic data. When heteroscedastic data needs to
be selected and ranked, as is often the case with large-scale data, both
replicability and fairness issues arise together. The goal of this proposal is
to resolve the dual issues of estimation and significance by developing new
inferential procedures for ranking and selecting heteroscedastic data. The three
objectives are to: (i) select ordered hypotheses based on the importance of data
results, (ii) create more efficient and accurate estimators for large-scale
data, (iii) create rankings to address inequities. The first objective will be
accomplished by reversing the typical multiple hypothesis testing steps of
ordering and then selecting hypotheses, which will better balance estimated
effect size and variability; the second objective, by developing a convex
optimization technique; and the third objective, by creating a ranking algorithm
that accounts for protected characteristics. New algorithms will be developed to
implement each of these methods and publicly shared via Github, DataLore, and R
packages. Extensive mentorship and professional development opportunities will
be offered to undergraduate and graduate students who participate in these
research activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.