* 2316317
* RCN-UBE: Case-based Active Science Education (CASE) Mentoring Network
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2028
* Rebecca Seipelt-Thiemann, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 11/30/2028
* USD 442,392.00

Effective and inclusive science education benefits the country by supporting
innovation, discovery, and economic stability. Despite the known benefits of a
science career, many students, including those from historically
underrepresented groups, identify biology coursework as a significant hurdle to
remaining in science fields. Many biology teachers are working to adopt teaching
practices that better support student learning and are inclusive of all students
but may lack the proper support structures and resources to make this task
achievable. To address this need, the CASE Mentoring Network project focuses on
providing personalized teacher mentoring, training in using and writing
effective and inclusive case studies, and freely sharing authored resources.
This project will also provide insight into how to leverage the strengths of
these teacher-mentoring approaches to support the development of students’
science identities.

A guiding principle of both the National Science Foundation and Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action is to support
training a diverse, scientifically capable, and resilient workforce. First, this
project will bring together individuals with diverse training and backgrounds to
support personalized mentoring and train teachers in a highly effective teaching
method, known as case-based learning. Second, the project will produce a broad
range of freely accessible teaching resources in the form of compelling, timely,
and relevant narrative case studies. These case studies will be carefully
designed by integrating biology, social science, and justice in a way that is
authentic to our modern world. Finally, the project will study ways to enhance
connections among teachers, as well as adoption and effectiveness of these
teaching methods. Products for this project include a strong personalized
network to support teachers, 126 diverse case-study authors, and 60 case studies
based on societally relevant scientific topics. Furthermore, the project will
evaluate potential barriers to case study adoption and network effectiveness, as
well as how case-based learning impacts students’ identity as early-career
members of the scientific community in addition to content mastery. This project
is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for STEM Education, Division of
Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed
in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/ ).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.