* 2316992
* LEAPS-MPS: Aryl Tosylates as Building Blocks for the Synthesis of Oxygen-containing Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Rashanique Quarels, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,999.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division, Dr. Rashanique Quarels and
her research team at Rowan University are developing photocatalytic conditions
to generate cyclic compounds, heterocycles, and desulfonylation methods. A major
focus of this project is conversion of phenols into value-added chemicals. The
use of aryl tosylates, derived from phenols, as radical precursors is chosen due
to the abundance of commercially available phenols, substrate stability, and
utility. The goal of this research is to provide fundamental knowledge on
visible-light-mediated, single-electron-transfer methods and resulting divergent
mechanisms dependent upon photocatalyst selection. Another objective of this
project is to implement several approaches to broaden participation and improve
matriculation into the STEM workforce. This project will support: (1) the
“Careers in STEM” seminar series, (2) the integration of research into the
curriculum, and (3) research experiences for underrepresented students in
chemistry and biochemistry.

The Quarels research team will study organic and transition-metal catalysts that
result in carbon-, oxygen-, and sulfur-centered radicals using aryl tosylates as
radical precursors. Dr. Quarels and her research team will perform chemical
synthesis, photoredox catalysis, NMR analysis, mass spectrometry analysis, and
computational modeling studies. The overall work could provide a better
understanding of the differences and complementarity between excited state
organic and transition-metal photocatalysts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.