* 2316808
* LEAPS-MPS: Multiqubit Entangling Gates for Solid-State Qubit Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Yun-Pil Shim, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Quantum information science and quantum computing have become the forefront of
future science and technology. Quantum computing promises a great leap forward
from classical computing capabilities. However, the current quantum hardware has
only a modest number of qubits (hundreds of qubits in a single device) and
limited coherence, making it difficult to use for practical problems. In this
project, the PI will address some of the above limitations by investigating
alternative ways to implement quantum operations on quantum hardware by creating
entanglement - an essential resource for quantum computation - between more than
two qubits more efficiently than the standard approach. This approach can reduce
the depth of the quantum circuits and extend the usefulness of the limited
quantum hardware. This new method will be applied to some hybrid quantum-
classical algorithms that many consider the leading practical applications of
quantum computers in the near future. As quantum technology progresses and its
importance increases, a larger quantum workforce will be essential for
maintaining the competitive edge, and it is important to engage underrepresented
demographic groups in quantum science and technology. This project will provide
valuable research experiences to graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of Texas at El Paso who will join the quantum workforce in academia,
industries, and national labs.

Quantum computation requires creating entanglement using entangling gates
between qubits to generate highly entangled many-qubit states. The standard
approach for implementing quantum circuits is to use single- and two-qubit gates
that can generate any quantum circuits in principle. However, creating
entanglement only using two-qubit gates typically results in a very long
sequence of quantum gates for any practical quantum circuits. This project
investigates possible multiqubit entangling gates for more than two qubits in
solid-state-based qubit platforms of semiconductor spin qubits and
superconducting qubits. This project will consider two schemes to generate
multiqubit gates: (i) simultaneous application of pairwise interactions between
qubits and (ii) multiqubit interactions mediated by a common bus where more than
two qubits are connected simultaneously. Theoretical analysis of the physical
qubit platforms and numerical simulation of the quantum gates and quantum
circuits throughout the project will shed light on the efficiency of quantum
circuits made of multiqubit gates in implementing quantum algorithms, especially
hybrid quantum algorithms such as variational quantum eigensolver. The new
approach developed in this project can lead to useful applications of the
currently available quantum computing devices for practical problems, such as
simulating complex quantum systems beyond the capability of classical
computation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.