* 2316420
* Collaborative Research:CISE-ANR:CIF:Small:Learning from Large Datasets - Application to Multi-Subject fMRI Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tulay Adali, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 399,790.00

In many disciplines today, there is an increasing availability of multiple and
complementary data associated with a given problem, and the main challenge is
extracting and effectively summarizing the relevant information from these large
number of datasets. Joint decomposition of these datasets, arranged as matrices
or tensors, provides an attractive solution to data fusion by letting them fully
interact and inform each other and yields factor matrices that are directly
interpretable, where the resulting factors (components) are directly associated
with quantities of interest. This research will provide a powerful solution for
inference from large-scale data by effectively summarizing the heterogeneity in
large datasets through the definition of homogeneous subspaces such that
components within a subspace are highly dependent. The success of the methods
will be demonstrated through identification of homogeneous subgroups of subjects
from neuroimaging data, thus enabling personalized medicine whose goal is to
tailor intervention strategies for a given individual. Effectively summarizing
information in large-scale datasets is at the heart of many of today's
challenging problems, hence the new set of tools will impact numerous areas in
science and technology, including those in medical imaging, remote sensing,
image/video processing, communications, and social networks.

Independent vector analysis (IVA) and coupled tensor factorizations are two
powerful ways for working with spatio-temporal data, each exploiting the
structural/dependence information through different mechanisms. They also
provide strong uniqueness guarantees, which is key for interpretability. This
project leverages the complementary strengths of IVA and coupled tensor
decompositions to develop a powerful framework for joint analysis/fusion of a
large number of datasets through automated identification of homogeneous
subspaces along with the components within these subspaces. This is accomplished
by initially developing effective solutions to the problem with IVA and with
coupled tensor decompositions, working in parallel. Then, in a second stage, the
connections between these two approaches are established, both in terms of
methods and uniqueness conditions, to develop a methodology that leverages the
strengths of both approaches. The emphasis on uniqueness and interpretability of
the solutions together with an application to a challenging dataset will ensure
that the methods, as well as the developed theoretical foundations, are not only
complete but also practically useful. Another important aspect of the work is
the establishing of bridges across two communities that do not necessarily
communicate. The work will demonstrate that statistically and algebraically
motivated approaches to data fusion are not in competition with each other but
have important complementary aspects that can be effectively leveraged. In
addition, a clear view of their connections as well as differences enables fair
comparisons of all methods clearly highlighting their abilities together with
their limitations. This will help establish a solid and well-balanced foundation
for the growing fields of data science and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.