* 2316701
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: "Effective Field Theory Approach to Nuclear Structure for Next Generation of High-Energy Scattering Experiments"
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Frank Vera, Vera, Frank
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Frank Vera is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Vera supports his research project entitled Postdoctoral
Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: "Effective Field Theory Approach to Nuclear Structure
for Next Generation of High-Energy Scattering Experiments", under the mentorship
of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is the Thomas
Jefferson National Accelerator (JLab), and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Christian Weiss.

In this project the PI will pursue a research project to better develop a new
theoretical method for the analysis of high-energy scattering experiments on
nuclei to unveil the nuclear microscopic substructure and internal interactions.
Dr. Vera will employ the developed method to calculate nucleon momentum
distributions, the nuclear pion density, nuclear quark/gluon densities, deuteron
breakup processes, and other properties of nuclei, and apply the results to
analyze experiments at JLab and the anticipated Electron-Ion Collider (EIC). Dr.
Vera will participate in outreach activities, such as public presentations and
lectures, and will mentor junior students, with a focus on those from
underrepresented groups in STEM. Dr. Vera will support the JLab REYES program by
providing lectures and research mentoring to local high school students and
undergraduates involved in REYES.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.