* 2316627
* Reconfigurable Diffractive Optical Neural Networks with Phase Change Material based Photonic Device
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Weilu Gao, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 374,849.00

Diffractive optical neural networks (DONNs) systems have gained interest as
high-performance optical architectures to perform machine learning tasks. Toward
the ideal DONNs systems, there is a lack of energy-efficient diffractive pixel
unit and accurate software models. This project employs one type of nonvolatile
material called phase change material (PCM) and address two major challenges,
substantial switching energy and multilevel operations, to develop PCM-based
diffractive devices. This project also develops an accurate model by
incorporating interlayer and intralayer effects. The research findings from this
project can find broad photonic and optoelectronic applications, such as in
communication, computation, and quantum technologies. This project also expands
participation in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) through
training and education activities in the laboratory, classroom, and through
outreach programs. The goal of these activities is to develop a diverse future
STEM workforce.

DONNs systems perform machine learning tasks through spatial light modulation
and optical diffraction in multiple diffractive layers. However, toward the
implementation of the ultimate all-optical, fully reconfigurable, and compact
diffractive layers for DONNs systems, there exist technological gaps including
nonvolatile reconfigurability, and accurate and trainable software models. To
fill these gaps, this project employs nonvolatile chalcogenide PCMs that feature
a few desirable properties, such as in-memory computing, large optical contrast,
and ultrafast reconfiguration with high cyclability, to construct a near-
infrared diffractive device for DONNs systems. This project aims to address
following challenges, including large reconfiguration energy consumption and
multilevel operation for implementing PCM-based photonic devices, as well as the
discrepancy between the standard DONNs model and the compact DONNs system with
PCM-based diffractive devices. Specifically, this project creates an energy-
efficient and transparent electrical heater for reconfiguring PCMs using aligned
carbon nanotube films with extraordinary and separately optimizable electrical,
thermal, and optical properties. This project also designs, optimizes, and
fabricates a multilevel reconfigurable device by only using two reliable
crystalline and amorphous states in multiple PCM films. In addition, this
project implements accurate and trainable DONNs models by incorporating the
effects of interlayer reflection and intralayer interpixel interaction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.