* 2316990
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cold adaptation and gene expression
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Christian Gagnon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 27,185.00

In the past ~450,000 years, members of the genus Homo migrated multiple times
from equatorial Africa to more seasonal and cold climates. Non-shivering
thermogenesis – a process by which brown fat generates heat – was likely a key
part of the success of our genus in adapting to these environments and helping
to facilitate these geographic expansions. The product of the gene UCP1, a
protein called thermogenin, drives this process. Nonhuman primates have also
expanded from Africa into colder latitudes over the past ~300,000 years.
Previously, the investigators found signals of selection in the regulation of
this gene in some nonhuman primates. In this doctoral dissertation research
project, the investigators validate and expand those findings by using
innovative methods and previously collected samples. Students from groups
underrepresented in STEM disciplines receive training and professional
development through this project.

Using an established protocol newly validated for specific species, the
investigators chemically convert archived wild nonhuman primate fibroblast cell
lines into chemically induced brown adipose (ciBA) cells. Outcomes of the
conversion are verified by quantifying RNA expression of UCP1 (which is uniquely
expressed in brown adipose) via RT-qPCR, with Oil Red O staining and
immunofluorescence staining to observe lipid droplet formation and the
completeness of culture conversion. The ciBA are then exposed to norepinephrine
to stimulate a cold response in the cell lines, and UCP1 gene expression with
and without the cold response are compared using bulk RNA sequencing. Results
are used to test the prediction of a derived allele dosage effect in UCP1
expression across four loci, such that each derived allele, previously found to
have appeared at higher frequencies in colder climates, will be associated with
a significant increase in UCP1 expression. Analyses consider potential
covariates like sex, BMI, and body weight. Validation of the investigators
previous results suggest that the NST system has undergone positive selection in
response to colder climates in nonhuman primates and inform our understanding of
this process in our own genus.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.