* 2316731
* Directed evolution of 3D printed microbial communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Seunghyun Sim, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 765,540.00

This project investigates the role of the spatial arrangement of cells in
denitrification, a central ecosystem process with important applications in
biotechnology. Bacteria play a crucial role in both biotechnology and the
functioning of ecosystems. These microbes are organized in specific spatial
patterns and often interact with each other within communities. It is known that
spatial organization is central to how different species interact and to the
resulting function of the community. However, a key challenge in microbial
ecology is understanding how different aspects of the spatial network contribute
to the overall function. The two main challenges in studying this problem are
the vast number of possible spatial arrangements and the difficulty of
manipulating microbes in space. To overcome these challenges, this research uses
evolutionary algorithms to efficiently explore different spatial arrangements,
and a novel approach to print microbial communities in 3D which allows better
system manipulation. These approaches are used to investigate how the spatial
organization of different microbes affects the process of denitrification, an
essential step in the nitrogen cycle, impacting the availability of nitrogen in
ecosystems and farming soils. This project advances the understanding of
microbial communities and their function. It provides insight into the role of
spatial structure on nitrogen cycling, informing soil research and applications
for waste-water treatment. Moreover, the 3D printing approach developed in this
research can be easily adapted to study other types of communities and their
functions. An indispensable component of this project is providing
interdisciplinary mentorship to diverse groups of students and increasing access
to science and technology through different science education programs and
outreach to local communities.

Microbial communities perform important functions for our health and that of
ecosystems. Many of these functions are performed in spatially structured
microbial communities such as biofilms, microbial mats and soil aggregates.
While it is well known that spatial structure can affect community functions and
interactions, there is limited understanding of how the arrangement of different
cells in space influences the function of the community. Two important
limitations in addressing this question are the large space of possible
parameters and conformations for even the simplest community and a lack of
technology to construct a pre-defined, stable spatial community. The research
constructs pre-defined spatial communities of bacteria, both experimentally and
computationally, and explores the effect of cells’ spatial arrangement on a
community’s function, stability, and division of labor. The model bacterial
community is composed of a mix of culturable species of bacteria able to perform
different steps of the denitrification pathway. While denitrification could be
performed entirely by a single species, it is often performed by multiple
bacterial species through division of labor, making it an ideal model system.
This research project develops a spatially explicit computer simulation of
denitrification, expands a novel polymer scaffold system to print entire
denitrifying microbial communities with pre-specified spatial organization and
uses evolutionary algorithms to select different spatial conformations of
improved function in two and three dimensions. Algorithms are evaluated by
assessing these conformations through bio-printing with the scaffold system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.