* 2316733
* Collaborative Research: Using a weather model and geologic data to test tectonic mechanisms in an intercontinental setting: The Altai Mountains of Central Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeremy Rugenstein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 230,872.00

The height and shape of mountain ranges exert a profound influence on the world
around us. Mountains host a variety of ecological habitats, provide much of the
water and nutrients necessary for life, the critical minerals needed for
society, and influence climate and weather patterns. The size and shape of
mountains reflect the underlying solid Earth processes responsible for how the
crust deforms, for earthquakes, and for related natural hazards. Despite their
importance, it remains exceptionally difficult to recover the history of
mountains including how changes in their height and shape interact with the
atmosphere to drive climate and weather. This project seeks to apply new
advances in the atmospheric and geosciences to a natural experiment in central
Asia where the height and shape of the Altai Mountains over the past 50 million
years are thought to have precipitated a major change in atmospheric circulation
and in climate. The Altai are one of the major ranges in Asia that substantially
modify regional climate and ecosystems and spawn some of the largest
intracontinental earthquakes ever recorded. This research will use a novel
weather model to predict changes in atmospheric circulation and climate in
response to the size, height, and growth history of the Altai. These model
predictions will be measured against field and laboratory data gleaned from the
sediments shed from the Altai. Using rock magnetic data preserved in the
sediments, and the steepness of river channels carved into the mountains, the
principal investigators will be able to construct an age model consistent with
the onset and growth history of the Altai range. This interdisciplinary approach
will be pursued by a multi-university, diverse team in the U.S. that includes
early-career professors, graduate students and undergraduates in collaboration
with Mongolian colleagues at the Institute for Astronomy and Geophysics. The
project will train three PhD students, three early-career scientists, and one
undergraduate in inter-disciplinary geosciences and build international exchange
opportunities. The results of this research will improve understanding of the
coupling among solid Earth and atmospheric processes and contribute to
addressing societal challenges, such as building resistance to climate change
and to earthquake-related natural hazards.

Mountain topography reflects complex couplings among tectonic, dynamic, and
surficial processes and influences climatic evolution, marine and terrestrial
biogeochemistry, and even the development of biodiversity. Unfortunately, the
climatic proxies which are so often used to reconstruct past topography are
themselves dependent upon a variety of other factors. Consequently, constraining
the tectonic and/or dynamic processes that are responsible for the height of
mountains remains exceptionally difficult. This project will leverage novel
advances in the atmospheric sciences to understand topographic growth beyond the
simple upslope model of orographic rainout. The project focuses on the Altai
Mountains of northern Central Asia, a poorly understood Cenozoic rejuvenation of
the Central Asia Orogenic Belt that rises more than 4 kilometers, casts a
substantial rain shadow, and is associated with some of the largest
intracontinental earthquakes on record. Altai uplift has been variously
attributed to far-field stress propagation from the collision of India and
Eurasia or to dynamic support from a mantle plume, a subducting slab, or
lithospheric delamination. Each of these uplift mechanisms predict a unique
spatial and temporal pattern of rock uplift and of regional climate change,
based upon how and when these uplift mechanisms modified the height, shape, and
orientation of the Altai. Existing data are contradictory; sedimentary,
geomorphic, and thermochronologic data indicate that tectonic uplift began in
the Paleogene, whereas paleoclimate data from both windward and leeward basins
suggest no clear climatic change until the late Miocene, when there appears to
be substantial aridification in western Mongolia. The project focuses on
collecting new spatially-resolved rock uplift data using inversions of fluvial
topography and new stable and clumped isotope records of paleoclimate from
leeside basins. The age model for both rock uplift and of climatic change across
western Mongolia will be constrained by magneto- and cyclostratigraphic-based
age models of adjacent, syn-deformational basin sediments. The Weather Research
and Forecasting model will be used to predict the climate impact of distinct
Altai topographic histories. Combined, these data sets permit tests of the
theories that seek to explain Cenozoic Altai uplift.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.