* 2316634
* Institutional Transformation: Transforming Cultures of Responsible Research through the Development of Ethics Expertise and Self-Efficacy among Faculty through Social Networks
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Rockwell Clancy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2028
* USD 699,706.00

Given the serious and wide-ranging implications of STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) research, it is important that STEM practitioners
conduct research in a responsible manner. However, is unclear whether existing
approaches to RCR (responsible conduct of research) education (1) help
practitioners to identify and address ethical issues in their own research, (2)
are relevant to researchers across the disciplinary spectrum, or (3) contribute
to the development of more responsible, ethically-attuned research institutions
and environments. To address these issues and foster cultures of responsible
research, this project will leverage the disciplinary expertise and social
networks of STEM faculty to empower them to engage with ethical issues in their
own research fields. It will result in programs that better engage and are more
relevant to a broader range of STEM practitioners, thereby helping to ensure
that the results of STEM research better serve social interests.

The goal of this project is to transform cultures of responsible research
throughout Virginia Tech, developing a research-based model of peer-to-peer RCR
education that can ultimately be used beyond the university. To do so, this
project consists in (1) conducting research on ethics expertise, self-efficacy,
and research climates among STEM faculty and (2) developing educational
interventions, empowering researchers to engage with ethical issues in their own
work. To ensure interventions have an institutional impact, the project will
conduct research on social norms in faculty networks, leveraging these results
to ensure perspectives on and practices in RCR come to have the broadest
possible impact. This project is novel in three main ways: it (1) develops
faculty expertise in ethics, so they can proactively identity and address
discipline-specific ethical issues that arise in their everyday research; (2)
improves faculty self-efficacy in ethics, so they can confidently communicate
about research ethics; (3) leverages faculty social networks, ensuring a model
of responsible research education that is scalable, sustainable, and
transferable. Team members will leverage their leadership positions in
professional organizations and relationships in government to promote the merits
and facilitate the adoption of this program elsewhere. The project will also
encourage faculty, especially those participating in our intervention programs,
to share this model with their networks outside Virginia Tech through cross-
institutional research collaborations and academic engagement with industry.

This project is jointly funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, the Directorate for Engineering, and
the Directorate for STEM Education (NSF ADVANCE program in the Division of
Equity for Excellence in STEM).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.