* 2316034
* Perceptions of Efficiency and Bias in Peer Review: Algorithmic versus Human Decision Making
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Connie L McNeely, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,922.00

This project will develop improved methods and concepts to guide the development
and application of new digital technologies that could be used in peer review
processes for evaluating scientific publishing and funding outcomes. The
research team will seek to compare perceptions of peer review decisions assisted
by algorithms to those made by humans. The focus of the research is on the
ethics and value of using algorithms in peer review. On the one hand,
algorithmic peer review serves an instrumental purpose, purportedly offering the
ability to make more efficient decisions. On the other hand, algorithms can
produce biased and discriminatory decisions, which can raise ethical concerns
about their use. This study will expand knowledge of how algorithms relate to
the norms, values, and institutional imperatives that dictate how science as a
human and machine endeavor should be conducted.

The research team will carry out a factorial survey based on experiments in
which research participants are presented with vignettes regarding human and
algorithmic peer review decision making. The participants will be asked to
assess the legitimacy of each scenario in light of bias and efficiency. The team
will employ various techniques, principally multi-level econometric methods, to
analyze data drawn from the survey and other sources, including sociology
publications. The team will use an institutionalist approach to frame and
delineate key concepts and relationships and to formulate research hypotheses
that are empirically meaningful and theoretically appealing. The project will
offer insights on measuring both pragmatic and moral legitimacy as they pertain
to peer review. The project will also provide an adaptable survey tool and
approach for gauging perceptions about algorithmic versus human peer review
decisions and other scholarly communication activities. Accordingly, it
addresses foundational issues in the philosophy of science, sociology of science
and technology, and science communication.

This project is jointly funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences and the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.