* 2316651
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Jet-Energy Loss Measurements with the sPHENIX Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Anthony Hodges, Hodges, Anthony
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Anthony Hodges is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Hodges supports his research project entitled " Postdoctoral
Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Jet-Energy Loss Measurements with the sPHENIX Detector",
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Anne Sickles.

Dr. Hodges will pursue a research project to better understand the nuclear
strong force and Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) at extreme temperatures by
measuring properties of the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP) produced in high-energy
collisions between large nuclei. The studies in this proposal will utilize a
new, state-of-the-art particle detector known as sPHENIX, which will begin
collecting data from nuclear collisions produced by the Relativistic Heavy-Ion
Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory in the summer of 2023. Hodges will
have a wide range of outreach activities including mentoring high school
students through the Grainger College of Engineering’s Young Scholars (GEnYuS)
program, engaging in recruitment through the National Society of Black
Physicists (NSBP), kick-start sponsorship opportunities for other minority
science individuals, and engage in local efforts at the Long Island Science
Center STEAM Museum to elevate under-represented minorities in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.