* 2316654
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Agent Adaptive Data Collection for Automated Post-Disaster Rapid Damage Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 165,000.00

In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, reconnaissance effort to identify
building damage severity and distribution is critical for search and rescue and
other time-sensitive decisions. However, existing data collection and analytical
processes are less responsive to unforeseen and unexpected circumstances.
Therefore, this project develops a novel adaptive data collection framework that
constantly analyzes the most recent observations to determine and update the
trajectory of data collector agents toward areas with the greatest potential for
information gain. It enables these agents to collect reliable data under severe
time and resource constraints. The outcomes of this project set the stage for
automated damage assessment systems to improve the resilience of built
environments and citizens in hazard-prone regions. A set of educational and
outreach efforts are envisioned for broadly disseminating the research findings
and integrating them into undergraduate and graduate courses.

The adaptive data collection system is built on a novel hierarchical Bayesian
framework for modeling disaster damage levels and a Bayesian optimization for
adaptive destination identification and trajectory planning. This method first
relies on a pre-disaster preliminary probabilistic model of physical damage
levels for different types of structures at the census tract level of
granularity using priori information and spatial attributes available to the
public. It then creates and constantly updates distributions of physical damage
levels across census tracts by integrating with the collected data from visited
zones. Next, it dynamically and adaptively determines the trajectories for
multiple agents to maximize the information gain in the shortest possible time.
The Bayesian probabilistic models could be transferable to other complex
problems such as environmental pollution assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.