* 2316278
* RII Track-2 FEC: Developing effective adaptation strategies to enhance the resilience of farmers under changing climate
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Sushil Adhikari, Auburn University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,907,825.00

Agricultural activities result in greenhouse gas emissions that contribute to
climate change. As a result of climate change, droughts are becoming more
frequent and severe. Drought, a period of prolonged dry weather due to a lack of
precipitation, reduces the water availability required to maintain crop
productivity, which impacts farmers substantially, whose livelihoods depend on
agricultural productivity. Therefore, developing and assessing management
practices that can help withstand and recover from the negative impacts of
droughts on agricultural operations will contribute to the sustainability of
agriculture and food security. This project is a collaboration among
universities located in three NSF EPSCoR jurisdictions: Auburn University,
Alabama; New Mexico State University, New Mexico; and the University of
Delaware, Delaware. Through the proposed research, the project team aims to
develop and assess agricultural management practices that will help reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural systems, improve soil health and
water quality, and reduce the vulnerability of crop failures during droughts.
The project team consists of early-career, mid-career, and established
researchers with diversity in gender and ethnicity. The proposed project will
contribute to developing a highly skilled and diverse workforce consisting of
several graduate and undergraduate level students, post-doctoral scholars, and
early career faculty. Further, educational materials will be developed to engage
with a broader audience (e.g., rural communities, students K-12, biochar
producers, conservation personnel), with particular emphasis on educating people
from traditionally underrepresented groups.

The overarching goal of this NSF EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (NSF EPSCoR RII Track-2 FEC) project is to
make agricultural systems more resilient to climate change, reduce greenhouse
gas emissions from agricultural sources in an environmentally sustainable manner
(e.g., improving soil health and water and air quality), and enhance the
resilience of farmers to the negative consequences of climate change. The goal
will be accomplished through the following three thrust areas, comprised of
research, educational, and outreach activities: (a) development of engineered
biochar for use in agricultural systems; (b) providing new insights toward
understanding the impact of using engineered biochar on the environment and crop
production systems; and (c) quantify the socioeconomic benefits of using
engineered biochar. The research project leverages each institution's unique and
complementary research expertise and resources to accomplish the following
objectives: (1) develop engineered biochar to lower agricultural nitrous oxide
emission in a climate-resilient system, (2) determine the plant genes and
pathways associated with a positive yield response to engineered biochar
amendment under water deficit conditions, (3) elucidate the impact of engineered
biochar on nutrients, greenhouse gas emissions, and microbial processes, (4)
simulate the impact of extreme events on crop yield and nutrient losses, and
identify the suites of conditions that are less impactful for agricultural
productivity, and (5) assess farmers' perceptions and the economics of using
engineered biochar along with the animal waste. The project includes
educational, mentoring, and training activities for undergraduate and graduate
level students, post-doctoral scholars, early career faculty, and various
communities (farmers, biochar producers, students K-12, industry personnel).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.