* 2316841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How primates assess risk while moving in the trees
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Nicole Schapker, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 20,224.00

Most primate species live and move in trees, and there is a wealth of research
on how the shape of primate skeletons and the way they move allows primates to
navigate branches that can be steep, thin, spread out, and bend underneath their
weight. This doctoral dissertation research project assesses how primate
cognition may allow these animals to stay safe while navigating potential risks
in their environment. The first part of this research analyzes video footage of
primates moving in their wild habitats to assess whether they change way they
move when crossing gaps or when moving at different heights in trees. The second
part of this research studies how day-living and night-living primates collect
information about the safety of potential supports for movement when different
amounts of light are available. The results of this research help us better
understand how anatomy and decision making help our close relatives navigate
their environments. This project supports K-12 STEM education and public
outreach through short courses and internships for high school students.

Arboreal locomotion is particularly difficult, given that supports are
discontinuous and vary in size, orientation, and compliance. Most previous
studies on primate locomotor adaptation have adopted a framework that directly
connects variation in postcranial morphology with locomotor performance to
assess whether primates are uniquely suited to this challenging environment.
However, previous work has largely bypassed the sensory and cognitive processes
that may also influence behavior. This project uses analytical tools novel to
the field of primate locomotor biomechanics to investigate how primates assess
risk in arboreal environments, focusing on three integrated projects to analyze
recordings of primates moving in their environments, designed to 1) assess
baseline performance of primates in simulated arboreal environments, performance
under varying light conditions, and how these variables influence path choice,
and 2) quantifying behavioral profiles of several different nonhuman primate
species as they make decisions on how to move on varied supports in their wild
habitats. The results of this research contribute to a better understanding of
primate adaptation and evolution, and specifically inform ideas regarding the
sensory and cognitive processes that go into maintaining safety while moving in
the trees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.