* 2316482
* Collaborative Research: RII Track-2 FEC: Promoting N2O- and CO2-Relieved Nitrogen Fertilizers for Climate Change-Threatened Midwest Farming and Ranching
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Shuang Gu, Wichita State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Hongmei Luo
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,010,735.00

With approximately 300 times the global warming potential of carbon dioxide
(CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O) contributes to 7% of U.S. greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions in 2020. 74% of N2O emission comes from agricultural fertilizer
applications. The atmospheric concentration of N2O has been increasing at a rate
of 2% per decade, driven largely by intensified fertilization in meeting the
ever-growing demand for food, fiber, and energy. Despite the strong link to
fertilization, N2O emission remains to be a complex problem arising from
scientific, technological, economical, ecological, and societal factors.
Understanding and therefore curbing N2O emissions urgently calls for effective
collaborations through interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research. This
NSF EPSCoR Track II FEC project brings together a multidisciplinary team of
scientists from Iowa State University (ISU) and Wichita State University (WSU)
to explore and examine green urea that could enable the paradigm shift of
fertilization towards N2O- and CO2-relieved farming and ranching. This research
project has the potential to set the foundation of fostering collaborations and
associations in both GHG N2O reduction and green fertilizer promotion across
academia, government, industries, agriculture, and communities, therefore
strengthening the sustained R&D capacity and competitiveness. While producing
green fertilizers, the capture of waste nitrogen and CO2 will also help protect
ecological and environmental systems in Midwest areas from being stressed by
existing non-sustainable practices, ensuring longer-term economic thriving and
prosperity. The distributed feature of green fertilizer technology holds a great
potential to create higher-wage jobs for local farming/ranching regions,
especially for low-income minorities in rural areas, thus expanding capabilities
and opportunities for agricultural communities that are disproportionately
affected by climate change.

The overarching objective of this collaborative project is to promote N2O- and
CO2-relieved nitrogen fertilizers (green urea as the focus) with economic
resilience and environmental consciousness as an innovative way to mitigate the
challenges posed upon climate change-threatened Midwest farming and ranching
communities. Two EPSCoR jurisdictions, ISU in Iowa and WSU in Kansas, will work
side-by-side to channel concerted efforts into the following research themes: i)
the advanced separation for waste nitrogen capture and product purification; ii)
the innovative electrolysis for synthesizing green urea; iii) the synergistic
investigation of nitrogen sensing, modeling, and fertilizer utilization; and iv)
the societal examination for community acceptance and policy changes towards
green fertilizers. The success of this EPSCoR project will enable an electro-
manufacturing system powered by renewable energy (wind and sunlight) to produce
green nitrogen fertilizers that are fundamentally different from current thermo-
manufacturing processes that consume non-renewable fossil energy (coal,
petroleum, and natural gas), which alleviates agriculture’s impact on climate
change, while ensuring the sustainability of Midwest farming and ranching. The
research outcome will lead to deep understanding of GHG N2O emission, nitrate
upcycling, urea synthesis, CO2 capture and conversion, and nitrogen fertilizer
utilization in agriculture. It will also open a new avenue for new generations
of technologies for N2O and nitrate sensing, anion-selective membrane, and
efficient chemical manufacturing. Simultaneously, the project execution enhances
research competitiveness and develops research capacity and infrastructure in
Kansas and Iowa (both physical and human resources) and grows the participants’
reputation and competence in their fields. Based on great synergy between Kansas
and Iowa in shared common problems and united interest in agricultural
prosperity, two EPSCoR universities will offer a unique educational platform
that aims at raising general public awareness in the Midwest on nitrogen-cycle
management, as well as training the next-generation of workforce for sustainable
agriculture. In particular, the EPSCoR team is partnering with the minority-
serving institution, Dodge City Community College (DC3), in mentoring minority
students and in training minority-teaching instructors in the closely aligned
areas including “agricultural science” and “farm and ranch management”.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.