* 2316778
* LEAPS-MPS: Exploration and Development of Transition Metal Complexes and Their Application in Undergraduate Laboratory Settings
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Joan Roque, University of Puerto Rico Cayey
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,999.00

In this project, managed by the Chemistry Division and co-funded by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Joan
Roque-Pe単a, and her undergraduate students at the University of Puerto Rico at
Cayey will be exploring and developing new catalysts for small molecule
transformations as well as developing experiments to teach novel concepts in
undergraduate chemistry laboratories. This project has the potential to advance
the development of air-stable catalysts that could be used in industrial
applications. This project will expand the research infrastructure at the
University of Puerto Rico at Cayey, a Hispanic Serving Institution located in
Puerto Rico, which will allow Professor Roque-Pe単a to train Hispanic
undergraduate students in inorganic and organometallic chemistry and chemical
education research methods.

Professor Roque-Pe単a and her undergraduate students aim to synthesize new
iridium complexes that will be studied for small molecule activation. They will
also explore the possibility of substituting iridium, which is an expensive
heavy metal, with cobalt, which is a cheaper and environmentally safer solution.
They will employ computational methods to? They will then be able to synthesize
new and safer complexes. Additionally, Professor Roque-Pe単a will be developing
new integrated experiments for the inorganic chemistry laboratory and will use
her research findings to inform the development of future experiments. This
research project will expand the research infrastructure at the University of
Puerto Rico at Cayey, expose students to new chemistry concepts that they have
not explored in the past, and allow Hispanic students to learn common techniques
and methods in inorganic and organometallic chemistry as well as chemical
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.