* 2316747
* Broadening Participation in the 2023 Electronic Materials Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Daniel Wasserman, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 04/30/2024
* USD 18,100.00

The Electronic Materials Conference (EMC) is a premier annual forum for the
presentation and dissemination of research focused on the preparation, growth,
characterization, and use of electronic materials. EMC talks, a majority of
which are given by students, present cutting-edge research in a wide range of
fields, including solar energy materials, metamaterials and plasmonics, quantum
structures, electrical and optical characterization techniques, wide bandgap and
narrow bandgap materials, nanocomposites, 2D materials, and many others. The
design, growth and synthesis, development, and characterization of electronic
materials are central to a wide range of scientific fields, from quantum
sensing, communication, and computation to renewable energy, optical
communication and sensing, data storage, power systems, and nano-electronics.
EMC provides a unique opportunity for researchers from academia, government
labs, and industry to meet and share the latest cutting-edge results across
these broad range of fields. While currently drawing from a broad range of
disciplines and institutions, EMC is looking to broaden participation of
scientists and engineers from minority serving institutions (MSIs), including
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs). This proposal aims to
broaden participation in the Electronic Materials Conference by forging close,
sustainable ties with MSIs, through the NSF Partnerships for Research and
Education in Materials (PREM) program, in order to build a more diverse EMC.

The project is designed to broaden participation in EMC by building a
sustainable relationship between EMC and PREM, as well as electronic materials
research groups at MSIs. The proposed effort will: (i) increase the breadth of
research presented at EMC, providing opportunities for dissemination of research
results from MSIs at an impactful forum for electronic materials research; (ii)
offer opportunities for networking and the building of collaborative research
efforts between MSI researchers and EMC attendees, fostering new research
efforts and directions; and (iii) strengthen the EMC by broadening participation
in the elected EMC organizing committee and pool of invited organizers. The
proposed effort will focus on bringing researchers from MSIs into the EMC fold,
both as attendees and presenters, but also as invited organizers and members of
the organizing committee. There will also be a focus on reaching out to
undergraduate researchers at MSIs, in order to expose these students to a broad
range of cutting-edge materials research, inspire these students to continue
their education at the graduate level, and thus strengthen the STEM pipeline for
under-represented populations. The program will reimburse EMC registration fees
for attendees and participants from MSIs and PREM institutions and will look to
support travel and lodging expenses for ‘teams’ of EMC attendees from these
institutions. Success will be measured by tracking attendance and participation
by MSI and PREM attendees, as well as with a post-conference survey to determine
adjustments to EMC that will further help to broaden participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.