* 2316076
* Collaborative Research: Strengthening the OOI Data Labs Community of Practice (CoP) to enhance undergraduate data literacy
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Anna Pfeiffer-Herbert, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2025
* USD 99,929.00

The Ocean Observing Initiative (OOI) is an observational network of over eight
hundred ocean instruments providing near real-time data that is freely available
online. A collaborative group of ocean education faculty from Rutgers University
and Stockton University in New Jersey, Hillsborough Community College in
Florida, and City University of New York Queens College and the Science
Education Resources Center at Carleton College in Minnesota will support
curriculum development and student engagement using advanced technologies of the
OOI. The work will maintain and extend the Community of Practice of professors
engaged in teaching with OOI data. These professors will be engaged in the
project with the goal of building data literacy in students with effective
course materials and expanding the workforce capacity in ocean data science and
data analytics. Recruitment of participants will focus on faculty from two-year
colleges, regional four-year colleges, and minority serving institutions, whose
student populations include greater numbers of students who are first-
generation, veterans, non-traditional, and/or from historically marginalized
communities. The project will provide targeted professional development
opportunities for professors to become more expert users of OOI assets, such as
the newly located Pioneer Array, and data streams while increasing
undergraduates’ engagement and understanding of core concepts in oceanography.
Through these professional development opportunities, the project will empower a
community of undergraduate instructors to teach oceanography while developing
students’ data skills using OOI data assets.

The project will advance the existing OOI Ocean Data Labs program model by
providing targeted faculty professional development to promote learning of ocean
literacy and data skills and expand educational resources that bring OOI data
into undergraduate geoscience curriculum. An assessment of community needs will
inform the development of additional relevant content, that can be articulated
and taught using OOI assets. The Data Labs online resources provide scaffolded
activities involving guided step-by-step instructions on how to orient and
interpret data from the OOI that are tied to fundamental principles in
oceanography. The activities meet users’ needs by placing information into
relevant context, self-checking knowledge throughout the activities and
promoting self-directed discovery to support undergraduate students that would
benefit from more practice with math or data skills and well as students who are
ready for higher order learning objectives. This project will also expand the
collection of OOI educational resources, by engaging the community in the
development of new activities and new Python-based structured activities that
introduce technical skills and further the data literacy of students learning
oceanographic concepts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.