* 2316908
* Causal Inference for Incomplete and Heterogeneous Multisite and Blocked Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nicole Pashley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This research project will expand randomization-based causal inference
methodology for complex blocked and multisite randomized control trials.
Researchers aiming to learn about the causal effects of treatments or
interventions often use blocked and multisite trials. With these designs,
experimental units are categorized into blocks or sites and then independent
experiments occur within each block or site. The designs are especially common
in the social and behavioral sciences; currently, however, they have some
limitations. This project will fill many notable holes in the randomization-
based causal inference literature by developing methodology for analyzing
complex blocked and multisite experiments. The results from this project will be
of value to both methodologists and practitioners. The significant involvement
of graduate students will aid in the training of researchers in randomization-
based causal inference. Materials from this project will be used in the
development of an undergraduate causal inference course. Freely available
statistical software packages also will be developed.

This research project will develop novel methodology for randomization-based
causal inference for complex blocked and multisite experiments. When there are
many treatments, it may not be practical or even feasible to implement all
treatments within each block or site. Use of an incomplete block design, in
which a random subset of treatments is assigned and implemented within each
block, can overcome this challenge while keeping the structure of the blocked
design. The project will develop methodology to analyze incomplete block designs
from the randomization-based potential outcome framework which requires fewer
assumptions than existing model-based approaches. Further, when there are many
factorial treatments of interest, it is possible that not all blocks or sites
will contain full information on all factors, or that a subset of factors may
not be randomized in some blocks or sites. This project will investigate what
causal effects can be identified in these situations and will develop
inferential techniques to learn about these effects. In addition to average
causal effects of interventions, there is often great interest in learning about
cross-site heterogeneity. The project will explore in what settings cross-site
heterogeneity is identifiable and how to best capture this heterogeneity. The
focus on randomization-based inference will make the tools developed especially
relevant to social and behavioral scientists who primarily run experiments using
human subjects, for which model-based assumptions may not be appropriate for the
data collected. Understanding the amount of treatment effect heterogeneity
across blocks or sites also will help researchers assess whether programs and
policies should be implemented at a large scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.