* 2316523
* Collaborative Research: Metabolic Bet-Hedging as a mechanism for the maintenance of functional diversity in tree-ectomycorrhizal mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Laura Bogar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 09/30/2027
* USD 490,526.00

This project will test how interactions between trees and soil fungi help trees
to adapt to changing environments. In temperate forests, trees rely on
partnerships, or symbioses, with belowground fungi that help them to obtain the
nutrients they need for growth. These symbioses can be incredibly diverse. For
example, Douglas-fir is a commercially valuable tree that can have dozens of
different fungal species on its root system at the same time. This project tests
the idea that Douglas-fir trees maintain this fungal diversity as a way of
adapting to variation in the environment. In other words, much like human
investors might maintain a portfolio of stocks, fir trees might maintain a
portfolio of fungi to “bet-hedge” against unpredictable changes in their
environment. Having many fungal partners at the same time might guarantee that
at least some of them are able to provide nutrients to the trees even when the
environment is unfavorable. To test this hypothesis, the project uses
experiments in greenhouses, mathematical models, and field surveys of fungal
diversity. In addition to improving knowledge of how beneficial interactions
between species affect natural biodiversity, this project will also provide
valuable data on Douglas-fir, a commercially and ecologically important tree in
the western United States. The results will help scientists to predict how
Douglas-fir and its fungal partners will respond to warmer, drier future climate
conditions. The project also provides training to the next generation of
American scientists, including fieldwork experiences for local high school
students.

The Douglas-fir ectomycorrhizal symbiosis meets the bet-hedging hypothesis’s
assumptions of (1) long-lived partners that must tolerate variable environments,
(2) trait variation across mutualist partners, and (3) evidence of variation in
partner quality. This project advances eco-evolutionary theory for mutualisms by
combining greenhouse experiments that measure tree investments in fungal
partners of different quality, mathematical models that predict portfolio
diversity based on environmental variation, and fieldwork to quantify fungal
diversity across a gradient of environmental conditions. Collectively, these
approaches will allow researchers to (1) quantify optimal tree investment
strategies in temporally fluctuating environments, (2) test for evidence of bet-
hedging across the distribution of coastal Douglas-fir, and (3) link fungal
diversity to host tree performance. The project supports three pre-tenure
faculty members, provides training opportunities for postdocs, technicians, and
student researchers, and supports course-based research experiences and
scientific training for college transfer students and teenage volunteers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.