* 2316107
* Examining the Long-Term Impact of an Undergraduate Ethics in Physics Course
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Thomsen, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 335,868.00

More attention is needed on ethics education at the undergraduate level,
especially outside the biosciences and engineering fields. This project will
examine the impact of a dedicated undergraduate course on ethics in physics,
which has offered for twenty years and served over three hundred students. The
research team will survey the combined population of former students who
attended this course. This provides a unique opportunity to study the long-term
impact of a scientific ethics course on the subsequent professional lives of
these individuals. As a fundamental goal of science ethics education is to
improve the way scientific research is carried out, this project will provide
essential information regarding the long-term impact of one approach to ethics
education: a dedicated, undergraduate course that caters directly to the
disciplinary interests of the students. This information, in turn, has the
potential to guide future science curricula, thereby making undergraduate
science instruction more compatible with the goal of developing a more effective
and ethical science, technology, engineering, and mathematics workforce.

The project will assess the relatively understudied area of undergraduate ethics
education, using a database of former undergraduate students from an ethics in
physics course. The project addresses the main question of whether a stand-alone
course in scientific and research ethics has a long-term impact on how
individuals detect, approach, and resolve ethical issues in their professional
spheres. The research team will collect data from former students who completed
the course within a twenty year period. The team will assess how the course
material has influenced ethical decision making in their careers. Specifically,
the project seeks to address the following: (1) Do alumni retain knowledge from
formal ethics training beyond two years after the course? (2) How long do alumni
retain and apply knowledge from formal ethics training? (3) In what ways do
alumni utilize and apply knowledge gained in an undergraduate ethics course in a
professional setting? The team will survey the population of approximately three
hundred former students of the course and contact a subset of the respondents
for follow-up interviews to help contextualize and interpret the survey data and
to gain a more nuanced understanding of the long-term effects of the course.
Survey questions will aim to identify specific influences on professional
behavior that are connected to the course, and interview data will provide
insight into nuances not readily apparent through the survey responses.

This project is funded by the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences
and managed by the ER2 Program of the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.