* 2316853
* Collaborative Research: The Increasing Diversity in Evolutionary Anthropological Sciences (IDEAS) Program
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Graciela Cabana, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2027
* USD 141,970.00

Research shows that participation of the full spectrum of diverse talent in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) brings unique
perspectives and experiences that solve problems and promote creativity in basic
and applied sciences. The Increasing Diversity in Evolutionary Anthropological
Sciences (IDEAS) program is a continuing initiative to build diverse talent in
biological anthropology through research, training, mentorship and collaboration
opportunities for students and faculty from groups underrepresented in STEM and
anthropology. As a discipline that studies the variation and evolution of living
humans, non-human primates and their extinct ancestors, and features researchers
who provide insights on everything from forensic identification to human
ergonomics to understanding climate influences on human systems, it is critical
that biological anthropology attract researchers with diverse backgrounds and
perspectives. The current award builds and expands on previous NSF-supported
IDEAS program activities, during which over 100 students and faculty mentors
participated and new researchers were retained in the discipline.

The current project continues the IDEAS Program initiative through the
successful student mentoring and outreach program that is held in conjunction
with the American Association of Biological Anthropologists annual meeting. The
project also expands the IDEAS Program initiative in two key ways: (1) adding an
IDEAS Workshop at, or near, one Minority Serving Institution (MSI) annually, and
(2) extending mentorship and community building into more advanced stages of the
academic life cycle (i.e., post-PhD). The project also develops more
sophisticated monitoring and evaluation strategies to understand this
initiative’s longer-term impacts on the discipline. This project is jointly
funded by the Biological Anthropology program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.