* 2316566
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Transiting brown dwarfs as the key to understanding substellar formation mechanisms
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Theron Carmichael, Carmichael, Theron W
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Theron Carmichael is awarded a Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of research
and education at the University of Hawai’i, Manoa. He plans to study the
population of transiting brown dwarfs, which are rare objects that serve as the
bridge between planets and stars in the Milky Way galaxy. He will serve as a
mentor in the Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and the Hawai’i
Student/Teacher Astronomy Research (HI STAR) programs at Manoa to improve the
participation of students from the Native Hawaiian community and other
underrepresented backgrounds in astronomy research.

Carmichael will take measurements of the masses, radii, and ages of newly
discovered transiting brown dwarfs in order to gain a deeper understanding of
their formation mechanisms and evolution. These measurements will be compared
against substellar evolution models that aim to predict how brown dwarf masses
and radii evolve over time. Through this work, Carmichael will explore the mass
range at which brown dwarfs stop forming the way giant planets do and begin to
form more like stars. He will additionally explore the effects of stellar
irradiation on the radius evolution of transiting brown dwarfs. Carmichael plans
to mentor and advise junior researchers using brown dwarf science as a rich
learning environment for these young scientists to grow. He will use his past
experience in mentorship roles to help these scientists identify, understand,
and overcome the systemic barriers they may face as they become full-fledged
researchers and future leaders in astronomy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.