* 2316002
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution - Oceanographic Instrumentation (Moored Instrumentation to Support Present and Future Field Programs)
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Brian Hogue, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The Physical Oceanography Observing Laboratory (POOL) of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution is a virtual facility that maintains and provides
moored instrumentation to U.S. investigators conducting research supported by
the National Science Foundation and other national agencies. Component
laboratory groups construct the mooring elements and prepare the sensors, go to
sea to deploy and recover moorings and, if requested by the principal
investigator, extract and process the data from the moored instrumentation and
make them ready for scientific analysis. The present inventory of POOL
instrumentation is fully committed to current, ongoing projects, greatly
restricting the ability to support new initiatives in the future. Moreover,
overlapping deployments now scheduled will result in a shortfall in some
requested instruments. Acquisition of selected new moored sensors is requested
here to address this shortfall and facilitate future field work. Instrumentation
requested includes:

EdgeTech 8242XS Release and Transponder $157,500 Nobska MAVS-5SD Acoustic
Current Meter $130,750 Seabird 37SMP Microcat (pumped C,T, &P) $210,520 Nortek
Aquadopp 6000 Current Meter $148,950 EdgeTech 8011M Command deck Unit $30,000
Dual Release Brackets $14,564 Misc labor, materials, IDC $47,497 $739,781 Year 1
$400,000 Year 2 $339,781 $739,781 Broader Impacts The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.