* 2316579
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: A multi-scale approach to predicting coral disease spread:  leveraging an outbreak on coral-dense isolated reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Amy Apprill, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 20,723.00

Marine diseases have devastating impacts on ocean ecosystems and this work
directly informs understanding of disease transmission in the ocean. To
understand the cause and patterns of spread of a disease outbreak that began in
late summer of 2022 at the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary
(northwest Gulf of Mexico, GoM), a team of ecologists, ocean connectivity and
disease modelers, microbiologists, and coral immunologists (from Rice
University, the University of Virgin Islands (UVI), Louisiana State University
(LSU), and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution) is monitoring the health of
corals, and biopsy their tissues. This data aid in developing a model that
predicts coral disease transmission and its impacts on economically valuable
coral reefs in the GoM. This project supports multidisciplinary field and
laboratory research experiences of graduate students at multiple minority-
serving institutions, and provides undergraduate students with hands-on training
in modeling, ecological and molecular analysis techniques. UVI and LSU are in
EPSCoR jurisdictions and have diverse student bodies, including numerous under-
represented minority (URM) students. The research team collaboratively provides
URM students with research experiences in STEM fields. Project findings are
being broadly communicated through virtual public programming, to the Disease
Advisory Council, and via direct updates to managers of the Flower Garden Bank
National Marine Sanctuary.

Over the last four decades, diseases decimated ecosystem engineers in marine
coastal environments, including coral reefs. Recent results from studies of
white plague and stony coral tissue loss disease (SCTLD) show coral species
immune traits can influence disease resistance and therefore predict of coral
community structure post-outbreak in the Caribbean. In late August of 2022, an
unidentified multi-species acute tissue loss disease with signs and species
susceptibility characteristics reminiscent of white plague or SCTLD was
documented at the Flower Garden Banks (northwest Gulf of Mexico, GoM). This
disease is having significant impacts on FGB and could become widespread across
the GoM, offering an opportunity to test hypotheses about the influence of coral
community composition and pathogen dispersal on disease spread during the early
stages of an outbreak; few studies examine this on relatively isolated, deep,
coral-dense reefs. The interdisciplinary research team employs photomosaics and
colony fate-tracking, layered molecular datasets and microscopy approaches, as
well as modeling of disease reservoirs and dispersal to assess the etiology of
the disease and contribute to the development of a generalizable framework for
disease spread on reefs. By parsing the impacts of reef-scale community
composition versus seascape-scale dispersal in disease transmission and
persistence, this work helps reveal the potential resistance and resilience of
isolated, coral-dense reefs to diseases that decimate these ecosystems across
the wider Caribbean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.