* 2316687
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Equilibrium States for Non-stationary Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Gregory Hemenway, Hemenway, Gregory
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Dr. Gregory Hemenway is awarded a National Science Foundation Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research, education, and activities related to broadening
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship supports the
research project entitled "Equilibrium States for Non-stationary Dynamical
Systems". The project activities will be conducted at the host institution, the
Ohio State University, under the mentorship of Dr. Daniel Thompson.

Many real-world systems exhibit chaotic behavior: small errors in measurements
compound quickly and render predictions of future states of the system
worthless. We can view such systems as stochastic processes and study their
asymptotic behavior using ergodic theory. Stationary dynamics in which the same
map is iterated to obtain results about asymptotic behaviors are well studied.
In his doctoral thesis, Dr. Hemenway used techniques from thermodynamic
formalism to study chaotic systems that exhibit non-stationary behavior. During
this project, Dr. Hemenway will continue to develop his research program as he
investigates conjugacies between expanding maps on higher dimensional spaces,
geometric approaches for characterizing conditional measures for skew products,
and applications of non-stationary results to interesting systems like beta
transformations and billiards. As an African American mathematician, Dr.
Hemenway is dedicated to helping bridge the gap in minority participation in
STEM at the research level. The broader impacts of this project will include
participation in programs, workshops, and activities that cater to the
recruitment and retention of minorities at the university level. This
participation will involve aspects of mentoring, teaching, and the development
of math related activities that reinforce and stimulate students' mathematical
prowess.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.