* 2316603
* LEAPS-MPS: Deep Quasi-Reversibility Inversion for Source Localization Oncological Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Anh Khoa Vo, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 78,336.00

Brain tumors are among the most fatal cancers, affecting millions of individuals
worldwide. In the United States alone, each year thousands of adults and
children receive a primary brain tumor diagnosis. A key focus for oncologists,
neurologists, and other scientists involved in the field is in determining the
specific anatomical origin site of the tumor. Knowing this site might help in
gaining insights in how the tumor behaves, in predicting the symptoms it is
likely to cause, and in identifying genetic syndromes that have a high
association with brain tumors. Therefore, this source information can be an
important aid in the early detection of brain cancer. This project studies a
reliable and efficient inversion algorithm called Deep Quasi-Reversibility
Method (DQRM) that can quickly reconstruct the primary tumorâ€™s location. By
actively involving undergraduate students in research activities and fostering
collaborations between institutions, the project will contribute to the well-
being of individuals affected by brain tumors as well as help to cultivate a
skilled STEM workforce. The project is based at a long-established HBCU, thus
providing an opportunity to broadening research participating in STEM.

The project involves numerical and theoretical studies of the proposed DQRM for
solving the source localization oncological question with different levels of
complexity. The DQRM is a combination of a variational quasi-reversibility (QR)
method and a deep learning mesh-free-based algorithm. The design brings together
techniques of computational mathematics, partial differential equations, and
machine learning to fast deliver a reliable and accurate quasi-solution. On one
hand, the variational QR approach can overcome localized features, highly
dynamic nonlinearities, and the inherent exponential instability of the
reconstruction process. On the other, the deep learning approach handles the
curse of dimensionality and the costs associated with data measurement. The
first objective of the project is to study the effectiveness of the inverse
solver in tackling the quasi-linear parabolic models associated with the
evolutionary dynamics of tumor cells. The second is to investigate the
applicability of the algorithm by incorporating an advanced tumor growth model
that considers factors such as age, size, and spatial structure. The theoretical
theme is centered around the convergence of a neural network approximator
towards the quasi-solution.

This project is funded in part by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Excellence in Research (HBCU-EiR) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.