* 2316572
* Collaborative Research: Bioarchaeology, Osteoimmunology, and Ecoimmunology: Linking Inflammation, Life History Tradeoffs, and Biocultural Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Haagen Klaus, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 140,000.00

The immune system and the skeleton are often viewed as separate parts of our
biology. However, recent research has revealed that the skeletal and immune
systems interact more than previously appreciated as part of the “osteoimmune”
system. Hyperinflammation experienced earlier in life, which can result in
chronic inflammation, therefore affects the skeleton as well as other parts of
the body. This project examines immune and inflammatory proteins in bone that
are markers of this complex relationship between bone and immune function and
applies them to questions about biocultural processes in human societies. The
project advances knowledge in skeletal biology and bioarchaeology by combining
traditional observations of skeletal pathology with proteomic analysis to better
identify inflammatory responses that may be shaping human morbidity and
mortality in the past and present. The broader impacts of the project include
student training, including individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM;
curriculum expansion; international research collaborations; and engagement with
schools, communities, and the public.

Early life biological stress and immune system over-activation are thought to
produce cascading effects involving phenotypic plasticity and life history
trade-offs that shape predilections for later-life inflammatory and
hyperinflammatory phenotypes. This project pursues a cross-disciplinary study of
skeletal inflammatory diseases, combining observations of periodontal disease
and periosteal reaction with proteomic analyses of at least of four independent
inflammatory protein biomarkers (osteocalcin, macrophage inflammatory proteins,
leukocyte-derived proteins, and neutrophil-derived proteins) in individuals
possessing an inferred hyperinflammatory phenotype. The PIs address biocultural
hypotheses about the co-occurrence of pathological processes, the role of early
life environments in shaping immune response, and the influence of sociocultural
dynamics on human biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.