* 2316785
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Mechanisms Underlying Repeated Evolution: Integrating Micro- and Macroevolutionary Analyses and Functional Genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Michael Tobler, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2027
* USD 569,812.00

Plants and animals have adapted to survive in a variety of extreme environments,
and understanding these adaptations has the potential to aid in developing
strategies to better withstand a changing environment. Despite their importance,
much is left to be learned about the genes responsible for adaptations to
extreme environments. This project investigates the genetic changes that are
responsible for allowing animals to live in extreme environments. Cave
environments provide natural laboratories to study how organisms can live
without abundant food sources and in constant darkness. Cave animals have
undergone shifts in their metabolism, sleep patterns, and sensory systems and
can inform the understanding of these basic biological processes. This research
will find commonalities in how organisms respond to extreme cave environments
and asks specifically if some parts of the genome contribute to adaptation more
so than other parts and if so, why those parts of the genome are unique. In
addition, this work provides opportunities for international collaborations and
for training the next generation of scientists in the classroom, in the
laboratory, and across the world through interactive and virtual experiences.

Over 200 species of bony fish have adapted to live in cave environments,
representing an unparalleled opportunity for comparative biology to uncover the
genetic basis of dramatic trait shifts. Through using cutting-edge third-
generation sequencing and newly developed population and comparative genomic
analysis methods, this work will identify genetic variations associated with
cave-derived traits within three species of cavefish that have close surface
relatives: the Mexican tetra (Astyanax mexicanus), the cave Molly (Poecilia
mexicana) and the Brazilian catfish (Aspidoras mephisto) to determine if the
same genes and genetic changes underlie repeated evolution of cave adaptations.
Genomic analyses across the teleost tree of life will also be performed to find
common genetic changes across cave-adapted groups. By comparing both within and
between species, this project will identify if mutational bias and mutational
opportunity predispose regions of the genome to contribute to phenotypic change.
Functional genomic tests using CRISPR-Cas9 will be employed to validate genetic
changes found in cave species and test the impact of mutations on phenotypes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.