* 2316235
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: General-Purpose Scalable Technologies for Fundamental Graph Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Julian Shun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 07/31/2028
* USD 330,000.00

This project seeks to accelerate the execution of large graph problems on large,
distributed machines, such as those found in datacenters. The graph computations
considered appear in computational biology problems (for example, how species
evolved), social network analysis problems, and verification of software systems
(for example, how to prove that software is correct). These problems have many
basic sub-computations in common, which this project will accelerate. The
investigators will identify new ways to perform these sub-computations that are
more efficient and will conceive new computing hardware that can execute them
faster. Our society will benefit because this work will enable solving bigger
versions of these problems faster and with less energy consumption. In addition,
the project includes an education program that will teach computer science to
high-school, college undergraduate and graduate students, with an emphasis on
students from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The challenges of the graph problems considered stem from both the complexity of
the algorithms used and the large compute and storage requirements of many graph
problems. To address these challenges, this projects pursues an ambitious,
cross-layer effort based on three interdependent main thrusts: new algorithms
for graph problems, a core software framework for the efficient execution of
these problems, and heterogeneous hardware to provide acceleration to these
problems. The first thrust focuses on a few high-payoff algorithmic directions
for the application domains considered: graph clustering in both static and
dynamic settings; graph construction while preserving important information; and
the application of machine learning (ML) techniques. In all these directions,
the project uses approximations. In the second thrust, we develop a flexible
programming layer that generates efficient code for a datacenter-scale platform.
The project introduces a graph programming framework with a novel Domain-
Specific Language (DSL) for graphs, high-performance numerical libraries for
graph processing with scalable sparse methods, and a smart compiler with two
intermediate representations that uses machine learning (ML) techniques. In the
third thrust, the project speeds up the execution of graph applications in a
large, distributed machine with a novel hardware accelerator. The accelerator
features a high-level Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) with instructions that
perform sparse matrix operations on tiles. A smart auto-tuner software helps
generate and map code to various accelerators and general-purpose engines. The
investigators are ten professors at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
MIT, and Indiana University, with expertise in several distinct areas. The work
will be done in close collaboration with industrial research groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.