* 2316387
* 2023 Cardiac Physiome Workshop; Irvine, California; 24-26 April 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Mitchel Colebank, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This grant provides support for students, postdoctoral fellows, and early career
scientists to attend the 2023 Cardiac Physiome Workshop, which will be held in
Irvine, CA 24-26 April 2023. The workshop will be organized by faculty and staff
at the University of California, Irvine, and will be co-hosted with Edwards
Lifesciences at their international headquarters in Irvine, CA. This award will
help broaden participation by providing registration and travel supplements to
early career scientists who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM and new
to the Cardiac Physiome community. The individuals supported will attend the
conference and present a poster or oral presentation. These individuals will
benefit from the technical experience and professional networking in both formal
and informal settings at the conference. Funding is mainly to support scientists
from underrepresented groups, first time attendees, those without any available
funding, and those with outstanding abstracts. The goal of the workshop is to
identify current limitations in cardiovascular healthcare and the innovations
needed via computational modeling.

The Cardiac Physiome, a subgroup formed out of the larger Physiome project, is
an international collaborative effort towards establishing biophysical models of
human physiology. The Cardiac Physiome Workshop takes place every 1-2 years,
with this year being the first in-person meeting in the United States since the
SARS-CoV2 pandemic. The 2023 Cardiac Physiome workshop will bring together
computational and experimental scientists, engineers, clinicians, and industry
partners to discuss the progress and future of in-silico cardiovascular medicine
across a three and a half day meeting. The conference will include four plenary
speakers across these themes, discussion sessions surrounding health disparities
and sex-differences. The workshop is a single-track session of talks, posters,
and discussions that encourages new collaborations and conversations across 150
participants, a majority of which are early career scientists. The 2023
subthemes include (a) addressing health disparities through data collection and
model simulation, (b) identifying mechanobiological sex-differences in
cardiovascular phenomena, (c) methodologies for cardiovascular digital twins,
and (d) innovations in multiscale computational models of cardiovascular
function.

This conference is supported by the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (BMMB)
program in the CMMI division and the Engineering of Biomedical Systems (EBMS)
program in the CBET division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.