* 2316199
* Fundamental Study of Odorant Responses of Desiccatable Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

An artificial or electronic nose (e-nose) for odor recognition has been a goal
for many decades. However, the primary and best means of odor identification in
the field today are still dogs, rats, and humans. Dogs can detect COVID, rats
can find landmines, and humans can recognize wine vintages. However, all require
extensive individual training and none leave an electronic record. A portable
artificial nose would have applications in many fields, from food safety to
security. Biohybrid sensors are a promising approach, since they combine the
ability of biological cells to detect odors with technology to record the cell
responses. However, the application of such sensors has been hindered by the
need to keep the cells alive continuously. The purpose of this project is to
understand whether a new cell line that can be completely dried, similar to the
way yeast is dried, could form the basis for a fieldable artificial nose.
Dryable cells derived from an insect have been created that give a fluorescence
signal when they detect an odor. The cells can be stored under a wide range of
environmental conditions in the dry state before they are needed, and can be
revived by the addition of liquid. This project seeks to understand the
responses of these cells to various odors and exposure conditions.

Artificial odor recognition would have a vast range of applications beneficial
to society. While biological odor sensing systems have unrivalled selectivity
and sensitivity due to specific recognition and combinatorial coding, the
challenge to practical realization of biohybrid sensors has been maintenance and
storage of the biological elements in a functional state. This fundamental
research is on the responses of a desiccatable insect cell line that has been
engineered to express an olfactory receptor (OR) and a fluorescence signal upon
odorant binding. These novel cells can be kept in a hibernating state, under a
wide range of temperatures, until use, circumventing that obstacle. The research
objective is to understand whether and how such cells could be employed in a
future artificial nose. The research includes 4 tasks. 1) Obtain the
concentration-response curves to a panel of odorants and compare them to the
known responses of the corresponding olfactory sensory neurons. 2) Ascertain the
sources and magnitudes of response variability and explore the issue of
calibration. 3) Determine what information the time courses of the responses may
contain. 4) Examine the response of the cells to their cognate ligand (the
odorant to which they bind most strongly) in the presence of other odorants. The
ability to treat the biological components of the sensor essentially as a
material similar to a polymer would be ground-breaking and may one day allow
biohybrid sensors to leave the laboratory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.