* 2316707
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Cyclodextrin-Poly(ethylene glycol)-Based Dynamic Covalent Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Emmanuel Nsengiyumva, Nsengiyumva, Emmanuel M
* Fellowship Award
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This research, to be carried out at the University of Buffalo, is focused on
societal aspects relevant to sustainability. It involves development and study
of advanced polymeric materials whose molecules can form networks that can be
broken and reconstituted dynamically ("dynamic covalent networks"). They can
potentially offer high performance on flue gas separation and the removal of
hazardous chemicals (including both industrial pollutants and harmful
biomolecules) from aqueous systems. If successful, the research activities can
impact chemistry, materials, membrane science, and biomedical science. The
research results of this project will be disseminated through publications and
presentations. Research participation of underrepresented undergraduate students
will be arranged through the SUNY LSAMP program. The project will incorporate
multifaceted educational efforts including outreach to help promote science
education in Buffalo’s public schools which include many students from
underrepresented groups.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Cyclodextrin (CD)-based polymers are promising materials for membrane separation
and other applications. Dynamic covalent polymer networks have also attracted
considerable interest due to their self-healing and other remarkable properties.
The core hypothesis of this project is that CD-based dynamic covalent polymer
networks can serve as novel membrane materials with self-healing properties and
significant separation performance. Accordingly, dynamic covalent networks with
building units of β-CD (a representative form of CD) and poly(ethylene glycol)
(PEG) chain linking with dynamic urethane bonds will be investigated in this
project. The research objectives are: 1) to establish the synthetic approach to
CD-PEG-based dynamic covalent networks, 2) to understand their structure-
property relationships, and 3) to examine their applications for carbon dioxide
(CO2) separation and removal of hazardous chemicals from aqueous phases. CD-PEG-
methacrylate conjugates having dynamic urethane bonds will be prepared first and
then photocured to give the CD-PEG-based dynamic covalent networks.
Characterization and studies of physiochemical, mechanical and self-healing
properties of the networks will be performed. Finally, membranes of CD-PEG-based
covalent dynamic networks will be prepared for studies on CO2/N2 separation and
removal of perfluorooctanoic acid, cholesterol, and uric acid from aqueous
phase. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.