* 2316455
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Advancing Mosquito-borne Disease Models with Distributed Delay Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kyle Dahlin, Dahlin, Kyle Joseph-Marley
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Dr. Kyle Dahlin is awarded a National Science Foundation Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research, education, and activities related to broadening
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship supports the
research project entitled "Advancing Mosquito-borne Disease Models with
Distributed Delay Equations". The project activities will be conducted at the
host institution, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, under the
mentorship of Dr. Lauren Childs.

Mosquito-borne diseases are one of the greatest challenges faced by humanity,
but understanding their drivers is a challenge as transmission involves
interactions between three organisms: vector, host and parasite. This project
entails developing novel models of mosquito-borne disease transmission to
incorporate key biological and ecological processes via three objectives: (i)
incorporate realistic mosquito feeding behaviors into mathematical models; (ii)
integrate behavioral dynamics into mosquito-host contact models; and (iii)
combine these mosquito behaviors into disease transmission models. This work
will be conducted in parallel with several broadening participation activities
aimed at increasing the participation of Native Hawaiian and other Pacific
Islanders in STEM, including the development of a calculus curriculum that
incorporates topics from traditional Pacific Islander practices of oceanic
wayfinding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.