* 2316453
* RCN-UBE Undergraduate Virtual Experiences as a Recruitment Tool for Underrepresented Students in STEM
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Itchung Cheung, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,437.00

The Virtual Field (thevirtualfield.org) was created to broaden access to
transformative field learning experiences at Field Stations and Marine Labs
(FSMLs) for undergraduate students in STEM disciplines. Traditional field
experiences have been shown to have a profound impact on student knowledge and
engagement in the sciences. However, these opportunities are often unavailable
to those from Community Colleges (CCs) and minority-serving institutions (MSIs),
due to financial, social, and logistical barriers. Additionally, the COVID-19
pandemic further exacerbated these challenges, limiting in-person field
opportunities. To overcome these barriers and increase access to field
experiences, this project will leverage virtual technologies to make field
biology experiences broadly accessible. By uniting FSMLs, virtual learning
experts, videographers, and educators, this project aims to bridge the gap and
bring science education to diverse communities, ultimately contributing to the
broader goal of increasing diversity in the field sciences.

The project will focus on training in inquiry- and evidence-based teaching, and
the development of virtual materials to enhance the effective use and
development of virtual inquiry-based learning materials by the Research
Coordination Network (RCN) faculty and Field Station and Marine Labs (FSMLs). An
online community will be created to encourage the sharing of ideas for creating
effective virtual learning experiences for underserved students. The project
includes seven annual orientation and training workshops where experts will
present on virtual technology skills, classroom use, and educational assessment.
These workshops provide opportunities for facilitated discussions, breakout
sessions, and feedback collection. The project aims to collect feedback on the
needs of network participants, identify barriers to accessing content, explore
collaboration opportunities, and develop community of practice documents for
faculty and FSMLs. Additional bimonthly office hours will be available for
participants and anyone interested in the project to seek support and
clarification. Faculty and FSML participants will integrate virtual materials
into their existing courses and educational programs and employ rigorous
assessments to quantify outcomes to share with other participants. The project
also focuses on the collaborative development of new virtual materials and
tools, including virtual materials, instructional videos, and an assessment
guide. The assessment expert will lead the creation of an assessment guide with
protocols for assessing student learning and affective outcomes, which will be
updated annually based on participant feedback. Furthermore, the project seeks
to establish long-term partnerships to sustain virtual field experiences beyond
the duration of the grant. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of
their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.