* 2316605
* CAREER: Synergistic Cross-IoT N-Way Sensing using Wireless Traffic in the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Ting Zhu, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,499.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices have been increasingly used in people's daily
life for applications such as personal health monitoring, global positioning,
power grids management, supply chain control, and smart home automation. These
IoT devices are expected to be widely deployed in environments ranging from
residential houses to highly dynamic urban surroundings. With the increasing
number of IoT devices, this CAREER project aims at improving the existing
sensing performance by leveraging various sensing capabilities from different
IoT devices. The success of this research can fully unleash the potential of
increasing number of IoT devices and significantly improve people's daily life.
The research results are likely to inspire novel theoretical and systematic
studies that open up new areas of research in Internet-of-Things. The broader
impact of this CAREER project is amplified by (i) improving curriculum
development with enhanced course projects; (ii) raising interest in technology
among K-12 students and under-represented minority groups through open houses;
(iii) supporting talented female and minority PhD students to successfully
accomplish their doctoral studies; and (iv) disseminating research results
through high-profile tutorials and open-source sites.

The main goal of this CAREER project is to enable IoT devices to conduct
accurate, efficient, and scalable N-way sensing. This project will deliver a
networked system with modularized structure that accommodates various solutions
for cross-IoT sensing, wireless communication, machine learning, and data
processing in the edge. New designs will be implemented with a combination of
different IoT hardware platforms and this project will deliver reusable system
designs, algorithms, and protocol libraries to the research community. In
addition to academic papers and technical reports, this CAREER project is
expected to contribute to the system development in broader application
communities across multiple disciplines, such as human behavior study, sleep
monitoring, and augmented reality.