* 2316163
* Cold climate adaptations and human metabolic variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cara Ocobock, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2026
* USD 348,000.00

A growing body of evidence suggests that some individuals have metabolically
healthy obesity, with a high body mass index and excess body fat, but without
many of the ill-effects often associated with obesity, such as poor
cardiovascular health or an increased risk of developing diabetes. Recently, it
has also been suggested that cold climate populations may be more likely to have
metabolically healthy obesity because of cold climate adaptations that impact
body size, shape and composition, as well as metabolic function. This study
examines how cold climate adaptations affect cardiometabolic health among
individuals representing traditional and non-traditional livelihoods that vary
in cold exposure and other factors. The research provides a more comprehensive
understanding of the interactions between biology and behavior in extremely cold
environments and in the context of climate change. Insights gained from this
project also have the potential to inform research on the assessment, treatment,
and monitoring of metabolic diseases regularly associated with obesity. The
research program actively includes the participating communities in research
design, implementation, and dissemination, and research is incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate curricula at the University of Notre Dame. The
research team has a robust outreach plan on local, national, and international
scales through the use of individual participant reports, a website, workshops,
public talks, podcasts, a museum exhibit, conference presentations, and peer-
reviewed publications.

The project has the following aims: 1) assess the range of resting metabolic
rate variation and drivers among different cold climate livelihoods; 2) assess
the range of brown adipose tissue activity, metabolic substrate utilization, and
the impact of developmental cold exposure; 3) assess behavioral cold climate
coping mechanisms including clothing, diet, and physical activity; and 4) assess
if individuals with greater cold climate adaptation expression exhibit better
cardiometabolic health. The research team measures height, weight, body
composition (fat mass and muscle mass), resting metabolic rate, brown adipose
tissue activation (using metabolic rate measurements and thermal imaging),
biomarkers of metabolic health (e.g., cholesterol and glucose), thyroid hormone
levels, activity levels, dietary intake, blood pressure, and behavioral and
cultural means for mitigating the cold and climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.