* 2316813
* GENERATING BIODATA FROM SCRATCH: CREATING AND VALIDATING A COMPREHENSIVE COLLECTION OF BIODATA ITEMS AND SCALES
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Andrew Speer, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 435,561.00

Valid pre-employment tests facilitate hiring qualified employees who perform
better at work. Biodata inventories are a type of pre-hire assessment that uses
questions about life history and past experiences to effectively evaluate job
applicants across a wide range of constructs. Research consistently supports
their efficacy in hiring, and yet biodata implementation is hindered by the
proprietary nature and restricted availability of biodata questions, alongside
insufficient data on individual item and scale properties across work settings.
To overcome these challenges, this project leverages natural language processing
(NLP) to build the most comprehensive, publicly accessible biodata repository.
Paired with a linked work analysis, the repository houses thousands of items
across dozens of constructs, including their psychometric properties. This
project, therefore, helps democratize biodata and empower users to create
tailored biodata scales within organizations, as well as provide rigorous tests
of the efficacy of different types of biodata inventories. Moreover, this
project will explore biodata’s potential for reducing adverse impact and test
bias, addressing a concern in personnel selection.

This project begins by crafting prototypical items to assess dozens of work-
related constructs. This initial item pool is being expanded by using automated
item generation via NLP, paired with researcher refinement and content validity
judgments. Data are being gathered for the biodata content, along with work-
related dependent variables. Empirical, rational, and hybrid scoring keys are
being developed, and a job analysis tool as well to help users identify optimal
biodata content and to estimate validity based on the job analysis. Finally, all
content are examined for potential group differences to determine susceptibility
to adverse impact or statistical test bias. In sum, this research establishes a
comprehensive biodata repository paired with an empirical database of
reliability, validity, and adverse impact information for biodata scales and
items, thus leading to improved hiring methods and expanding biodata knowledge
and expertise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.