* 2316200
* Unraveling Mechanics of High Strength and Low Stiffness in Polymer Nanocomposites through Integrated Molecular Modeling and Nanomechanical Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Ying Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2024
* USD 337,108.00

The storage and release of elastic strain energy in materials, along with
mechanical strength, play important roles in both natural and engineered
mechanical actuation systems, such as biological tissues responsible for the
fast and high-powered locomotions in animals. The modulus of resilience provides
the measure of a material?s ability to absorb and release elastic strain energy,
determined by the ratio between strength and stiffness of these materials. In
general, engineering the modulus of resilience is extremely difficult because it
requires asymmetrically increasing strength and stiffness against their mutual
scaling behavior. As an alternative route, this award supports fundamental
research to elucidate how nanoparticles can be used to tune mechanical behaviors
of their polymer composites for simultaneously achieving high strength and low
stiffness. This knowledge will accelerate the design of high strength, yet
compliant polymeric materials for a broad range of applications, such as light-
weight elastic energy storage devices, protective coatings, flexible and
foldable optoelectronics, and artificial muscles. Thus, this research will not
only promote the progress of science, but also advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare. It can also help to secure national defense through
technological innovations, e.g. light-weight energy absorption and protection
systems for aircrafts. By integrating multiple disciplines, this project will
train a diverse group of students in the areas of mechanics of materials,
polymer science, mechanical engineering, and material science and engineering
for next-generation workforce development. The educational objectives of the
project will be realized through curriculum development, undergraduate research
opportunities, summer research program for high school students, research
experience for K-12 teachers program, and K-12 outreach program. Special efforts
will be made to involve underrepresented students in this project. The objective
of this project is to test the hypothesis that the combination of high strength
and low stiffness is attributed to the unique microstructure of polymer
nanocomposites that contains spherical nanoparticles weakly interacting with
soft polymer matrix. To achieve this objective, the research plan consists of
two major aims. The goal of Aim 1 is to establish a research framework
integrating multiscale molecular modeling and complementary nanomechanical
experiments for studying polymer nanocomposites with high strength and low
stiffness. It will be used to elucidate how the size of nanoparticles, in
comparison with free volume elements of the polymer matrix, can influence
mechanical behaviors of polymer nanocomposites. In Aim 2, the underpinning
mechanics principle of attaining the combination of high strength and low
stiffness will be generalized to guide exploration of a novel class of polymer
nanocomposites. These nanocomposites with ultra-high elastic energy storage
capability can be used for superior mechanical protection, artificial muscles,
soft robotics and flexible electronics. The interdisciplinary effort will open
promising avenues for quantitatively understanding the anomalous high strength
and low stiffness behaviors, and offer mechanistic insights into the design
principles of a novel class of nanocomposites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.