* 2316664
* Collaborative Research: Spin Transport in Nonrelatisvistically Spin-split Antiferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2026
* USD 125,869.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In his 1970 Nobel Prize Lecture, Louis Néel famously described antiferromagnets
– materials with nearby magnetic moments of atoms being oriented in opposite
directions, as interesting but useless. This is due to their vanishing net
magnetic moment which makes difficult to control properties of antiferromagnets
by an applied magnetic field. Jump forward 50 years, antiferromagnets have
emerged as potential replacements for ferromagnets – materials with magnetic
moments of atoms being oriented in the same direction, in commercial memory
applications. Unlike ferromagnets, antiferromagnets can improve speed and
storage density by orders of magnitude. However, harnessing this potential
requires the development of efficient information write and read-out protocols
for antiferromagnets, which is much more challenging than those used for
ferromagnets. This project addresses this challenge by exploiting unique
properties of a newly discovered class of antiferromagnets that exhibit an
uncompensated magnetic moment along certain crystal directions. While the net
magnetic moment of these antiferromagnets remains vanishing, this property
allows similar information write and read-out protocols as those used for
ferromagnets, provided that the methods to grow single-crystal films of these
antiferromagnets have been successfully developed. This collaborative project
brings together the experimental and theoretical expertise of the University of
Delaware and University of Nebraska-Lincoln with the ultimate goal of developing
a memory cell based on this new class of antiferromagnets. The collaborative
research will elucidate the unique properties of this new class of
antiferromagnets and holds potential to revolutionize information processing and
storage. The project will provide valuable training in modern experimental and
theoretical methods for early career team members, preparing them for cutting-
edge research in materials science. The project emphasizes the inclusion of
students from underrepresented minority groups, providing them with exposure to
advanced interdisciplinary studies and enriching their professional preparation.
The research team will collaborate with industrial researchers offering
intellectual stimulus and an important educational component regarding career
opportunities in industry. Leveraging the existing program at University of
Delaware, the team will outreach to high schools, engaging minority high-school
students and inspiring their interest in science and engineering. Additionally,
team members will actively participate in the NSF-funded Partnerships for
Research and Education in Materials (PREM) program between the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and Tuskegee University. Results of the proposed research will
be disseminated to a broader audience via modern multimedia channels including
an NSF-supported online resource Funsize Physics.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Antiferromagnets hold great potential for replacing ferromagnets in spintronic
device applications due to their orders of magnitude enhanced switching speed
and storage density. Realizing this potential requires the development of
efficient electric control and detection of the antiferromagnets order
parameter, known as the Néel vector, which is much more challenging than the
control and detection of the magnetization in ferromagnets. This proposal
addresses this challenge by exploiting unique properties of the
antiferromagnetic materials that belong to a space group supporting momentum-
dependent spin splitting. Among them is RuO2 – the roomtemperature
antiferromagnetic metal, exhibiting spin splitting of its electronic bands along
certain crystallographic directions. The proposal entails a collaborative effort
involving experimental and theoretical research, with the goal of harnessing the
advantages offered by these nonrelativistically spin-split antiferromagnets. The
ultimate goal is to demonstrate the electrical control and detection of the Néel
vector, culminating in the realization of a fully functional antiferromagnetic
tunnel junction with a large tunneling magnetoresistance at room temperature. By
fundamentally advancing our understanding of the physics and materials science
underlying these phenomena, the proposed research will contribute to the
technological development of spintronic devices with superior performance. The
research team will collaborate with industrial researchers providing
intellectual stimulus and valuable insights into potential career opportunities
in industry. Additionally, the project will equip early career team members with
necessary skills in modern experimental and theoretical methods, essential for
conducting research at the frontiers of materials science. The project
emphasizes the inclusion of students from underrepresented minority groups,
providing them with exposure to advanced interdisciplinary studies and enriching
their professional preparation. Leveraging the existing program at University of
Delaware, the team will reach out to high schools, engaging minority high-school
students and inspiring their interest in science and engineering. Furthermore,
team members will actively participate in the NSF-funded Partnerships for
Research and Education in Materials (PREM) program between University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and Tuskegee University. Results of the proposed research will
be disseminated to a broader audience via modern multimedia channels including
an NSF-supported online resource Funsize Physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.