* 2316526
* LEAPS-MPS Discovery of Earth-abundant Transition-metal Catalysts for Small Molecule Functionalization and Mechanistic Insights
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* REBECA AREVALO, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Rebeca
Arevalo and her students at the University of California, Merced will perform
studies that aim to explore new bond-activation strategies by Earth-abundant
metal complexes and leverage this knowledge to the discovery of sustainable
catalysts for the functionalization of inert bonds in small molecules. In
particular, different types of C-H bonds will be targeted, which are amongst the
strongest in organic molecules and require precious metals with limited Earth-
abundance for its cleavage. Professor Arevalo and her students will target
sustainable and green metals to achieve C-H bond functionalization and will dig
into the design requirements of the complexes to be efficient. They will
investigate the synthesis, characterization, and catalytic reactions of new
complexes with silicon and phosphorous-containing donors. Their studies could
provide valuable insights for catalyst design for the synthesis of functional
molecules. This project will serve to provide underrepresented Hispanic students
with experience in synthesis and characterization of air- and moisture-sensitive
metal complexes and with knowledge in mechanistic studies in catalysis, as well
as constitute a starting point for the creation of instructional materials and
new curriculum at UC Merced. Professor Arevalo and her students will synthesize
new Earth-abundant transition-metal complexes and evaluate their efficiency as
homogeneous catalysts for the functionalization of inert C(sp3)-H bonds and for
tandem processes involving C(sp)-H functionalization. The focus will be placed
on 1st-row transition-metal complexes where two different strategies will be
explored for bond activation (a) metal-centered processes and (b) metal-ligand
cooperation. The functionalization of C-H bonds in inert small molecules will
render access to valuable synthons for pharma industry and materials chemistry
by new synthetic routes involving sustainable catalysts and feedstock starting
materials that might be considered as unsuitable due to their inertness.
Professor Arevalo and her students will aim to elucidate the keys for the design
of catalysts efficient for C-H functionalization through mechanistic studies and
rational catalyst design. Their results will contribute to increase the
knowledge of the underexplored Earth-abundant transition-metal organometallic
chemistry and open new avenues for the discovery of new strategies for the
activation of strong bonds in organic molecules. They will use NMR, EPR and IR
spectroscopy as well as single-crystal X-ray diffraction and gas chromatography
to characterize the catalysts and the new functional molecules and gain insights
into the cycles operative in catalysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.