* 2316694
* CAREER: Addressing Scalability Challenges in Designing Next-generation GPU-Based Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Adwait Jog, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 01/31/2024
* USD 230,238.00

Graphics processing units (GPUs) are becoming default accelerators in many
domains such as high-performance computing (HPC), deep learning, and
virtual/augmented reality. Their close integration with high-performance multi-
core CPU architectures is also allowing very efficient heterogeneous computing.
Going forward, it is imperative that such GPU-based systems scale both in terms
of performance and energy efficiency to meet the exascale (and beyond) computing
demands of the future. However, sustained scaling of these systems is
challenging primarily because a) fabricating a single large die provides very
low yield, making it prohibitively expensive, b) memory hierarchy remains a
critical performance and energy efficiency bottleneck, and c) programmability
and application scalability is hindered by inefficiencies in the shared virtual
memory and multi-application support.

This project seeks to address these scalability challenges by rethinking the
design of future large-scale GPU-based systems. In particular, this research
project revolves around three major components: a) design space exploration of
cores (including their organization) and the entire memory hierarchy, b)
development of data movement optimization techniques by identifying and then
exploiting cache locality via novel synergistic caching and scheduling
techniques, and c) improving resource utilization of large-scale system
resources by enhancing shared virtual memory and multi-application execution
support. All three research components will be evaluated on a newly-developed
comprehensive evaluation infrastructure. The findings of this research will be
incorporated into new and existing undergraduate and graduate courses. It is
expected that the insights resulting from this research would have a long-term
positive impact on GPU-based computing, thereby making our daily lives more
productive.