* 2316078
* A Participatory Approach to Autism Research, Ethics, and the Neurodiversity Movement
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Katherine Walton, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Portions of the autism community identify with the neurodiversity movement,
which asserts that autism is a form of difference to be supported rather than a
disease to be cured. Given the emergence of the movement, a key focus of this
project is to better understand ethical concerns emerging within the autism
community about autism research practices. The research team will accomplish
this goal by partnering with autistic people. The team will also consult with
caregivers and autism researchers. Among the questions the research team will
address is whether current ethical frameworks effectively capture the concerns
of the autism community. The project will identify knowledge gaps and inform
research involving members of the autism community or other neurodiverse
individuals. This project aims to provide information and training for autism
researchers about how to conduct research that is respectful of members of the
autism community. To do this, the research team will: (1) conduct focus groups
aimed at identifying ethical concerns of neurodiversity advocates, (2) create
ethics training for autism researchers, and (3) evaluate the training’s
effectiveness at fostering ethical attitudes as it pertains to conducting autism
research. Online focus groups will include autistic adults, parents of autistic
children, and autism researchers. Research participants will discuss their
opinions about the risks and benefits of several types of autism research. The
team will use participant responses to determine how ethical concerns align
within existing, or new, frameworks of ethics and justice. The responses will
inform the design of a training to help researchers learn about the research-
related perspectives of autistic people, the ethical concerns that may arise
during autism research, and how to best manage these concerns. The team will
distribute the training to four groups: undergraduates, graduate students,
researchers, and members of institutional review boards.

This project is funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.