* 2316951
* LEAPS-MPS: Computational Modeling of the Interaction between the Eye and a Contact Lens
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lucia Carichino, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 248,735.00

The project will develop a computational framework to improve contact lens
fitting and comfort. Since the 1970s, soft contact lenses have been worn by
millions of people worldwide to correct vision impairment. More recently, stiff
contact lenses have been used as devices to reshape the ocular surface and
correct vision disorders such as myopia (nearsightedness) in children and
keratoconus (characterized by a cone-shaped cornea). The lens-to-eye fitting is
crucial for proper vision corrections and to reduce the risk of ocular surface
damages or infections. Despite the importance of understanding the interactions
between the ocular surface and a contact lens to improve lens-to-eye fitting, to
date, the mechanisms affecting such interactions remain unknown due to
limitations in the clinical instrumentation. This project will develop a
mathematical and computational framework, based on the laws of physics, to study
the interactions between the eye and a contact lens, and to predict the ocular
reshaping due to contact lens wear. The model’s predictions will help contact
lens manufacturers to theoretically predict the fitting, and consequently the
performance of a lens design, without having to manufacture the lens and then
test the lens in an expensive clinical trial. The project will provide training
opportunities for students in model development, in computation, as well as in
biomechanics of the eye. The project activities will support the representation
and retention of students from underrepresented groups in Mathematical and
Physical Sciences by collaborating with the Rochester Institute of Technology’s
Inclusive Excellence initiative and National Technical Institute for the Deaf.
Mathematical and computational models of the coupled dynamics between the eye
and a contact lens will be developed. The cornea, the clear front surface of the
eye, is made of five layers that respond differently to the stresses induced by
soft and stiff contact lenses. The model will account for the heterogenous
viscoelastic response of the cornea and for the porosity of the different layers
by tracking the fluid movement inside each layer. The predictions of ocular
reshaping and the suction pressure under the contact lens will be emergent
properties of the coupled problem and not imposed a priori. The project will
develop computational algorithms to treat the nonlinearities coming from the
poro-viscoelastic description of the ocular tissue and the coupling between the
eye and the contact lens. The model will predict ocular tissue deformation and
the ocular stresses while loading and unloading the lens on and from the eye,
for soft and stiff lenses worn on different shaped eyes. This project will
provide new insights into the mechanisms driving the interaction between the
contact lenses and the eye, especially in orthokeratology applications to treat
childhood myopia and in eyes with keratoconus.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.