* 2316868
* LEAPS-MPS: Flexible Semiparametric Transformation Models with Applications to Personalized Medicine
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Yinghao Pan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 229,710.00

Censored data arise when the failure time of interest is only partially
observed. This project will develop novel and powerful semiparametric
transformation models to more effectively analyze such data. Furthermore, this
project aims to contribute to the understanding and advancement of personalized
medicine, a field focused on tailoring medical decisions and interventions to
individual patients. Although primarily motivated by biomedical applications,
such as HIV vaccine and AIDS treatment, the outcomes of this research will have
broad applications in diverse disciplines, including engineering, economics,
finance, and social sciences. The PI will establish new summer research programs
designed to increase the participation of underrepresented groups in
undergraduate research in statistics and prepare them for success in advanced
degree programs and careers in academia and industry. Additionally, the project
will offer research training opportunities at the graduate level. The new models
proposed in this research extend the traditional transformation models in
important directions and effectively bridge the gap between additive-
multiplicative and transformation models, two of the most prominent models in
survival analysis. The presence of infinite dimensional parameters poses
considerable computational and theoretical challenges. To address these
challenges, this project will develop robust and scalable Expectation-Solving
algorithms for estimating model parameters under various censoring mechanisms,
including right-censored, interval-censored, and partly interval-censored.
Moreover, a new class of semiparametric transformation models will be proposed
for estimating optimal treatment regimes, an important topic in personalized
medicine. This research will leverage modern empirical process theory to develop
new theoretical arguments for investigating the proposed estimators. Simulation
studies and real data analysis on HIV vaccine and AIDS clinical trials will be
performed to demonstrate the methods. The PI will also create and distribute
user-friendly open-source software to researchers and practitioners in the
field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.