* 2316646
* LEAPS-MPS: Quantum Field Theories and Elliptic Cohomology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Laura Murray, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 130,532.00

The dialog between mathematics and physics has a long history of yielding
insights in both disciplines, often revealing deep, unifying structure, such as
in general relativity and Riemannian geometry. Topology is the study of shapes;
in particular, topology asks about properties of shapes that remain unchanged as
the shape is smoothly transformed. Over the past century, advances in quantum
physics, especially condensed matter physics and superstring theory, depended on
innovations in topology. One such innovation is factorization algebras, a
mathematical model for the observables of a (classical or quantum) field theory.
This project uses factorization algebras to explore a conjectured relationship
between a certain type of quantum field theory and an object in topology called
elliptic cohomology. The precise structure of this relationship has remained
elusive for decades; a resolution to this conjecture would provide insight into
both a geometric interpretation of elliptic cohomology and foundational
questions in quantum physics related to string theory. This award also supports
a regional conference on topology and mathematical physics, a distinguished
lecture series, and research opportunities for undergraduates at the PI’s
institution, both increasing participation of underrepresented minorities in
mathematics and enhancing the research environment of the PI’s institution.

More specifically, this project explores the relationship between equivariant
factorization algebras, supersymmetric twisted field theories, and elliptic
cohomology, with the goal of giving insight into a geometric understanding of
the latter. The first component of the project involves analyzing the
relationship between smoothly equivariant factorization algebras and
supersymmetric twisted functorial field theories, using tools of higher operads.
Supersymmetric twisted field theories have been used to bridge mathematical
physics and cohomology theories; in low dimensions there are known differential
geometric descriptions of these field theories using deRham cohomology and
K-theory. In the next supersymmetric dimension, twisted field theories are
conjecturally related to a generalized elliptic cohomology theory, topological
modular forms (TMF). The conjectured relationship has been investigated for over
thirty years but remains unresolved. Having a description of these
supersymmetric field theories as equivariant factorization algebras would
reframe the conjecture, allowing more direct use of examples of field theories
from physics. The second component of the project involves looking at a
categorification of principal bundles, where the symmetries are given by a
smooth 2-group. Principal bundles for smooth 2-groups are also related to
questions in elliptic cohomology, since the string group (an example of a smooth
2-group arising as a categorical central extension) gives orientation data for
TMF.

This project is jointly funded by the LEAPS-MPS program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.