* 2316944
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developmental Adaptation to High-Altitude Hypoxia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Kimberly Zhu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 39,000.00

High-altitude hypoxia, or low oxygen availability at high elevations, presents
one of the strongest selective pressures in human evolutionary history. Despite
this formidable environmental stressor, several human populations have thrived
at high altitude for millennia and display unique adaptations to low oxygen
availability. Although recent research has documented the role of genetic
evolution in shaping different adaptations to high altitude, less is known
concerning the role of epigenetics – or influences shaping gene expression –
with respect to how different populations respond to the stressor of hypoxia.
This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the extent to which
high-altitude hypoxia impacts DNA methylation (DNAm – one specific kind of
epigenetic effect) patterns in a human population, and the functional role that
DNAm contributes to adaptation to this environment. In doing so, this project
directly contributes to the body of knowledge on human evolution, variation, and
adaptability by exploring the critical role of epigenetic change on high-
altitude gene expression patterns and phenotypes. This project supports STEM-
focused educational and outreach efforts in research and local communities, and
training of undergraduate research assistants.

Using a migrant study design, this project analyzes epigenetic, transcriptomic,
and phenotypic data from three groups of study participants with differential
exposure to hypoxia. Differential methylation analysis between the three
participant groups is used to identify differentially methylated positions and
regions associated with developmental exposure to high-altitude hypoxia. In
tandem, mRNA sequencing and analysis is used to identify gene expression
patterns associated with exposure to high altitude. Association testing between
DNAm levels and 1) gene expression and 2) adaptive phenotypes identifies key
methylation differences associated with transcriptomic and phenotypic changes.
This multi-omics approach offers new insight into the role of adaptive
developmental plasticity in shaping human adaptation to high altitude. Further,
results of this study build on on previous studies of DNAm patterns in other
high-altitude populations. By comparing the role of epigenetic changes in
shaping high-altitude adaptive phenotypes in different populations, this
research provides critical insight into the convergent patterns of high-altitude
adaptive phenotypes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.