* 2316960
* Bacterial-based Biosensor Digital Twin for Microbial Community Sensing (US-Ireland-R&amp;D Partnership)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sasitharan Balasubramaniam, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,974.00

In the 21st century, the understanding of microbial ecology evolution is a
critical challenge, especially as we are tackling new emerging threats to our
health as well as the global environment. This collaborative US-Ireland R&D
Partnership project aims to address this challenge by developing a system that
can sense molecular communications from living bacteria in the natural
environment, and feeding this information to its equivalent digital twin, in
order to allow us to observe and predict their conversation and tap deep into
their internal functionalities that control their behaviors. This will be
realized through a detailed computer produced digital twin model of the
bacteria’s intra and inter-cellular communication model, which is wirelessly
connected to a novel integrated living cell biosensor with electrochemical
nanosensors. The resulting impact of this system is a new monitoring tool to
understand how bacteria evolve and transform their capabilities. This project
will develop a cross-cultural Trans-Atlantic mentoring program, where
undergraduates from the US and Ireland will be jointly mentored by a team of
researchers with the aim of attracting women and underrepresented minorities to
do multi-disciplinary breakthrough research. The project will also develop and
deliver programming activities to middle-and high-school students as part of the
outreach program.

In the 21st century, the understanding of microbial ecology evolution is an
emerging challenge, especially as we are tackling new emerging threats to our
health as well as the global environment. The aim of this US-Ireland R&D
Partnership is to develop a novel system that senses communication molecules
from living bacterial cells using a novel integrated engineered E.Coli biosensor
with an electrochemical nanosensor and feeding this information to a digital
twin that will enable prediction and observation of their complex communication
patterns. The in silico digital twin will be constructed from a combination of
3D trans-omics data models with parameter inferencing techniques from wet lab
experimental data integrated with biophysical computational models. This system
will provide detailed information that correlates the intra and inter-cellular
communications under a specific environmental condition. Solid state generator-
collector electrochemical sensors will be designed to eliminate interference for
deployment into the environment to increase the accuracy of information that is
transmitted to the digital twin. The research in this project can lay the
groundwork of an open platform for “Bacterial Citizens on the Internet," where
researchers can (i) develop new forms of bio-cyber environmental monitoring of
ecological systems, (ii) provide collaborative initiatives for global bacterial
tracking to understand how they evolve and spread globally, and (iii) design
future bio-hybrid implantable devices for disease detection. A prototype
demonstrator will be developed to show communication between wild-type bacteria
to a computer, focusing on two case study scenarios, which are “Bacterial
conversation in chronic wounds” and “Conversation enabling Horizontal Gene
Transfer (HGT) in soil microbiome."

This project is jointly funded by the Biosensing Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.