* 2316836
* LEAPS-MPS: Some Applications of Free Probability and Random Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Ping Zhong, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 07/31/2025
* USD 247,480.00

Matrices with random entries arise naturally in physics, statistics, and
engineering, and they are designed to describe complicated systems. As the
dimensions of these matrices are usually very large, classical tools in linear
algebra are inadequate to tackle this situation. One common theme of random
matrix theory is that a large family of random matrices shares the same limiting
distribution due to universality phenomena. This is an analogue of the central
limit theorem in classical probability, where the only requirements for the
i.i.d. random variables are some moment conditions. Hence, random matrix theory
can make sense of large-scale data under very mild assumptions. Random matrices
of large dimension can often be modeled by nonrandom operators living in some
abstract operator algebras, where these operators satisfy some highly nontrivial
relations characterized by Voiculescu’s free independence. These nonrandom
operators are free random variables in free probability theory. The principal
investigator will study probability distributions of free random variables and
the convergence of suitable random matrix models. The project provides research
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students.

This project, supported by a LEAPS-MPS award, aims to develop analytic tools for
studying fundamental questions regarding the limiting distributions of important
random matrix models. These questions are motivated by questions from
mathematics, statistics, combinatorics, and quantum information. The Brown
measure of a free random variable is a spectral measure that generalizes the
eigenvalue distribution of square matrices. One major objective is to develop
new techniques for calculating Brown measures, which provide predictions for the
limits of non-Hermitian random matrices. The Hermitian reduction method and
subordination functions are powerful tools for deriving Brown measure formulas.
The new results on Brown measures open the door to the study of random matrix
models that were previously inaccessible.

Free probability theory offers a conceptual approach to studying random matrices
of large dimensions. The principal investigator will identify the limiting free
random variables for various random matrix models arising from high-dimensional
statistics and quantum information theory. In particular, the principal
investigator will examine the spectrum of the full rank deformed single-ring
random matrix model, the autocovariance matrix of time series, and the
k-positivity of random tensor networks. Additionally, the PI will explore the
theory of epsilon-freeness and investigate its applications to quantum
information. This project is funded in part by the NSF Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.