* 2316762
* Fundamental Understanding of Chemical Complexity on Crack Tip Plasticity of Refractory Complex Concentrated Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amit Misra, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 453,014.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project studies the crack tip plasticity in novel refractory complex
concentrated alloys (RCCAs) to facilitate their applications in high-temperature
applications. For example, hypersonics, safer nuclear fusion energy and fuel-
efficient airplanes all require the use of metallic alloys that can retain high
mechanical strength at extremely high temperatures (>> 1200 ℃). Alloys based on
refractory metals (such as Niobium (Nb), Molybdenum (Mo), Tantalum (Ta),
Tungsten (W), and Rhenium (W), all of which have melting temperatures higher
than 2000 ℃) provide such possibilities. Typical alloys rely on a single
refractory metal as its major (> 50%) chemical component. These however do not
meet the criteria for high-temperature structural applications because their
strengths are dramatically reduced as temperatures rise. Complex concentrated
alloys (CCAs), involve high concentrations of multiple refractory elements and
may meet extremely strict specifications. Refractory CCAs (RCCAs), such as
NbMoTaW, may sustain high strengths across a wide range of high temperatures due
to unique interactions between multiple chemical elements and the deformation
defects inside these alloys. However, these RCCAs are usually brittle at room
temperatures, making it difficult bend, form and shape these metals into forms
suitable for use.

This project is generating new understanding of how to control mechanical
deformation at the crack tip of RCCAs at room temperature by applying an
integrated computational, experimental, and statistical method. The main goal is
to activate various forms of plastic deformation in order to blunt the crack
tips and slow fast crack propagations. Computer simulations based on quantum
mechanics and statistical methods are being used to screen for possible RCCA
compositions. Laser-directed energy deposition is also being carried out for
fast production of the candidate compositions. Advanced mechanical testing and
structural characterization tools at nanoscales are also being conducted to
analyze deformation at crack tips. Finally, machine learning techniques are
being applied to analyze the experimental testing and characterization results
for the purpose of identifying novel alloy chemistries and the mechanisms needed
to slow down crack propagations. This research project is enabling the
implementation of RCCAs with high room-temperature ductility and formability,
favorably impacting energy sustainability, aviation/aerospace, and other
critical areas that require structural materials under extreme thermomechanical
environments. Relatedly, the teaching and training elements of this project are:
1) enabling integrated-computational-materials-engineering (ICME) approaches and
artificial intelligence (AI) concepts to be widely shared with senior
undergraduate and graduate students, 2) championing outreach activities for
students in K-12 students as well as 3) supporting opportunities for students of
underrepresented groups to engage in state-of-the-art engineered materials
research.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The novel materials known as single-phase body-centered cubic (BCC) refractory
complex concentrated alloys (RCCAs), which contain multiple refractory elements
in high concentrations, exhibit high yield strengths at temperatures above the
melting point of Ni-base superalloys. However, RCCAs lack room-temperature
ductility, resulting in premature failure during manufacturing and mechanical
loading. The challenges to enhance their room-temperature ductility to a large
extent originate from the lack of understanding of their intrinsic ductility
determined by deformation mechanisms at their crack tips. The commonly employed
Rice criterion based on the classical Rice-Thomson model uses the energetics of
a specific slip system and a particular cleavage plane orientation to predict
the general trends of the ductile versus brittle crack tip behavior. However,
chemical and stress complexity at crack tips in RCCAs may activate multiple
deformation modes, but there is still a knowledge gap on whether and how the
synergistic effects of multiple deformation modes on crack tip plasticity emerge
in RCCAs to enhance their ductility and toughness. To alleviate this knowledge
gap, this project is applying a systematic approach to measuring and analyzing
sufficient and representative data of crack tip plasticity within single-phase
RCCAs based on high throughput syntheses, rapid nano/micromechanical
characterization techniques, physical modeling, and machine learning (ML)
methods. Physical modeling results based on first-principles calculations, ML
methods, and fracture mechanics are guiding the synthesis of RCCAs via high-
throughput laser-directed energy deposition additive manufacturing (DED-AM).
This approach uses a unique capability to enable rapid screening of compositions
of up to six different elements. Nanomechanical characterization involving high-
throughput nanoindentation and in situ direct pull tensile and notched
cantilever fracture beam tests in a scanning electron microscope will be used
for rapid assessment of tensile ductility, toughness, and deformation mechanisms
at crack tips of RCCA samples. Finally, the physical modeling, deep learning of
microstructural characterization images, and ductility measurements are being
integrated to develop a ductility criterion beyond the classical Rice criterion
for concentrated alloys that incorporates synergistic effects of multiple
chemical elements and deformation mechanisms. Broader impact activities include:
1) enabling integrated-computational-materials-engineering (ICME) approaches and
artificial intelligence (AI) concepts to be widely shared with senior
undergraduate and graduate students, 2) championing outreach activities for
students in K-12 students as well as 3) supporting opportunities for students of
underrepresented groups to engage in state-of-the-art engineered materials
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.