* 2316368
* Collaborative Research: RII Track-2 FEC: Rural Confluence: Communities and Academic Partners Uniting to Drive Discovery and Build Capacity for Climate Resilience
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Mary Emery, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benjamin J. McCall
* 07/31/2027
* USD 536,244.00

Climate change threatens rural communities across the US due to their strong
dependence on natural resources and higher poverty rates and lower resilience
capacity than urban areas. Thus climate change may disproportionally impact
rural communities, but the majority of climate resilience research to date
focuses on urban areas. Furthermore, rural residents are underrepresented across
all areas of science, which may contribute to skepticism about climate change
science and hinder collective action. Therefore, there is a pressing need to
advance the science of rural climate resilience and to reduce climate change
vulnerabilities in rural communities. This project seeks to meet that important
need through the confluence of knowledge, skills, and perspectives from diverse
but connected communities, disciplines, and institutions within the Mississippi
River basin. The project is significant because it will engage rural communities
to create shared frameworks for rural climate resilience, project rural climate
change impacts and community resilience scenarios, expand social and economic
opportunities for rural communities, and broaden STEM workforce opportunities
for people from rural and underrepresented backgrounds. Through the
collaborations between faculty and students at Oklahoma State University (OSU),
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), and Louisiana State University (LSU),
along with Hispanic and Native American minority-serving institutions, Western
Oklahoma State College and Northern Oklahoma College, this project will
substantially advance rural climate resilience research and generate lasting
improvements in rural STEM opportunities. These collaborations will lay the
foundation for long-term partnerships between the Rural Renewal Initiative
(OSU), Rural Prosperity Nebraska (UNL), and the Gulf Scholars Program (LSU). The
project aims to touch the lives of thousands of people and translate to economic
impacts in rural communities by identifying potential solutions to expected
climate change-driven losses. Focusing climate resilience research on rural
communities creates the potential to bridge the divide between rural and
scientific communities, while creating frameworks and civic engagement
strategies that may be applied in other rural communities around the world.

This project is centered around epistemological inclusivity, which allows rural
perspectives to help guide the investigations. Researchers work with community
members to co-create socially robust knowledge, which can enhance trust in
science, provide new insights, and build social capital for climate resilience.
The specific aims of this project are to: 1) Co-develop with communities a
shared conceptual framework for rural climate resilience research and action
informed by rural perceptions and priorities; 2) Project rural climate change
impacts and community resilience scenarios using improved simulation methods
accounting for slow-burn processes such as population decline; 3) Expand social
and economic opportunities for disproportionately affected rural communities by
helping them identify and pursue locally-relevant climate resilience strategies;
and 4) Broaden STEM workforce participation for people from rural and
underrepresented backgrounds by developing diverse career pathways from K16 to
early-career faculty. The project will create diversified rural STEM pathways
using a braided river approach. Rural and underrepresented students, including
Hispanic students and Tribal Nation citizens, will benefit from new micro-
credentials, STEM curriculum, and undergraduate research opportunities. The
project will also support the development of Early-Career Faculty from rural and
underrepresented backgrounds. Impacts of this project will be sustained through
investments in STEM students and Early-Career Faculty; by creation of open-
access publications, curriculum, and models; and by development of community
resilience action plans. Approaches will be tested, evaluated, and refined
through 2-year cycles of engagement with six focus communities, leading to the
creation of a replicable model. Simulations will incorporate state-of-the-art
climate projections into a suite of interconnected open-source models to
estimate hazard exposure, damages, and long-term community recovery or decline
with and without locally-prioritized adaptation measures. Simulation results
will be shared with the communities, contributing to the development of local
resilience action plans. This project is expected to expand and accelerate
community resilience modeling, being among the first to develop simulation
methods accounting for the paired, simultaneous slow-burn disturbances of
climate change and rural depopulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.