* 2316946
* LEAPS-MPS: Number Fields Generated by Points of Curves and their Galois Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Renee Bell, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 153,842.00

Integer and rational solutions to polynomial equations have intrigued humans for
thousands of years, from the triangle side lengths considered by the
Pythagoreans to Fermat’s Last Theorem, which was only proven at the end of the
twentieth century. There is a deep link between the rational solutions to a
polynomial equation and geometry of the shape formed by the complex numbers that
satisfy the equation, which for a widely-studied class of equations looks like a
many-holed donut. This link is perhaps best illustrated by Faltings’ Theorem, a
seminal modern result which shows that the number of holes in the shape defined
by the complex number solutions imposes strong constraints on the number of
rational solutions to the equation. This grant investigates another aspect of
this relationship, exploring how the geometry relates to the rate at which new
solutions to the equation are found by augmenting the potential solutions beyond
the rational numbers. In addition, the PI will host career panels, workshops,
and colloquia which will aid in recruitment and retention in the sciences of our
students, the majority of whom are underrepresented. The PI will also run an art
prize to foster inclusion of the arts in mathematics education, as well as
visibility, representation, and inclusion of underrepresented math students.

The projects in this grant build on previous work on a geometric facet of the
inverse Galois problem. In their program on Diophantine stability, Mazur and
Rubin suggest studying a curve C by understanding the set of number fields
generated over the rationals by a single point of C; in particular, they ask to
what extent the set of such field extensions determines the curve. The projects
proposed in this grant address an inverse direction of this, how the geometry of
the curve influences the aforementioned set of field extensions. The proposed
projects address the size of this set in terms of the degree and discriminant of
the fields from an arithmetic statistics perspective, measuring the asymptotic
growth of this set as a function of the discriminant bound. Additional
directions which will be explored include restricting this count to field
extensions with specified Galois groups, and field extensions which increase the
rank of the Jacobian. The projects expand on ongoing work by the PI and her
collaborators, using tools such as geometry of numbers, Hilbert irreducibility,
Newton polygons, and linear optimization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.