* 2316428
* Neural Inference of Dynamic Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiao Wang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 237,438.00

This research project will advance statistical inference on dynamic systems.
Dynamic systems are a versatile method to model the time-dependent progression
of phenomena in a wide range of fields, including the social, behavioral, and
economic sciences. By leveraging deep learning and statistical modeling, this
research will enhance the efficiency, accuracy, and interpretability of
statistical analysis in time-dependent phenomena across various domains. The
project will introduce a new neural inference framework for estimating and
inferring dynamic systems. The new framework differs from the conventional
likelihood-based method or Bayesian approach. The new framework will allow for
more efficient estimation and prediction, while also improving the
generalizability of the methods. The project will contribute to the social,
behavioral, and economic sciences by providing well-calibrated dynamic systems
that can enhance the ability to innovate, make informed decisions, and drive
positive change. The results of this research will be disseminated through
academic publications, conferences, and open-source software, thus ensuring
widespread utilization, and benefiting researchers and practitioners in the
field. The investigator will involve both graduate students and a small group of
high school students in the research process.

This research project will address key questions related to estimation,
prediction, and uncertainty quantification in dynamic systems. Statistical
inference for dynamic systems can be difficult, due to the high computational
demands of solving ordinary differential equations numerically or the inherent
complexity of the transition density of stochastic differential equations. This
project will introduce a new neural inference framework for estimating and
inferring dynamic systems, which differs from the conventional likelihood-based
method or Bayesian approach. By leveraging the capacity of deep neural networks,
the framework will create a direct mapping between the data space and the
parameter space using synthetic datasets associated with different parameters.
The new algorithm will offer simultaneously an exceptional estimate of the
unknown parameter and enable a learning-verification process. Asymptotic theory
will be developed to measure the approximation error of the learning algorithm
and the posterior consistency from a Bayesian perspective. The new framework
will be combined with conformal inference to provide predictive confidence
intervals with the assumption-free finite-sample marginal coverage guarantees,
and additional local coverage guarantees under certain conditions. The project
also will tackle the issue of inferring on dynamic systems when obtaining its
sample path is challenging by adopting the neural process prior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.