* 2316382
* RII Track-2 FEC: An Interdisciplinary Program for Research, Education, and Outreach on Climate Change and Adaptive Resilience in the Yazoo - Mississippi Delta
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Christy Hyman, Mississippi State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benjamin J. McCall
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,999,611.00

In this collaborative interdisciplinary research program, Mississippi State
University, the University of South Carolina, and Mississippi Valley State
University work together to build a climate change education and research
program in communities disproportionately affected by climate change in the
Yazoo-Mississippi Delta (The Delta). The Delta residents are often affected by
floods, droughts, and tornadoes. In spite of its rich agricultural heritage, the
Delta has high poverty rates, obesity, diabetes, and food insecurity. In this
project, we will develop a climate model for the Delta, study social
vulnerability to environmental hazards, and estimate resilience to climate
change. We'll also study climate impacts on health, and climate risk as it's
experienced and lived. The project will provide climate literacy to K-12
students, as well as workforce development for local communities. In addition,
this project develops geospatial technology and climate change courses for
Mississippi Community Colleges. Thus, many undergraduate students in the state
will gain climate literacy and be prepared for graduate school. Research results
will provide a road map of communities' risks and vulnerabilities to climate-
related extreme events.

This project investigates how historical and current land use patterns intersect
with uneven climate vulnerability in the Yazoo-Mississippi Delta (The Delta). It
also determines the extent of resilience and adaptive capacity of underserved
communities in the Delta. The objectives of the project are: (1) to develop a
scenario-based climate change model and conduct a probabilistic risk analysis
for land use and land cover changes in the Delta (2) to assess the current
social vulnerability to environmental hazards and to estimate resilience
capacity to climate change; (3) to bridge the gap between spatial indicators of
vulnerability and climate risk as it is lived and experienced; (4) to determine
the impacts of the intersections of climate-vulnerability and peopleâ€™s health;
(5) to increase climate literacy and develop a workforce in the underserved
communities; and (6) to help improve adaptive capacity of the underserved
communities by working with community organizations. The research will use an
interdisciplinary approach including climate modeling, spatial and statistical
modeling, interviews, photovoice, and documentation of environmental oral
histories. Geospatial technologies and climate change will be taught online
through a partnership with community colleges. Education and workforce
components of the project aims to provide climate literacy to K-12 students, and
workforce development opportunities for underserved communities. By combining
community knowledge and scientific reasoning this study will bridge the gap in
knowledge related to the interconnection between climate change and food
security for marginalized populations. Through knowledge sharing across the
research-practice divide, the research will improve communities' adaptive
resilience to climate change. The proposed work will support early career
faculty development. The project will help develop the environmental science,
education, and justice workforce by recruiting and training students from
underrepresented communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.