* 2316088
* High Risk Research: Understanding Long Term Human Adaptation in a Challenging  Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* William Taylor, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 33,793.00

While pastoral empires had a tremendous impact on human history over recent
millennia, the role of environmental variation in the development of these as
well as in the earliest chapters of human prehistory remain difficult to trace.
Preliminary investigations at rare and individual sites can play important roles
in providing insight into these earlier chapters of the human story. Through
interdisciplinary scientific excavation and digital conservation, this award
helps to document, preserve, and protect one caves threatened cultural heritage
and also provide insight which extends through the Neolithic potentially back
into the Pleistocene period. The research focuses on a region in which during
the Late Pleistocene three different species of hominids were present. In order
to assess the transformative processes like the first human dispersals, the
extinction of Ice Age megafauna, and the introduction of domesticated animals,
this project focuses on the excavation and 3D scanning of recently identified
archaeological deposits. The research investigates well-preserved archaeological
deposits using cutting-edge archaeological and biomolecular techniques,
including precision 3D scanning, radiocarbon dating, ancient DNA, and
proteomics, using scientific results to gain insights into the trajectory of
human history and to develop infrastructure to protect and preserve the cave for
future generations. This project is funded through NSF” “High-Risk Research in
Biological Anthropology and Archaeology” competition. While the site has very
high scientific potential it is not known how far back in time archaeological
materials extend.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.