* 2316561
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Abrasive foods, tooth size, and enamel thickness in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Luke Fannin, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 31,394.00

The consumption of tough, abrasive foods may have contributed to key changes in
the teeth of our earliest human ancestors. Researchers have proposed that the
ingestion of particles that are abrasive to tooth enamel was an important force
structuring dental traits during human evolution, including thicker enamel and
larger tooth size. A debate exists regarding the type of abrasive material that
would have been the most important for understanding the evolution of human
teeth. This doctoral dissertation research project investigates whether tooth
size and enamel thickness vary with the 1) ingestion of abrasive particles, and
(2) how well primates chew their food in the wild. This project trains students
from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM in field and lab methods, some leading
to independent honors projects, and contributes K-12 and museum educational
outreach. The project further contributes to capacity building at a long-term
primate field station in a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The long-term objective of this research is to inform hypotheses that pivot
around form-functional relationships between primate foraging behaviors and
dental traits, an essential task for inferring behavior in the human fossil
record. The investigators (i) differentiate and quantify phytoliths and grit in
the diets of the monkeys and compare this variation to (ii) variation in fecal
particulate size (a metric of chewing performance); and (iii) variation in tooth
size and enamel thickness collected from population-specific skeletal
collections. This project leverages established and emerging techniques in
primate dental ecology to unravel a long-standing puzzle. Molar size and enamel
thickness are traits of enduring importance to paleoanthropologists, being
central to phylogenetic reconstructions and dietary inference, but with little
functional consensus due to the uncertain and potentially confounding effects of
abrasive material in the diet. To resolve this puzzle, this investigation
collects systematic data on the siliceous composition of primate diets and
uncovers the relationships between this composition, dental morphological
traits, and chewing performance in living primates in the wild.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.