* 2316167
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Quantifying Accelerated Reaction Kinetics in Microdroplets with pH-Jump and Mass Spectrometry: From Small Molecules to Proteins and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Thien Khuu, Khuu, Thien Tung
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Thien T. Khuu is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Khuu supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Quantifying Accelerated Reaction Kinetics in
Microdroplets with pH-Jump and Mass Spectrometry: From Small Molecules to
Proteins and Beyond” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is the University of Southern California, and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Jahan M. Dawlaty.

This proposal intends to study accelerated chemical reactions in microdroplets
where the reactions are observed to occur significantly faster than in the
solution phase. The proposal will use photoacids and green fluorescent protein
as model systems to measure the rate of proton transfer reactions in
microdroplets using ultrafast fluorescence spectroscopy and complementary mass
spectrometry techniques. If successful, the proposed research could answer
fundamental questions on the accelerated reaction kinetics of biological systems
in microdroplets and could develop new technologies for future academic research
as well as for industrial applications.

The PI intends to be actively involved with the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics & Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) to broaden
participation of local Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans students in the
Los Angeles area in science education and research. The proposed activities
include monthly science demos at local middle and high schools, mentoring and
tutoring of students, organizing science workshops for extracurricular programs,
and fundraising for expanding the SACNAS@USC Community College Research
Fellowship Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.