* 2316244
* RCN-UBE Incubator: KBase Educators: Microbiome Workforce Development Program
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Adam Arkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2024
* USD 75,000.00

Undergraduate educators strive to incorporate useful and meaningful skills that
engage their students in current research and prepare their students for jobs in
science. However, access to resources that support training in microbiome
research limit the ability of many institutions to effectively teach these
skills. The KBase Educators: Program for Microbiome Workforce Development
Research Coordination Network (RCN) Incubator is focused on developing a more
inclusive and accessible microbiome research curriculum that enables a diversity
of institutions to train students with the skills necessary to successfully
enter the workforce. In addition to teaching resources, the RCN will bring
together a peer support network that reaches across five types of institutions,
with the goal of forming equitable partnerships that allows each educator to
contribute meaningfully to develop a comprehensive microbiome research-based
curriculum that accurately reflects realistic access to resources and standards.

Participating educators will form working groups to develop a modular curriculum
with the guiding question of how microbiomes respond to climate change across
ecosystems and potential impacts for humans that culminates in student-led data
publications. The RCN will support a workshop where educators can co-create and
trial-run modules with their peers, and receive training from partner
organizations, such as the Agricultural Microbiome RCN, National Ecological
Observatory Network, and National Microbiome Data Collaborative. This will
prepare them to pilot the modules in their classrooms, across a range of
institutions, and to collect feedback and outline recommendations to scale the
program in subsequent years. The goal of training an inclusive workforce is to
enable students to become the next generation of researchers capable of
answering current questions and generating open data that will address the grand
challenges of our future. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.