* 2316452
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Shape Morphing Materials for Programming Shape, Composition, and Morphology of 3D Cell Sheets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mustafa Abdelrahman, Abdelrahman, Mustafa Kamal
* Fellowship Award
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical description: Tissues and organs found in the body have complex
three-dimensional shapes and are made up of different kinds of cells. For
example, the heart develops into a four chambered organ from a simple tube and
is composed of cardiac fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes, smooth muscle cells, and
endothelial cells. This shape and cellular diversity is determined early during
tissue development, where stem cells grow and determine their fate. Outside the
body, stem cell fate is typically determined by changing the growing conditions
of stem cells. However, another important variable is the application of forces.
Cells can sense their environment, and pulling and pushing tissues during
development may provide control over cell fate. This will be accomplished by
growing cells on a shape changing material. This shape changing material will be
programmed to shrink, bend, twist, and expand in response to a stimulus to mimic
natural processes that occur during biological tissue formation.



Technical description: In this proposal, we seek to engineer shape morphing
materials as cell sheet culturing substrates to develop human tissues with
controllable shape, cellular composition, and cellular morphology. Specifically,
we propose to use thermo-responsive hydrogels as they demonstrate
biocompatibility and are capable of out of plane programmed shape deformation.
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) will be seeded onto
thermoresponsive hydrogels and allowed to proliferate. Thermoresponsive
hydrogels will then be heated to physiologically relevant temperature to induce
an out of plane shape deformation. Once confluent layers are developed, the
thermoresponsive hydrogel will be cooled, enabling cell sheet expulsion. The
effect material characteristics, such as stiffness, actuation strain, and
geometry, has on stem cell fate will be explored. The ability to program the
shape of cell sheets is an important research target as it will (i) provide
insights in the role structure and geometry play in tissue development, (ii)
enable cell proliferation on structures that better resemble physiological
environments, and (iii) permit cell sheet shape-selection for tissue engineering
applications. This proposal also seeks to broaden the participation of members
that are historically excluded from the mathematical and physical sciences by
introducing underrepresented minorities to STEM subjects. This will be
accomplished by coordinating a program where scientists in the Boston area will
be invited to speak to students at the K-12 level from disadvantaged and
underrepresented backgrounds on the process of becoming a scientist.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.