* 2316450
* Spatial Explanation and Planning for Resilience of Community-Based Small Businesses to Environmental Shocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Yan Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 456,702.00

The project aims to study how community-based small businesses (CSB) adapt to
environmental shocks and promote economic growth in a changing climate, with
research being completed through a spatially based planning lens. By bringing
together knowledge and theories from socio-ecological systems, community
economic development, and human behaviors, the research has the potential to
generate valuable insights and methods for supporting CSB climate adaptation at
various levels. While playing a vital role in creating vibrant communities,
improving quality of life, and fostering workforce diversity, CSB are highly
vulnerable to environmental shocks. The research and engagement activities lay
the scientific foundation for creating more diverse and equitable environments
and enabling local communities to develop strategies and policies for building
resilience. Additionally, the project provides rich learning opportunities for
students, business owners, practitioners, and policymakers.

Community-based small businesses (CSB) must maintain and grow their customer
base over time. However, their risk to environmental shocks has been
underestimated when their location, land use, and infrastructure support are not
carefully considered or well coordinated. The project aims to gain a
quantitative, systematic, and generalized understanding of how specific
characteristics of CSB locations and other spatial factors in their communities
contribute to customer demand patterns and overall resilience. The research team
leverages new and large datasets to develop a theory-guided framework that
incorporates artificial intelligence to assist in spatial planning. This
framework is designed to anticipate short-term resilience and evaluate long-term
adaptation measures for CSB. While the initial focus is on coastal communities
in the US Southeast affected by flooding, developed methods could be broadly
applied to other natural disaster types and in other regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.