* 2316459
* Conference: CSHL Advanced Courses for Model Genetic Systems (2023-2025)
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2026
* USD 666,664.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) Advanced Courses in Model Genetic
Systems serve a critical role in the training of investigators new to the use of
genetic and genomic approaches in bacteria, yeast and plants. These highly
intensive three-week courses cover the fundamentals of genetics in the
respective system, which then establishes the conceptual backbone for the more
sophisticated genomic methods that are covered as the courses progress. The
hands-on experimental portion of the courses, often including multi-day modules,
are complemented by daily theoretical lectures by instructors chosen for their
proven expertise in the system and a world class seminar series from renowned
investigators that utilize the respective system. As a result, every student is
exposed to the underlying principles of the methods they are being taught and
their state-of-the-art application by the experts in the field. The courses have
a well-established reputation for serving a diverse community of biologists as
well as training researchers from the physical sciences. The students range from
early-stage graduate students to tenured professors, with backgrounds in areas
including genetics, molecular and cellular biology, bioinformatics, engineering,
and physics.

Since their foundation in the 1970s and early 1980s, the CSHL summer courses on
Advanced Bacterial Genetics, Yeast Genetics & Genomics and Frontiers &
techniques in Plant Science (collectively, the Model Genetics Systems courses)
have each played a critical role in disseminating new approaches and techniques
to the broad scientific community interested in the use of model systems in
genetics and genomics. The proposed courses (2023-2025) will continue this
tradition by providing advanced training in the fundamentals of working in these
model systems making use of classical genetic and molecular biological
approaches, analysis of genetic interactions, and genomics. The courses each
consist of hands-on laboratory modules, a vigorous lecture series, technical
presentations and demonstrations, and informal discussions. The instructors and
invited speakers, acknowledged leaders in their fields, present up-to-the-moment
research on a wide range of topics. The informal, highly interactive course
format allows students and teaching apprentices to learn from each other as well
as from the instructors and invited speakers. In sum, the courses provide for
intensive three-week immersion into cross-disciplinary and cutting-edge
approaches, helping prepare the next generation of microbiologists and plant
scientists to apply the latest genetic/genomic tools and approaches to their own
research, often in non-model and “real world” applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.