* 2316995
* LEAPS-MPS: Functional Identities, Nilpotent Rings, and Garside Shadows
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jordan Bounds, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 07/31/2025
* USD 197,154.00

The study of algebras and Lie theory is a fundamental branch of mathematics that
centers around the exploration of symmetries and touches on many aspects of STEM
research, including geometry, topology, differential equations, complex
analysis, group and ring theory, number theory, and numerous aspects of physics.
This PI will focus on nilpotent algebras and a family of abstract algebraic
structures known as Coxeter groups. The PI will also integrate the research
program with research and training opportunities for undergraduate students with
an emphasis on increasing the participation of students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences.

The project will apply functional identity theory to the study of nilpotent
rings and algebras, an approach that was successful in the case of general
algebras and Lie theory and led to solving Herstein's long-standing open
questions concerning Lie and Jordan structures of associative rings. The PI will
examine the relationship between nilpotent algebras and Coxeter groups by
investigating a relatively new structure called Garside shadows. While it is
known that every Coxeter group contains a Garside shadow, there is still much
left to determine regarding how these structures relate to the properties of the
groups and their associated algebras.

This project is jointly funded by the Launching Early-Career Academic Pathways
(LEAPS) program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.