* 2316353
* Clustered Coefficient Regression Model-Based Estimators in Small Area Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Wang, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 214,625.00

This research project will develop model-based estimators for estimating
population parameters in small areas. Small area estimation is an important
problem in survey sampling when the sample sizes are not large enough to provide
reliable estimates in small areas or domains. Model-based estimators based on
auxiliary variables are widely used to increase the precision of estimators in
survey sampling. However, if a heterogeneous relationship exists between the
variable of interest and auxiliary variables, traditional models based on
homogeneity will not accurately describe the relationship. This project will
develop new model-based estimators based on more flexible regression models
called clustered coefficient regression models. The new estimators will be
applied to different national surveys, such as American Community Survey
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. Results from the project will be used as
examples in a course on survey sampling. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will be involved in the research project. Publicly available R packages
also will be developed.

This research project will develop new model-based estimators based on clustered
coefficient regression models using penalty functions, which also can borrow
spatial or ordering information in different areas. The project will bridge the
gap between clustered coefficient regression and model-based estimators. Three
types of estimators in small area estimation will be studied. First, the project
will develop new generalized regression estimators based on clustered
coefficients for both linear regression models and logistic regression models.
Second, the project will examine new unit level estimators based on clustered
coefficient regression models, including an extension of the current linear
model and the development of new estimators for binary data with consideration
of random effects. Finally, the project will develop new area level estimators
based on clustered coefficients, including an extension to proportions based on
beta regression models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.