* 2316676
* Collaborative Research: Revealing Strengthening and Toughening Mechanisms in Coconut Endocarp through Integrated Multiscale Modeling and Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ning Zhang, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2024
* USD 136,000.00

Non-Technical Summary:

The hard shell of the coconut, called endocarp, is a lightweight material with
impressive strength, toughness, and hardness. As with many biological materials,
this outstanding behavior is due to a highly complex structure. When studied at
increasing magnifications, the endocarp reveals different structures at each
magnification level. At the largest level, a porous network can be seen,
consisting of bundles of hollow channels. Larger magnifications reveal a graded
cellular structure, where larger cells are found toward the inside of the
coconut, and smaller cells toward the outside. The cells themselves feature
walls consisting of many layers, and each of these layers consists of tiny
fibrils. Understanding comprehensively how all of these elements work together
to make the coconut so strong and tough is a significant challenge, especially
because of their disparity in size. This project will develop novel computer
simulation techniques with the capability of treating these different elements
simultaneously at the relevant sizes. This project will also develop new
experimental techniques to measure and visualize directly how the different
elements inside the coconut endocarp interact, to test and calibrate the
computer models. This integrated computational and experimental approach will
provide unprecedented insights into how the coconut’s structure gives rise to
its outstanding performance. These insights and methods can then be used to
engineer coconut-inspired lightweight applications that are strong and tough,
for instance to improve helmets. This project will provide research
opportunities to undergraduate students. For instance, computational and
experimental training series will be offered to undergraduate students during
the summer. Underrepresented students including female and minority students
will participate in this research project. This project will also provide
opportunities to students with disabilities to work on computational modeling
remotely. Presentations and seminar talks will be offered to middle and high
school students to attract them to participate into biomaterial research.

Technical Summary:

Coconut endocarp is substantially stronger and stiffer than wood, despite
sharing the same major ingredients: cellulose, hemi-cellulose, and lignin. The
key to this impressive mechanical performance is a sophisticated structure with
many levels of structural hierarchy between the molecular scale and the
macroscale. This project’s goal is to develop a rigorous understanding of the
endocarp’s structure/property relationships by means of a multi-scale effort
integrating novel computational and experimental techniques. A concurrent
atomic-continuum (CAC) computational tool will be developed to span all relevant
length scales of this materials system naturally. This approach will overcome
limitations of current computational approaches, where different length scales
are treated with conceptually different models that need to be interfaced. The
CAC approach will be used on hierarchical materials for the first time,
representing a game changing development for the materials sciences. The
experimental efforts will mirror the computational work and provide
characterization across all length scales. Scanning probe techniques will play a
crucial role in characterizing not only the structure and mechanical properties
of nano- and microscale constituents of the endocarp, but also their interfacial
interactions. The outcome will be a powerful model that is calibrated and
verified across multiple length scales. This model can serve as a basis to
establish guidelines for bottom-up hierarchical design of synthetic cellular
lightweight materials with outstanding mechanical performance, inspired by the
coconut endocarp.

This project is jointly funded by the Biomaterials progam (BMAT) in the division
of materials research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.