* 2316177
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: Research into the Use and iNtegration of Data Movement Accelerators (RUN-DMX)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Bahar Asgari, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2028
* USD 695,173.00

The project aims to optimize communication overheads for high-performance
computing (HPC) applications to better address the challenges caused by the
rapid growth of data. Many important scientific simulations have large data
inputs or outputs that may be sparse and that may also require extra effort and
energy to move across processors, memories, and disks within a large HPC system.
Moreover, an HPC node may have several different locations where data needs to
be moved to and from while an HPC application is running. This work’s novelty
lies in its focus on optimizing communication overheads for HPC systems and
applications by supporting “computation-in-communication”. The integration of
these new hardware advancements with appropriate software techniques will
enhance the scalability of computing for high-performance applications including
molecular dynamics simulations and applications like computational fluid
dynamics codes. The project's impacts include: (1) enhanced scalability of
computing for high-performance applications via reductions in data movement, (2)
novel algorithmic and hardware designs for the broader HPC community to leverage
emerging technologies combining communication and computation, and (3) open-
source software infrastructure that can be used to facilitate education in
parallel computing, HPC, and computer architecture at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The project's technical goals encompass several key
components. First, it develops new algorithms to effectively leverage
computation-in-communication paradigms. Second, it incorporates compression
techniques to enhance data transfer efficiency, including the development of
new, processing-friendly compressed formats specifically designed for sparse
data. Third, the project designs novel hardware enhancements to optimize
computation-in-communication. The project creates a full-stack solution for
computation-in-communication with an open-source library focused on algorithmic
and compression techniques which are co-designed with architecture designs to
support efficient processing and manipulation of large data inputs. Combined,
these hardware and software advancements will allow a larger class of
applications to take advantage of next-generation data-centric HPC that
minimizes communication overheads and data movement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.