* 2316351
* RII-Track 2 FEC: Advancing Social and Environmental Equity through Plastics Research: Education, Innovation, and Inclusion (ASPIRE)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Selen Cremaschi, University of Southern Mississippi
* Cooperative Agreement
* Hongmei Luo
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,873,415.00

Plastics have transformed and broadly benefited modern society; however, with a
cumulative global production exceeding 9 billion metric tons, the generation and
management of plastic and plastic waste are fundamentally intertwined with
environmental pollution and climate change. Mismanaged plastic lifecycles
irrecoverably commit non-renewable resources to either pyrolysis processes or to
landfills, which generates substantial greenhouse gas emissions and produces
microplastic pollution. These consequences exacerbate global climate change,
putting both environmental ecosystems and human health at risk, with coastal and
underserved communities, as well as individuals with vulnerable health
conditions, bearing a disproportionate burden. This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations award will enable researchers
from institutions in two EPSCoR jurisdictions (MS and AL), including the
University of Southern Mississippi (USM) and Auburn University (AU), to
establish a transdisciplinary program to address plastic waste challenges and
their climate and health impacts, while building community climate resilience
and advancing social and environmental justice in Mississippi and Alabama. In
partnership with regional research and health institutions, local communities,
small businesses, and recycling service providers, the project team will assess
the impact of microplastics on marine, aquaculture, and community health,
develop blend compatibilizers to improve mixed polyolefin recycling, and create
next-generation bio-sourced polymers. The project features a comprehensive
workforce development and training plan that focuses on enhancing the skills and
competencies of researchers, students, and industry professionals with a
particular focus on advancing STEM diversity and inclusivity. Program elements
include mentorship and advancement for early-career researchers, virtual
professional development workshops, student-led symposia to foster networking
and leadership skills, summer research programs for undergraduates, and
specialized training sessions for workers in construction, agriculture, and
marine sectors to better manage plastic waste. A robust outreach program will
foster community engagement through setting up research exhibits along the
coast, leading hands-on expeditions for plastic debris removal from beaches, and
enhancing recycling infrastructure in underserved areas. These plans are
strategically designed to promote sustainable practices and knowledge transfer
for long-term impact on participating jurisdictions. Collectively, the project
will serve as a regional hub for plastic-climate-health research, advancing
economic development, environmental and social equity, and workforce diversity.

The transdisciplinary Advancing Social and Environmental Equity through Plastics
Research: Education, Innovation, and Inclusion (ASPIRE) project seeks to
mitigate the negative impacts of plastic pollution on vulnerable coastal
communities in AL and MS, leveraging innovative and inclusive research,
education, and outreach. ASPIRE will foster social and environmental equity
through a holistic approach, integrating the fields of polymer science,
chemistry, (bio)engineering, social/health science, and marine ecology.
Specifically, project teams at the USM and AU will: 1) develop advanced
detection methods to analyze microplastic contamination in field and aquaculture
samples, pairing these findings with community health and behavior surveys to
identify microplastic-to-human exposure pathways; 2) synthesize blend
compatibilizers containing dynamic crosslinkers to enhance mixed polyolefin
recycling, extending the lifespan and improving the performance of recycled
products for sustained use; and 3) design inherently recyclable polymer
thermosets comprised of dynamic crosslinks using sustainable, bio-derived
building blocks, concurrently establishing fundamental chemistry-structure-
property relationships. Technology development within these projects will be
informed by technoeconomic and life cycle analysis to ensure maximized
sustainability and economic feasibility. ASPIRE aims to foster a diverse
workforce by actively recruiting underrepresented groups, nurturing early career
researchers through comprehensive mentoring programs and seed grant
opportunities, and partaking in outreach activities aimed at K-12 students. The
program will engage coastal community stakeholders, providing targeted training
to local small businesses and focusing on effective plastic waste management.
Coastal communities in the Gulf of Mexico region, people with vulnerable health
conditions, and racial and ethnic groups from underrepresented populations bear
the brunt of plastic pollution and associated climate change. ASPIRE strives to
enhance opportunities and elevate the quality of life for these historically
marginalized populations in Mississippi and Alabama.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.