* 2316525
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Photoactive Metal-organic Nanocages for Sequestration and Degradation of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Karla Rosalia Sanchez Lievanos, Sanchez Lievanos, Karla Rosalia
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Karla Rosalia Sanchez Lievanos is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct
a program of research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Sanchez Lievanos supports the
research project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Photoactive Metal-organic Nanocages for
Sequestration and Degradation of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances” under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
the State University of New York at Buffalo, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Diana S. Aga.

This proposal aims to utilize inorganic chemistry design principles to generate
a safe prototype technology to remediate water pollution caused by ubiquitous
and persistent poly and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The proposed work will
develop robust porous and photoactive molecular nanocages with potential
chemical affinity and catalytic activity for selective sequestration and photo-
degradation of PFAS. The work will focus on studying the binding interactions
between the nanocages and PFAS, evaluating the photo-induced reactivity of the
nanocages to generate reactive oxygen species for PFAS decomposition, developing
a mechanism of photo-degradation, and performing ecotoxicology studies on
selected nanocages as part of a safe-by-design strategy for potential scale-up.
Successful implementation of this work may allow for the development of
functional materials that reliably and safely remove PFAS from water.

The PI intends to establish a partnership with the Buffalo Public School system
to develop efficient tools to improve educational efficiency in underperforming
Community Schools. The PI will join the Buffalo Niagara Waterkeeper organization
to offer seminars to underrepresented minority groups on water quality issues
and remediation efforts. The PI will also partner with the International Younger
Chemist Network to increase global participation in developing and understanding
water remediation technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.