* 2316391
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Integrating nanobiotechnologies to understand the role of nitro-oxidative stress in the coral-dinoflagellate mutualistic symbiosis dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel Wangpraseurt, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 07/31/2026
* USD 384,490.00

Understanding the complex processes that occur inside cells when reef-building
corals are exposed to stressful conditions is essential to guiding future
conservation efforts and engineering solutions for the survival of coral reefs.
This project will focus on the relationship between corals and the microscopic
algae living in their tissue, especially the accumulation and exchange of very
reactive molecules (known as free-radicals) during periods of stress, which can
have damaging effects on cells at high doses. The symbiosis between coral and
algae is crucial for coral reef survival. As conditions in Earth’s oceans
change, this symbiosis becomes unstable, such that extreme conditions like
marine heat waves lead to expulsion of algae from the coral tissue, turning
corals white to the naked eye, a condition known as "coral bleaching." This
research will use a multidisciplinary approach--combining marine biology,
molecular sciences, ecophysiology, physics, nanoengineering, and 3D fabrication
--to explore how free-radical concentrations and dynamics within the complex
coral-algae symbiosis may contribute to coral bleaching. The scientific training
and outreach involved in this project will strive to engage with various groups
to promoted integrative multidisciplinary STEM methodology and literacy for
tackling complex contemporary challenges.

Mass coral bleaching events have increased in frequency and severity. However,
the mechanism leading to the breakdown of symbiosis (dysbiosis) is still poorly
characterized. The accumulation of free-radicals is understood to be a primary
driver of dysbiosis. In this project, researchers will first study the cellular
response in isolation and symbiosis of both the coral cells and the
dinoflagellate algae cells to create a 3D physical biohybrid coral model. The
model will be composed of a hard base mimicking the coral skeleton and bioink
combined with coral and algae cells mimicking the coral tissue. This model will
allow researchers to study the changes inside the cells and the bioink at high
resolution under different conditions, including during stress levels associated
with bleaching, according to cell type, cell density and tissue architecture.
The characterization toolkit will consist of advanced microscopy, gene
expression, metabolomics, nanoprobe measurements, material characterization,
computational modeling, 3D printing and 3D bioprinting. Amongst the expected
outcomes, researchers anticipate this project will profoundly transform our
understanding of free-radical dynamics in symbiotic organisms in relation to the
coral tissue microenvironment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.