* 2316894
* LEAPS-MPS: Exploring various subgrid scale turbulence models via convergence analysis, data assimilation and deep learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jing Tian, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 204,884.00

Turbulence is a set of complex nonlinear phenomena showing unsteady, irregular,
seemingly random and chaotic characteristic motions of fluids. It happens in
various systems involving the atmosphere, ocean, aerodynamics, and technology.
The study of turbulent fluid flow is well known to be highly important and
challenging. Since some issues of existence and uniqueness of solutions of the
three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations are still not yet fully established
despite century-long efforts, turbulence modeling currently provides the best
qualitative and, in many cases, even quantitative measures for many problems in
applications. Recently, generating through an averaging process, various subgrid
scale turbulence models were developed with good success. These models not only
capture the large-scale dynamics of the flow, but also provide “unresolved”
small-scale representations of the physics of fluids as well as reliable closure
models to the averaged equations. Moreover, they have nice analytical, empirical
and computational properties, such as global regularity and good matching with
empirical data collected from examples such as turbulent channels and pipes.
Therefore, studying these models will be beneficial and effective as far as both
mathematical rigors and real-world applications are concerned. This project aims
to study these subgrid turbulence models from the point of view of both basic
mathematical research and applications. The project will have significant
impacts on both undergraduate and graduate students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, through their participation in accessible research
projects. This will also establish a strong research agenda for the PI via
working with different career-stage researchers, building the research
capability and curricular offerings of the Department of Mathematics to fulfill
regional needs for data science expertise and offering educational experiences
in the local community.

In this project, a synthesizing effort of convergence analysis, data
assimilation algorithm and deep learning computation will be made to study
various subgrid scale turbulence models. The PI will first explore the
relationship between, and the emergence of, these models in association with the
Navier-Stokes equations. This will help us explore their intriguing connections
to the global regularity problem. Next, the PI will apply the data assimilation
algorithm to these subgrid scale models. The PI plans to build a data
assimilation system for these models, prove the existence of solutions, and show
convergence of the data-assimilated solutions of these models to the weak
solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations on a three-dimensional domain. As a
target, the PI will conduct parameter estimation via the determining map and its
computation using deep learning. The PI aims to develop a rigorous framework via
the determining map and computing it using neural networks. Exploiting the
computational advantages of recent deep learning techniques, the PI and her team
hope to be able to treat some cases where the traditional numerical methods face
hurdles such as the curse of dimensionality and complex geometries. This project
will help provide an illuminating link between various subgrid scale turbulence
models and the Navier-Stokes equations and improve our understanding of
turbulence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.