* 2316030
* Prosodic Event Annotation and Detection in Three Varieties of English
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jonathan Howell, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 507,066.00

English speakers constantly and effortlessly use prosody, such as accent and
phrasing, to communicate beyond the meaning of individual words. Yet our
understanding of prosody, and its integration in speech technologies, have
lagged behind, particularly so for language varieties that are already
underrepresented. While millions of Americans speak African American English
(AAE) or Latinx English (LE), these language varieties remain underrepresented
in basic and applied research, with negative consequences for speech therapy,
education, criminal justice, and employment. This research will result in a
corpus of AAE, LE and European American English speech data annotated for
prosody, which will be used to improve our scientific understanding of prosody
and to create tools for automatic detection of accent and phrase boundaries. A
team of 7 students from diverse backgrounds will receive training that will
provide a gateway to careers in language and technology.

The corpus will include pairs of same-dialect speakers recorded in a map task, a
method used to elicit spontaneous, naturalistic speech. The data will be
transcribed using automatic speech recognition and hand correction, and
automatically segmented into words and individual sounds using forced alignment
software. Both trained and untrained coders will annotate the data for sentence
accent and boundary using Rapid Prosody Transcription, an established method
designed for fast, intuitive prosodic annotation by non-experts. Acoustic
information, including duration, pitch, and intensity, will be extracted and
used with the annotations to train a machine learning detection model, and to
test previous findings about the frequency, distribution, acoustics and
perception of accent and boundary in the three English language varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.