* 2316456
* Collaborative Research: IntBIO: Rules for cell membranes in the extremes of the deep sea
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Steven Haddock, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2027
* USD 680,707.00

In this project, a cross-disciplinary team of scientists will uncover the
mechanisms underlying how animals specialize for life in the deep ocean. The
volume of the deep sea is vastly larger than all other habitats on earth
combined, but only highly specialized organisms can survive its extreme
conditions. How do deep-sea animals keep their cells functioning under freezing
temperatures and crushing pressures -- hundreds of times that at the surface? In
a surprising twist, once animals have adapted to the deep sea, surface
conditions often turn extreme to them, and they fail to survive anywhere except
in the deep sea. The researchers will focus on the cell membranes of deep-sea
animals -- molecular structures that are very sensitive to pressure and
temperature. The team will apply the latest methods in deep-ocean exploration,
genomics, lipidomics, biophysics, synthetic biology, and computer modeling to
uncover the molecular and cellular features that allow for survival in different
marine environments. Success will lead to new knowledge about the biochemical
limits of life and give insight into how environmental changes might affect
diversity and abundance of marine animals. Broad preparation is an essential
aspect of transformative research, because breakthroughs come when scientists
integrate information from a variety of domains. Thus, this project will provide
cross-disciplinary training for Ph.D. students to produce a new generation of
diverse scientists who are trained in integrative approaches to biological
research. The team's findings will also be incorporated into an integrative
education curriculum for K-12 students in partnership with educators across the
country.

The project uses ctenophores -- commonly called comb jellies -- as a model
system to discover rules that underlie an organism's ability to tolerate the
extreme conditions found in the deep sea. Many scientists have never seen a live
ctenophore, yet this phylum represents an excellent model system for the study
of adaptation to extreme environmental conditions. Ctenophores inhabit a wide
range of temperatures (-2°C to 30°C) and pressures (1 to 700 bar), and they have
convergently adapted to these conditions, with closely related species also
being found in very deep and very shallow habitats. Recently it has become
possible to maintain them in lab culture for several generations, and there are
high-quality transcriptomes and chromosome-scale genomes available. Thin layers
of tissue are essentially all that distinguishes a ctenophore from the
surrounding water, so adaptation must be focused at the cellular level. The
overall hypothesis driving this project is that adaptations in lipid metabolism
can be used to overcome the inhibition of cell-membrane dynamics by pressure.
The project combines bioinformatics, whole-animal experiments, pressurized
biochemical characterization, high-pressure small-angle x-ray scattering,
molecular dynamics simulations, and synthetic biology to uncover the genetic and
physicochemical mechanisms by which ctenophore membranes adapt to the deep
ocean. Predictions that emerge from integrated observations will be tested by
engineering lipid metabolism in microorganisms. The "rules" that emerge will be
relevant to marine biology, biotechnology, food science, and the physiology of
animals subjected to extreme conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.