* 2316827
* LEAPS-MPS: Time- and depth-resolved charge carrier transport in phase stable hybrid perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Meng-Ju Sher, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 238,316.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Mixed halide perovskites are a novel class of hybrid semiconductors with organic
and inorganic components. They have shown great promise for use in solar cells
and light-emitting diodes, in part due to their highly tunable electronic and
optical properties. However, fundamental limitations have limited their use. In
particular, stability issues due to ion migration and phase segregation must be
resolved. Complicating studies of pervoskites is the dynamic time scale of
electronic processes. These span from picosecond electron scattering, nanosecond
energy relaxation, to millisecond ionic motion. This LEAPS-MPS project will use
terahertz waves that are sensitive to electron conduction to find pathways to
develop stable hybrid perovskites. To achieve this goal, the PI will develop new
non-contact terahertz characterization techniques to increase the probing window
from picosecond to millisecond time scales. THz studies will be complemented by
photoluminescence and X-ray characterization to investigate the dynamic coupling
among electronic, optical, and structural properties. The PI emphasizes training
for next generation scientists, involving undergraduate and graduate student
researchers will be involved in the project. In addition, the PI leads the Girls
in Science Camp for elementary school girls, with a team of female faculty
members, high school, and college teaching assistants. Through intergenerational
mentoring, this project contributes to the training of next-generation
scientists and educators.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Recent developments in organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites have opened a wide
range of opportunities for highly tunable materials. However, thermodynamically
driven halide segregation in mixed-halide perovskites changes their optical and
optoelectronic properties. Ionic motion also impacts material properties
occurring in a solid, requiring a broad range of time scales to understand
dynamic material properties. This LEAPS-MPS project seeks to develop depth- and
time-resolved, non-contact characterization techniques to study the impact on
charge carrier transport by the movement of halide ions upon light soaking and
to find pathways to develop phase-stable hybrid perovskites. To achieve this
goal, the PI will develop new optical pump, terahertz probe techniques using a
ns-pulsed pump laser with electronic timing to extend the measurement time-
window from 2 ns to beyond 1 ms to match carrier recombination dynamics and
increase the dynamic probing window. THz studies will be complemented by time-
and spatially-resolved photoluminescence and in situ X-ray scattering mapping to
provide correlations with the local film stress and composition. Ultimately,
this project will link picosecond carrier scattering, nanosecond recombination,
and millisecond ionic motion to provide a comprehensive understanding of
photocarrier dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.