* 2316285
* Plasmon-enhanced Expansion FluoroSpot for Imaging and Quantifying Single Cell Protein Secretion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Srikanth Singamaneni, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Cell secreted proteins are important for understanding disease and for
developing new diagnostic technologies and future personalized medicines.
Current methods for monitoring secreted proteins observe many cells together,
which makes it difficult to see how cells interact with each other and how they
differ. These methods are not very sensitive, limiting information about protein
secretion, especially after cells are stimulated. These challenges point to an
urgent need for a simple, highly sensitive, and high-resolution method to
observe protein release at the level of individual cells. The aim of this
project is to develop a method called Plasmon-Enhanced Expansion FluoroSpot
(PEEFS), which can image secreted proteins with high sensitivity and precision,
and accurately measure differences between cells. This new technology combines a
very bright fluorescent nanoparticle with expansion microscopy, a technique that
enables high resolution optical imaging. In addition to training graduate and
undergraduate students, the project aims to introduce middle and high school
students to biophotonics. The goal is to encourage students from groups not
usually well-represented in STEM to feel confident and excited about science and
engineering.

Understanding the spatial and temporal dynamics of cell-secreted proteins is
essential in numerous life science disciplines, including immunology, oncology,
and stem cell biology. Existing methods involve averaging many thousands of
cells, resulting in the loss of information related to the spatial distribution
of secreted proteins, cell-to-cell heterogeneity, and cell-cell interaction.
Furthermore, due to the low sensitivity of the existing techniques, there is
little information on the kinetics of protein secretion, particularly at early
time points after cell stimulation and under low levels of stimulation. These
considerations highlight the critical need for a simple, ultrasensitive, and
high-resolution method to image and quantify protein secretion at a single-cell
level. The goal of the project is to introduce and establish Plasmon-Enhanced
Expansion FluoroSpot for ultrasensitive and high-resolution imaging and accurate
quantification of cell-secreted proteins, and cell-to-cell heterogeneity. This
novel bioplasmonic technology relies on an ultrabright fluorescent
nanoconstruct, plasmonic-fluor, recently introduced by the investigatorâ€™s lab,
and expansion microscopy, an unconventional super-resolution technique. Specific
objectives include: (1) realizing five distinct plasmonic-fluors and determining
their brightness and compatibility with expansion microscopy, (2) demonstrating
PEEFS and improving plasmonic-fluor labeling efficiency, and (3) demonstrating
multi-color PEEFS for probing cell surface and cell-secreted proteins. The
project represents a transformative advance in that it aims to design and
realize a novel bioplasmonic technology to image and quantify cell-secreted
proteins at extremely high resolution. The project offers unique training and
educational opportunities to graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students at the
intersection of plasmonics, super-resolution microscopy, and optical bioimaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.