* 2316857
* LEAPS-MPS: Development of Models in Spatial Statistics for Complex Policing and Social Science Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Claire Kelling, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,708.00

Pressing research concerns in the social sciences often require the analysis of
spatial data, which has become increasingly complex. This research aims to
better understand and model some of these complexities with innovative
statistical methodology that will allow the PI, other researchers, and community
members to better answer research questions relevant to public policy. The PI
also will host a forum at Carleton College in fall 2023 on Statistical
Challenges in the Analysis of Police Use of Force. This work will have immediate
impacts on the undergraduates at Carleton College who participate in this
research process, the students outside Carleton who attend the statistical forum
on policing, and the local Minneapolis community through intentional partnership
with community organizations. The proposed work will help those in local
communities answer specific questions about the policing of their neighborhoods,
allowing them to add additional context from data to their lived experiences.

This project will develop new statistical methodology with three specific aims:
methods to address and account for spatial uncertainty, methods to incorporate
bounded or constrained actors into spatial models, and spatio-temporal
extensions of preliminary spatial models. The first aim will develop software to
implement a constrained spatial privacy method that protects the original
locations while preserving the statistical utility of the original dataset. New
methodology will be proposed to analyze spatial uncertainty due to both
structured (privacy) and unstructured (geocoding error or imprecise data
collection) processes. The second aim will develop research methods to
incorporate actors that are spatially constrained both due to structured (e.g.,
police jurisdictions) and inferred (regional unions) boundaries. The third aim
will extend a newly developed spatial model, which is a shared component model
for characterizing the relationship between two point processes, to a spatio-
temporal model, incorporating temporal dynamics as well.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.