* 2316685
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: The Ghost Algebra for Correlation Functions &amp; Convexity of Anosov Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Caleb Ashley, Ashley, Caleb J
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Dr. Caleb Ashley is awarded a National Science Foundation Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research, education, and activities related to broadening
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship supports the
research project entitled "The ghost algebra for correlation functions of Anosov
representations." The project activities will be conducted at the host
institution, Boston College, under the mentorship of Professor Martin Bridgeman.

This project will focus on research in the area of the ghost algebra for
correlation functions of Anosov representations, as defined by Bridgeman-
Labourie, using geodesic laminations and geodesic currents. The PI will work on
the fundamental question of relating these structures to positivity in the sense
of Fock-Goncherov and on the question of convexity for higher cyclic currents
such as triangle functions. In the role as one of the directors of the African
Diaspora Joint Mathematics Workshop at the Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences
Institute, the PI will participate in Diversity, Equity, Inclusion efforts on
the national scale. Additionally, the PI plans to mentor underrepresented
students and expand the training and outreach efforts of the Experimental
Mathematics and Machine Learning Laboratory at Boston College.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.