* 2316955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social perception and body awareness in large-brained mammals
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2024
* USD 19,428.00

This study characterizes traits that have evolved in brain regions that
integrate social cognition with deep awareness of the body. From the experience
of ‘gut feelings’ to the contextual nuances of social perception, these features
are implicated in enhancing and expanding the human social-body connection.
Different aspects of our anatomy, ancient in mammals, coordinate and integrate
their activity to work toward benefitting survival and social outcomes. Humans
and great apes also show some anatomical features at the cellular level, called
von Economo neurons (VENs), shared with some distantly related mammals such as
whales and elephants. This doctoral dissertation research project examines
whether VENs evolved for similar functional reasons across mammal groups. The
results of this research expand our understanding of the importance of social-
body connection in the evolution of our own species’ social behavior. This study
provides opportunities for aspiring undergraduate researchers to learn
comparative anatomy lab techniques, and the investigators conduct outreach
through science communication activities and publishing digital video tutorials
for comparative neuroanatomy techniques.

The study utilizes immunohistochemistry and RNAScope to compare protein/gene
expression selective to VENs, found in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and
anterior insular cortex (AI) and hypothesized to enhance signaling speed within
social-visceral pathways. The project compares the expression of proteins
associated with social and visceral regulation, and the degree to which these
pathways recruit VENs, across primates, whales, and elephants. This study also
extends beyond cortical regions to comparatively profile a critical node between
these regions and the viscera--the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS)—which is
heavily involved in mediating social-visceral processes, particularly satiety
and motivation. In particular, the study focuses on social neurohormones,
including oxytocin and vasopressin, across this network. Differences in
neurotransmitter innervation may have implications for social and resource-
sharing behavior. The findings have implications for evolutionary studies and
clinically oriented research, shaping our understanding of the social brain and
addressing debates surrounding how we define convergent neural morphologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.