* 2316584
* Mentoring Institute for Sediment Transport (MIST) for Early Career Professionals at the 2023 EWRI World Environmental and Water Resources Congress and the AGU Fall Meeting
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Luke McGuire, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 34,485.00

This project aims to break barriers of limited professional interaction among
sediment researchers from different science and engineering disciplines and the
lack of diversity in both geoscience and engineering disciplines. Given that
climate change will produce more severe natural disasters that will
disproportionately affect vulnerable populations, including groups typically
underrepresented in geoscience and engineering fields, it is critical to bring
together a diverse group of researchers capable of tackling this growing set of
environmental challenges. This travel award develops a Mentoring Institute for
Sediment Transport researchers (MIST) to connect science and engineering leaders
(mentors) with early career professionals (mentees). Travel funding will support
25 early-career mentees to attend the 2023 ASCE EWRI World Environmental and
Water Resources Congress or the 2023 AGU Fall Meeting. This support will enable
mentees to attend an annual mentoring meeting during one of these conferences,
and it will kick off future MIST activities.

MIST aims to be an inclusive institute consisting of racial, gender, and ethnic
diversity among mentors and mentees. MIST is a virtual network that connects
mentors — accomplished professionals in academia, governmental agencies, and
industries — with mentees in early career stages, including tenure or non-tenure
track faculty, researchers in non-profit institutions or federal laboratories,
postdoctoral scholars, and students, with a focus on individuals from
underrepresented groups. MIST will collaborate with other mentoring networks
including the Student Mentoring Program in the AGU Earth and Planetary Surface
Processes section and Mentoring365 (chronus.com). Mentees will be recruited
prior to the proposed conferences, targeting underrepresented professionals and
students from Minority Serving Institutions, and advertising via mechanisms such
as the Women Advancing River Research Seminar Series. MIST will also create a
list of qualified mentors who have technical knowledge and enthusiasm to guide
mentees. Prior to the conference, MIST will match mentees with mentors. At the
EWRI and AGU Fall meetings, mentees will participate in technical sessions
highlighting state-of-the-art research in sediment transport and will also
participate in an in-person annual mentoring meeting. MIST aims to help the
mentees to become future leaders in science and engineering. Through these
activities, the project expects to 1) publish a special issue in a reputable
journal of selected mentee and mentor papers from the conferences, 2) foster
collaborations across two professional societies, and 3) create an inclusive,
diverse mentoring network for early career professionals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.