* 2316528
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Development of Catalytic, Asymmetric Ritter-Type Reactions of Racemic Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andre Sanchez, Sanchez, Andre
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Andre Sanchez is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics).
This fellowship to Dr. Sanchez supports the research project entitled “MPS-
Ascend: Development of Catalytic, Asymmetric Ritter-Type Reactions of Racemic
Precursors” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution
for the fellowship is Harvard University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Eric Jacobsen.

The proposal aims at the development of catalytic, asymmetric Ritter-type
reactions from readily available racemic precursors using hydrogen-bond donor
(HBD) catalysis to provide access to value-added chiral materials for small
molecule-based drug discovery. The research plan outlines specific tactics that
will enable the desired transformations through identification of a suitable HBD
catalyst framework, capitalizing on a synergistic network of non-covalent
interactions. A combination of mechanistic and computational investigations has
the potential to provide insight into the critical non-covalent interactions and
catalyst features necessary for enantioinduction. Scientific broader impacts
include applications to drug discovery and development of new therapeutic
technologies.

The proposed project will serve as a teaching platform for the mentoring of high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students from underrepresented minority
groups. The PI will serve as a committee member on departmental and campus-wide
diversity initiatives. The PI will participate in professional networking and
conference opportunities aimed at building an inclusive community and
diversifying the professoriate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.