* 2316470
* Collaborative Research: IntBIO: The Evolution of Immune Investment Strategies Across Amphibian Ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Jacques Robert, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2027
* USD 613,690.00

The increasing frequency of emerging infectious diseases in humans and animals
underscores the need to better understand the immune defenses that organisms
deploy to ward off these infections. Notably, the ability of the immune system
to fight infection changes as an organism progresses from birth to old age.
After all, the risk of encountering pathogens is tied to age-related behaviors
and environmental setting, and overly strong immune responses can drain precious
energy and fuel autoimmune diseases. As a result, organisms of different ages
may derive uneven benefits from the same types of immune responses. Building on
the observation that frog (Xenopus laevis) tadpoles contain a less diverse set
of adaptive T cells than those of adult frogs and instead rely more on innate-
like T cells, the purpose of this project is to investigate the ecological and
evolutionary factors that influence changes in T cell immunity as an organism
proceeds from younger to older stages of its life. To accomplish this, the
project will integrate approaches from the fields of immunology, evolutionary
biology and mathematics to investigate T cell receptor diversity across
amphibian species currently under existential threat worldwide from a deadly
fungal pathogen. The project will provide training to a diverse group of early
career scientists and spur the development of active learning modules to educate
students about the immune system through the lens of frog biology.

Frogs represent an optimal system to investigate age-structured investment in
innate-like and adaptive T cells because of their high diversity in life
histories and susceptibility to emergent pathogens. The three project objectives
are to: (1) use mathematical models and empirical data to predict when
evolutionary history, pathogens, and environment favor T cell diversity within
and among life stages on ecological and evolutionary time scales, (2) use RACE-
PCR and RNA-seq to quantify T cell receptor diversity for multiple frog species
spanning the frog tree of life and known tadpole development times, and (3)
experimentally manipulate early-life diet and environment in a laboratory
setting to quantify the extent of developmental plasticity on frog T cell
receptor diversity and infection outcomes. This proposal integrates classic
immunological techniques with evolutionary genetics, mathematical modeling, lab
experimentation, and natural population sampling to yield unprecedented insights
into the factors that drive the evolution of immune system maturation,
plasticity, and diversity. At the same time, this project will train young
scientists in interdisciplinary immunology, thus contributing to the formation
of the next generation of scientists with interest in immune responses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.