* 2316260
* RCN-UBE: ImmunoReach - An interdisciplinary community of practice to promote immune literacy.
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Louis Justement, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 09/30/2028
* USD 499,360.00

This project will expand the ImmunoReach network to develop and test new tools
for teaching immunology in college biology courses. Immunological terms and
concepts are complicated and new discoveries are made every year. This can
discourage people from learning about this important topic and makes it
difficult for instructors to keep current in the subject. The lesson plans that
will be developed in this project will make immunology concepts easier to
understand and help teachers feel comfortable teaching immunology across all
levels of courses. This work by ImmunoReach will help improve the quality of
biology education and support public understanding of important societal issues
such as combatting infectious disease, vaccination, and impacts of climate
change.

ImmunoReach is an interdisciplinary Community of Practice (CoP) that aims to
foster immune literacy and increase access to immunology education beyond
traditional immunology-specific classrooms. This CoP will identify a common
language between disciplines to discuss and share curricular challenges and
solutions with the broader community. To accomplish this, we will look towards
the key concepts and competencies described in The Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action report, and Benchmarks for
Science Literacy (AAAS, 2011 and 1993, respectively). The ImmunoReach network
will bring together educators who are committed to the goals of fostering immune
literacy, through the use of evidence-based pedagogical practices. The network
will develop teaching resources that integrate immunology-related
interdisciplinary learning outcomes, for example, those intersecting with
microbiology, genetics, ecology, evolution, physiology and chemistry. Less
experienced educators of immunology, representing diverse institutional and
disciplinary expertise, will be paired with experienced immunology educators for
developing, implementing, and assessing these interdisciplinary teaching
resources, based on a backward design approach and active learning strategies.
The products generated at the end of this project will be shared with the
network participants and the broader community through ImmunoReachâ€™s QUBES hub
site, virtual symposiums, conference presentations, journal publications, and
other outreach activities. The network will empower educators to positively
impact diverse student populations with the ultimate aim to foster immune
literacy. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Directorate for STEM
Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.