* 2316097
* LEAPS-MPS: Development, Design and Construction of DUCK (Detector of Unusual Cosmic-Ray CasKades)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Dmitriy Beznosko, Clayton College and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2025
* USD 130,854.00

A large mystery that is currently being investigated by the High Energy Physics
(HEP) field is the origin and the nature of the Ultra-high energy Cosmic Rays
(UHECR). Coming from deep within the Universe, they interact with Earth’s
atmosphere and multiply from a single particle with enormous energy to billions
of particles with much lower energy, causing what scientists call Extensive
Atmosphere Showers (EAS). Another current challenge in HEP and science in
general is raising and training new generations of capable scientists to
investigate the current mysteries and discover new ones. The shape of the EAS
when it reaches the planet’s surface is a disk of varying thickness, similar to
magnifying glass – thicker in the center and tapering towards the edges. The
main goal of this proposal is to develop a fast-speed detector system that is
capable of recording cosmic ray events, digitized at high speed. From that data,
the information of the disk thickness can be studied for the purpose of
improving current EAS simulation software as well as developing and improving
the existing methods for analyzing the data so that we can tell the origin of
the particle, its energy, and its species (i.e., was it a neutron, a proton, or
a nucleus of some element). Additionally, the capabilities of the detector will
assist in the search for the new types of the EAS, such as Cosmic Ray Ensembles
proposed by CREDO collaboration, and in the confirmation of the Unusual Events
that were observed by the Horizon-T collaboration. Participation of
undergraduate students in these activities with support and supervision will
provide the training for the future scientists using the real experiment in
multiple topics will provide hands-on research experience for a diverse student
population supporting the groups underrepresented in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.

The intent of this proposal is to initiate the scalable research project in
physics that can be subsequently extended. The project goal will be the
development, design and construction and deployment of core modules of DUCK
(Detector system of Unusual Cosmic-ray casKades). The main scientific importance
for the DUCK project will be adding the capabilities of the high-speed full
wavelength recording of the EAS events with different trigger possibilities,
analysis of which would contribute: to general EAS event analysis methodology
using the full waveform and detector response width, to CORSIKA simulation
development and check of the current and upcoming versions (7 and 8), to the
overall cosmic ray flux and space weather monitoring, to the search for the
Cosmic Ray Ensembles by CREDO collaboration, and to an independent verification
of the detection of the ‘unusual’ cosmic ray events by the Horizon-T detector
system. The project will involve computer simulation activities, design and
construction, data acquisition system design, data collection and analysis,
allowing participation of students pursuing not only physics but also other STEM
fields, such as Chemistry, Engineering and Computer Science. The project will
extend the research potential and facilities at Clayton State University (CSU).
This would serve as strong institutional support and encouragement of first-
generation college students for whom there is often little family support for
going to graduate schools after graduation from CSU.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.