* 2316007
* Quantum Monte Carlo methods beyond the fixed-node approximation: excitonic effects and hydrogen compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Lubos Mitas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2026
* USD 346,461.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education aimed to make significant advances in
simulation and computational approaches for studies of atomic and electronic
structures of materials. Understanding, design, and prediction of new types of
materials involve solving the equations that describe fundamental quantum
mechanical laws for complex, many-particle systems at the level of quantum
mechanics. Such solutions are exceptionally difficult to obtain due to major
mathematical, algorithmic and computational challenges as well as due to
exceedingly high accuracy required for real world applications. In addition,
research on new materials often involves very intricate interplays of quantum
phenomena that provide unexpected opportunities to discover materials and new
functionalities for information processing, optical, magnetic and host of other
applications. This may lead to the discovery of new quantum states of electrons
that exist in materials.

The proposed research ideas build upon previous developments of methods known as
quantum Monte Carlo, that are particularly promising in overcoming many of the
fundamental challenges involved. This successful strategy combines analytical
insights, statistical sampling techniques and the power of parallel architecture
computing machines into unique and powerful tools that enable us to attack areas
of quantum research that were unthinkable even a few years ago.

Key developments involve new algorithms that significantly increase robustness
and accuracy of calculating crucial characteristics of materials using a more
powerful mathematical framework and more efficient algorithmic constructions.
These developments will be applied to two intensely studied groups of materials:
i) hydrogen compounds, which are putatively claimed to be new superconductors
that would work close to room temperatures; ii) to compounds that exhibit strong
quantum phenomena that are essential for optical applications as well as for
occurrence of new quantum states of matter. Proposed projects will provide
exciting research, education, and training opportunities for students in quantum
physics, computational and simulation techniques, all of which are crucial for
technological advances in general and for the next generation workforce. These
research and education activities offer a stimulating environment for aspiring
young scientists from the growing body of NCSU students, the largest in North
Carolina, that includes many students from rural and disadvantaged communities.
Acquired skills in analytical, computational, and modelling techniques are in
high demand on job markets throughout academia, national laboratories, and a
variety of industries. Preparation to take advantage of such opportunities leads
to attractive, highly paid, and intellectually rewarding career paths for future
STEM workforce.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education aimed to make significant advances in
simulation and computational approaches for studies of atomic and electronic
structures of materials. Electronic structure quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods
are routinely used to calculate fundamental gaps, cohesion energies, electronic
densities, and other properties by solving the stationary Schroedinger equation
with high accuracy explicitly using correlated many-body wave functions. In this
project the PI will expand the ability of QMC many-body wave function methods to
describe excitons and excitonic related phenomena in systems with significant
electron correlations. For this purpose, pair orbital-based wave functions
combined with recent developments that involve two-component spinors will be
explored to capture strong correlations in systems that involve magnetic,
optical, and collective electronic states. In particular, this form enables the
description of exciton condensates in a variety of materials. The next area of
interest involves the application of QMC methods to binary hydride compounds
involving a heavier element such as sulfur or yttrium that are putatively
claimed to exhibit near-room temperature superconductivity particularly at high
pressures. However, due to experimental challenges the existing data is very
limited and our understanding of these materials and phenomena is very far from
being settled. The plans involve applications of QMC methods to elucidate atomic
and electronic structures, equations of state, and the role of proton zero-point
motion and anharmonic effects in these compounds. At the fundamental level,
recent developments for spin-dependent interactions enable smooth variation
between fixed-node and fixed-phase versions of QMC. This opens new possibilities
to increase variational freedom as well as to reach beyond the current fixed
node/phase accuracy limit. The intention is to explore directions that have
potential to decrease the commonly encountered fixed-node/phase bias by almost
an order of magnitude, opening new avenues for insights into electron-electron
correlations and intricate quantum phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.