* 2316693
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Controlling the spin and charge of color centers in diamond under cryogenic conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Richard Monge, Monge, Richard
* Fellowship Award
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Description

Diamond is a remarkable material made only of carbon. Diamond is one of the
hardest natural materials and, unlike many electrical insulators, it is a good
conductor of heat. These properties have led to many industrial applications,
such as an abrasive used in grinding, drilling, and cutting. Diamond also hosts
a sensitive detector of magnetic and electric fields: the nitrogen vacancy (NV)
center. NV centers can be used to sense magnetic objects and have potential for
use as quantum bits (qubits) for quantum computing. Most work on NV centers in
diamond has been done at room temperature under ambient conditions. Cryogenic
conditions substantially alter its optical properties, creating new
opportunities for control and readout of NV centers. In this MPS-Ascend project,
the PI will use instrumentation developed during his doctoral work to
investigate the interplay between the NV spin, optical, and electronic
properties at low temperatures. The PI will integrate his research with
educational activities that build on the PIâ€™s experience as an educator,
including mentorships of undergraduates and junior graduates as well as outreach
activities in local high schools.

Technical Description

Cryogenic manipulation of NV centers has received relatively little attention in
the context of sensing, due to complications deriving from the impact of local
strain on the NV optical spectrum. The PI plans to carry out a systematic
investigation that will shed light on the interplay between crystal strain and
optical cyclicity. These studies will be enabled by a cryogenic microscope
developed by the PI that has multi-color excitation capabilities. This
instrumentation integrates magnetic resonance and atomic force microscopy
capabilities that can be combined to implement NV scanning probe experiments.
Activities will center on the narrow, spin-selective optical transitions NVs
display in the cryogenic regime with two main goals: (i) develop enhanced forms
of NV spin readout with emphasis on applications to sensing, and (ii) study the
NV charge state dynamics under resonant optical excitation with an eye on sub-
diffraction optical memories. The planned studies will also enable effective
spin-to-charge conversion schemes as an alternative to attaining enhanced NV
sensitivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.