* 2316043
* Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York/Langseth Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Sean Higgins, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 303,366.00

A proposal is made to fund instrumentation on the R/V Marcus Langseth, a 235â€™
Global seismic vessel with general oceanographic capabilities. The vessel is
owned by Columbia University and operated by Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University under a cooperative agreement with NSF. The Langseth is
unique in the Academic Fleet in that it provides a combination of capabilities
for imaging the oceans, the seafloor and the solid earth beneath the sea. It is
the only vessel in the world dedicated to academic research that can conduct 3D
seismic surveys as well as extended offset 2D surveys. The tuned, linear source
array, consisting of up to 36 airguns, with a total capacity of 6,600 cu in is
also unique asset of this vessel. All of the requested equipment in this
proposal is for upgrading existing systems. Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:

Seamap BuoyLink 4DX GNSS Source Tracking system $224,016 Cisco Meraki computer
Network vessel-wide upgrade $36,135 Seamap Near Field Hydrophones and HVRU
$43,215 $303,366 Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is
under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It
provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-
use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research
projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research
program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use
instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.