* 2316143
* Morphology-Controlled Carbon Molecular Sieve Membranes for Gas Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Ali Rownaghi, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 414,710.00

Energy industries, including oil and gas facilities, petrochemical production,
and electric power generation, produce exhaust gas streams. These gas streams
are hot, high-pressure, and can contain noxious chemicals. Before the gas can be
safely released to the atmosphere, small, chemically similar molecules must be
selectively removed from the stream to meet government regulatory standards.
Conventional gas separation technologies such as cryogenic distillation and
absorption are energy-intensive and, thus, add to operational cost and further
burden the environment. Membrane-based separations are a competitive alternative
gas separation technology, but those used in industrial gas service stand to
benefit from performance improvements that enable use at higher temperatures.
This project will establish a controlled membrane fabrication process that
overcomes the primary limitations facing industrial use of membranes in gas
separations, including the ability to control the internal network of pores and
how the material ages. The fabrication process incorporates polymer precursors
and porous liquids to form a "mixed matrix" membrane with high selectivity
(preference) for a target molecule and good mechanical properties. The
incorporated materials significantly increase the ability of the membranes to
operate at higher temperatures making them more competitive with the energy-
intensive separation methods. The results of this project are expected to be
broadly applicable to many types of gas separation processes and may spur the
development of new technologies for air pollution control. Educational
opportunities will be provided to undergraduate students and graduate students
through research projects. The principal investigator will also leverage
existing programs at Missouri University of Science and Technology to engage
with K-12 educators and high school students in activities that enhance public
science literacy.

This project will systematically investigate structure/property relationships in
a recently developed platform of fluorinated copolyimides (FCPs), which exhibit
outstanding gas separation performance. The objective of this study is to
develop a better understanding of the fundamental relationships between the
microstructure of the polymer precursor and physical aging and gas separation
performance of the resultant carbon molecular sieve (CMS) membrane. Such FCP
materials and related blends have high thermal and chemical stability, making
them suitable candidates for separations at high temperatures or in harsh
chemical environments, such as natural gas processing or olefin/paraffin
separation. In this project, the investigator will synthesize a family of FCPs
and related materials integrating the polymer precursorâ€™s backbone structure
with porous organic cage (POC) nanoparticles via covalent bonding. The effects
of backbone structure modification and polymer precursor doping with POCs on
morphology, free volume, transition layer, physical aging, and gas separation
properties will be explored; the objective of which is to develop fundamental
structure/property/performance relationships for these novel membranes. Gas
solubility, diffusivity, and permeability as a function of temperature and
pressure for pure gases will be characterized. Similarly, mixed gas permeation
properties over the resulting FCP and derived POC-based CMS membranes will be
assessed for application in natural gas or olefin/paraffin separations. The
project will offer undergraduate and graduate education opportunities, and in
conjunction with existing programs at Missouri University of Science and
Technology, the investigator will create classroom modules for K-12 educators
and high-school outreach events. Products will be distributed to the public
through YouTube and investigator's research website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.