* 2316281
* URoL:  Epigenetics 2: Robustness and Adaptability of the Dynamic Epigenome: A Multiscale Approach
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kaushik Ragunathan, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,204,512.00

Cells experience a wide range of unforeseen challenges in their natural
environment. Under these circumstances, change is often not a choice. Cells
inevitably find new ways to adapt and survive upon exposure to acute stress.
Bacterial cells that are exposed to antibiotics acquire resistance through
changes to their DNA sequence. Plants make decisions about their flowering times
based on their time of exposure to cold conditions. Cancer cells, when exposed
to chemotherapeutic agents, can become resistant, posing a significant challenge
to treatment and worsening patient outcomes. In many cases, these adaptive
changes are epigenetic - they result in gene expression changes without any
alterations to the genetic blueprint. In contrast to genetic mutations,
epigenetic changes can be transient, heritable and reversible providing diverse
pathways for cellular innovation. The thousands of genes within the nucleus of
each cell serve as tunable knobs that can alter cell fitness. We do not
understand how cells choose which knobs to turn, and making the wrong choice
could prove catastrophic. This NSF-funded research program aims to understand
the fundamental rules that shape the inner workings of the cell. This research
program captures the chaotic collisions between molecules within a cell which
can work in unison to help cells make accurate, adaptive decisions. This project
also seeks to broadly impact high school and undergraduate education in Michigan
through a unique emphasis on interdisciplinary research and learning.

Understanding the fundamental rules of life that guide cells to make adaptive
decisions requires interdisciplinary tools that capture cellular processes
across different time and length scales. Because epigenetic changes can occur
even without cell division and are not permanent, they lead to a rapid,
reversible, and adaptive cellular response that has profound consequences for
cell growth and survival. This research uses high-resolution imaging to
visualize single molecules in cells, microfluidic platforms to reveal decision
making events within individual cells, and automated continuous culture methods
to investigate the dynamics of cell populations. The synthesis and integration
of these multi-dimensional viewpoints will enable the development of
mathematical models with the potential to predict emergent properties of these
complex regulatory networks. Ultimately, the outcome of these studies will be a
set of rules that define how adaptive epigenetic states, much like genetic
mutations, represent evolvable traits in eukaryotic genomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.