* 2316744
* LEAPS-MPS: Prediction issues in progressively censored life-testing experiments: New ideas and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Ritwik Bhattacharya, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 243,831.00

A goal of manufacturers is to produce high quality products that satisfy
customersâ€™ expectations. Reliability is crucial and is formally defined as the
probability that a product will perform a required function adequately for a
given period of time when used under the stated operating conditions. Customers
want to purchase products which are highly reliable and safe. They expect that
the products will perform their intended function without failure for a long
period of time. A cost-effective warranty design needs information on the
product failure time distribution, which is commonly determined through life-
testing experimental data. These types of data are often partially observed.
Therefore, there is a need for prediction of the unobserved part of the data.
One of the statistical tools for the prediction methodology is the linear
estimate. However, the prediction methods are not fully developed in the
literature for more complex life-testing experiments. The principal aim of this
LEAPS-MPS project is to develop new theoretical results for the prediction in
such complex cases and to show its applicability by analyzing failure data
obtained through life-testing experiments. The second aim is to implement a
sustainable education plan to increase the number of student participants from
underrepresented groups, in particular, women and Hispanics in El Paso, Texas.

In a reliability life-testing experiment, a fixed number of items are tested and
the failure times of those items are recorded. The lifetimes of these items are
assumed to be identically and independently distributed random variables. These
life-testing experiments are commonly conducted in the framework of censoring
mechanisms (either time-censored or failure censored), that is, a part of the
testing units are only observed for data collection purposes. Under all
censoring mechanisms, the information obtained through a life-testing experiment
is often associated with two types of ordered data, namely, the usual ordered
data and Progressively Type-II ordered data. Thus, inferences based on ordered
statistics play an important role in analyzing life-testing experimental data
and a common interest of study is to predict information on the unobserved part
of the testing units. There are three basic approaches to address the predictive
inferential issues: likelihood based, Bayesian and linear estimate. Among them,
linear estimate methods for progressively ordered data have not been explored in
the literature. This project will develop modelling and theory for linear
estimaes. In particular, simultaneous point and interval predictions will be
constructed based on best linear unbiased estimators and best linear invariant
estimators. Finally, a framework for statistical process monitoring tools using
the simultaneous prediction intervals will be established to bridge between
predictive inference and statistical process control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.