* 2316243
* Scaling Open Access Responsible and Ethical Conduct of Research and Mentoring Trainings Across Academic Institutions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Weihong Wang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 387,295.00

Large universities often have dedicated offices to support ethical and
responsible research education, while primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs) tend to lack similar resources. Yet there is a pressing need to engage
faculty and students from PUIs and other academic institutions in responsible
and ethical conduct of research (RECR) training, especially on the topic of
research mentoring. This project addresses this educational need and provides
benefit to students, faculty, and other personnel by generating accessible and
permanent research ethics training materials that can be used in a variety of
academic settings. The research team will assist academic institutions,
including those lacking an established research education infrastructure, to
understand the challenges and opportunities associated with providing training
on mentoring and other research ethics topics. The team will survey a collection
of academic institutions to inform its approach. Survey results will guide the
development of educational modules for faculty and students engaged in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research fields.

The goal of this project is to expand access to research ethics training
approaches and materials. To address this goal, the research team will develop
and disseminate open access and customizable RECR and research mentoring
training within a network of state-funded universities. The team will seek to
accomplish three main aims: (1) determine which factors are most effective in
forming equitable approaches to research ethics training in STEM research
fields; (2) develop and disseminate customizable research ethics training
modules; and (3) evaluate how and why these factors are effective in enhancing
research ethics training. The team will develop the modules using multiple
education modalities and openly share the modules through a clearinghouse
website.

This project is jointly funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.