* 2316218
* RCN-UBE: Connecting Curriculum: A Fly-CURE Network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Kayla Bieser, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to create a Research Coordination Network (RCN) to
connect new Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) that are
expansions of a genetics laboratory CURE, called Fly-CURE. The Fly-CURE RCN will
act as a centralized hub for training undergraduates in four new CUREs
encompassing in-demand curricular topics: Bioinformatics, Behavioral Genetics,
Molecular Biology, and Developmental Biology. The creation of these CUREs will
not only bolster the existing scientific knowledge base regarding the
relationship between genes and growth and development, but also increase student
participation in research across biological sub-disciplines. CUREs allow
students to participate in hands-on and inquiry-based research which increase
their critical thinking skills, learning gains, and sense of belonging in
science. These new CUREs will also include student-led community-based service
learning opportunities to introduce scientific discovery to young learners to
further promote student persistence in STEM and prepare them for future
scientific careers. For faculty, the Fly-CURE RCN will provide opportunities to
actively engage in and publish scientific research and connect with a shared
scientific community which is especially challenging at under-resourced
institutions including community colleges, minority-serving institutions, and
primarily undergraduate institutions.

The first goal of the Fly-CURE RCN is to develop four new CUREs, each designed
to involve undergraduate students in the analysis of Drosophila melanogaster
mutants, discovered in the original genetics Fly-CURE, using different
disciplinary approaches. This RCN will increase the number of faculty
implementing CUREs by targeting faculty at community colleges, minority-serving
institutions, and primarily undergraduate institutions. The second goal of Fly-
CURE RCN is to foster a scientific community of faculty participants and assess
whether this approach is effective at recruiting faculty from underrepresented
groups, early-career faculty, and faculty from an array of institutional types.
The Fly-CURE has successfully retained faculty thus far and has contributed to
the professional advancement of participants. Considering the limited resources
and research support often available at smaller institutions, this project
provides the scientific training and peer support needed for faculty involvement
in successful CUREs through professional development and collaborative
interactions across the network. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part
of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.