* 2316399
* Collaborative Research: RII Track-2 FEC: STORM: Data-Driven Approaches for Secure Electric Grids in Communities Disproportionately Impacted by Climate Change
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Sharon Klein, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,802,109.00

RII Track-2 FEC: STORM: Data-Driven Approaches for Secure Electric Grids in
Communities Disproportionately Impacted by Climate Change involves the
jurisdictions of Maine, Alaska, South Dakota and Puerto Rico. The proposed
research, education, and workforce development activities will advance the
nation’s smart grid technologies to support communities disproportionately
impacted by climate change and related severe weather such as hurricanes,
blizzards, flooding, and rapid shifts in temperature. STORM will benefit from
experts in electrical, computer and civil engineering, economics, community and
environmental resilience, climatology, and mathematics and statistics. Faculty
and students will co-produce knowledge with community stakeholders, using
convergent approaches that are critical to solving complex problems. Research
and workforce development objectives are built around three intersecting themes:
(1) Engagement of underserved communities in local climate change solutions and
knowledge translation for microgrid design; (2) Improvement of power grid
resilience in underserved communities through accelerated big data modeling,
estimation, and secure control frameworks, and (3) Development of regionally
relevant cyber-physical research infrastructure for studying community engaged
data-driven operation of power grids. Each theme will involve early career and
senior faculty to ensure effective mentoring. Research and workforce development
activities are designed to develop pilot programs and research data that will
lead to sustainable funding from federal agencies and industry. Project partners
include school districts, indigenous tribes, municipalities, electrical
utilities/cooperatives, nonprofits, start-up and established companies, and
federal laboratories. STORM will encourage diverse and inclusive participation
through its work with community members, undergraduate and graduate students,
early career faculty, federal laboratories and industry. Efforts to broaden
participation in STEM will be enhanced through two institutions in particular.
The University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF) is an Alaska Native and Native
Hawaiian and Native American-Serving Nontribal Institution. The University of
Puerto Rico Mayaguez an Hispanic Serving Institution. It is one of the top
producers of Hispanic engineers in the United States of America according to the
American Society of Engineering Education.

The electric grid, among the most complex human-made systems, is vital to U.S.
security and quality of life. More frequent and intense extreme weather events
as well as other anthropogenic threats, including physical and cyber-attacks,
are testing the resilience of our nation’s critical infrastructure. STORM is
built around three interrelated themes in response to this challenge. Theme 1
focuses on engaging underserved communities in local climate change solutions
and knowledge translation for microgrid design. Theme 1 approaches are novel in
terms of the co-production of research and knowledge among community members
geographic and culturally distinct regions; the co-design of solutions with an
interdisciplinary team of researchers with social science and engineering
backgrounds whose experiences span the study regions, and applications of
lessons learned from each of the three study regions, to the others. While Theme
1 focuses on microgrid planning to meet the resiliency goals of communities
disproportionately impacted by climate change, Theme 2 seeks to increase the
situational awareness of underserved communities and mitigate the impact in the
electric grid according to the community resilience goals during and after an
extreme weather event. Theme 2’s new multi-microgrid system restoration strategy
will prioritize critical loads at the community and individual levels based on a
new multi-timescale predictive control and estimation framework that utilizes
GFM inverters to provide optimal dynamic support during the process. Novel
hardware Trojan prevention, detection, and mitigation techniques will advance
cyber-attack resilience of the entire system during severe weather. Theme 3
seeks to develop regionally-relevant cyber-physical research infrastructure for
studying community-engaged, data-driven operation of power grids. The new,
regionally relevant synthetic power systems, climate, and socioeconomic data
will be immensely valuable to the advancement of data science, machine learning,
and artificial intelligence applied to the electric industry in these
underserved jurisdictions. STORM will benefit from strong existing partnerships
including a successful Department of Energy EPSCoR project on modeling converter
dominated power systems. STORM also builds upon senior personnel’s partnerships
with Sandia National Laboratory, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, and
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. In addition, the project will leverage
relationships with key industry/community partners (Kartorium, Kotzebue Electric
Association, East River Electric Co-op, Missouri River Energy Services, National
Rural Electric Cooperative Association, Siemens, Sioux Valley Energy,
Sustainable Energy for Galena, and Versant Power).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.