* 2316072
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Selective Electrogeneration of Ammonia from Nitrate - establishing Control of Bimetallic Electrocatalysts Through Interfacial Chemical Design
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kenneth Flores, Flores, Kenneth Ray
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Kenneth R. Flores is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Flores supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: Selective Electrogeneration of Ammonia from
Nitrate - Establishing Control of Bimetallic Electrocatalysts through
Interfacial Chemical Design” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The
host institution for the fellowship is Arizona State University, and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Sergi Garcia-Segura.

This proposal intends to develop bimetallic electrocatalysts for the
electrocatalytic reduction of nitrate for both water remediation and the green
generation of ammonia. The proposal aims at tailoring the electrocatalysts
towards ammonia selectivity by modulating metal affinity to hydrogen and oxygen
moieties to control species interaction at the electrode interface, varying
surface coverage of the metals to elucidate the contributions of each metal in
product selectivity and varying the preferential crystal structure of deposited
metal centers to establish correlations in selectivity and kinetics for ammonia
generation. If successful, the proposed research could impact circular economy
strategies by sourcing valuable industrial chemicals such as ammonia from waste
materials.

The PI intends to study and improve the performance of electrochemical systems
relevant to water remediation strategies that could benefit both industry and
underrepresented minority (URM) communities. The proposed outreach activities
for Hispanic serving schools in the Phoenix area include hosting workshops to
assist in the development of soft skills such as technical writing and speaking
as well as in the utilization of proper resources such as grants, fellowships,
and internships for students from URM groups pursuing MPS fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.