* 2316063
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Increasing the Rate of Singlet Fission through Strong Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shreya Patel, Patel, Shreya Kiritbhai
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Shreya K. Patel is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program of
research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics).
This fellowship to Dr. Patel supports the research project entitled “MPS-Ascend:
Increasing the Rate of Singlet Fission through Strong Coupling” under the
mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is
Northwestern University, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Teri Odom.

This proposal plans to study the conversion of an excited singlet state down to
two triplets (known as singlet fission) that could dramatically improve the
efficiency of solar cells by down-converting high energy photons into a more
useful energy range. Pentacene and perylene di-imide will be investigated as
singlet fission chromophores. The proposed work will investigate polariton-
assisted singlet fission using plasmonic nanoparticles arranged in a new
architecture that doesn’t require mirrors and can allow for facile tuning of the
photonic mode by changing the dielectric constant of the solvent around the
plasmonic nanoparticles. The proposal seeks to advance the polariton-assisted
singlet fission process through surface lattice resonances and make it more
practical for energy harvesting applications. Successful implementation of this
work may allow for the development of more efficient optoelectronic devices.

The PI intends to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
science by mentorship, advocacy, and public outreach activities. The PI plans to
mentor students to provide them with the tools and encouragement they need to
pursue and stay in the science disciplines. The PI intends to join the
Northwestern Chemistry CARES committee to improve diversity within the
department, and to participate in efforts on the Northwestern University campus
to improve equity, diversity, and inclusion in the community. Finally, the PI
plans to join the Science in Society group at Northwestern University to improve
awareness and knowledge of science in the greater Chicago area by hosting an
after school program with scientific experiments for students, hosting teacher
workshops, and visiting schools to present science demonstrations to younger
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.