* 2316496
* CAREER: Discovering Structure in Uncertainty: Using Topology for Interactive Visualization of Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Paul Rosen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,505.00

In science, ensembles are used to model uncertainties that occur in data from a
variety of sources, including errors in measurements, inaccuracies in modeling,
and a lack of adequate sampling. Understanding these errors is critical to
improving human understanding of phenomena in many areas of science, from urban
planning to astrophysics to medicine to weather forecasting, etc. This project
investigates new Topological Data Analysis and visualization methods to analyze
uncertain data. This will enable scientists to better understand phenomena
within their domain by developing new insights and making discoveries more
quickly. The techniques will be tested in collaboration with a biomedical
engineering research team helping to develop new life-saving treatments for
heart attacks and a research team helping to develop technologies that support a
safe, clean, and reliable national energy grid. Furthermore, this project will
study and advocate for integrating better teaching methodologies, such as peer
review, into computer science curricula. The results will be integrated into
visualization and computational geometry courses through course materials, such
as design mini-challenges, and shared with the educational community through
outreach activities, such as pedagogy-themed panels and workshops.

To accomplish the goals of the project, the tools of Topological Data Analysis
provide a strong theoretical basis for robustly extracting features from
ensembles and designing visualizations for performing important uncertainty
analysis tasks, including identifying and ranking similarities, identifying and
ranking variations, and correlating topological features. This project addresses
two important scientific questions: how to effectively use topology to extract
features from ensembles; and how to design visualizations for domain experts
that efficiently communicate the features. To extract features from an ensemble,
the project will investigate new methods of robustly comparing and contrasting
the topology of multiple ensemble realizations. Then, in collaboration with
domain scientists, it will design new visualization methods for efficiently and
effectively comparing and exploring the features and variations within
ensembles. The project web site provides additional information and will include
access to developed tools, data sets, and educational content.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.