* 2316003
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of NVIDIA DGX H100 GPU system for research and education at VCU
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Ka Un Lao, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 10/31/2026
* USD 299,621.00

Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) have become an essential computational tool in
support of a wide range of research areas. This project funds the acquisition of
a high-performance GPU cluster to be installed at the Virginia Commonwealth
University (VCU) High-Performance Research Computing (HPRC) core user facility,
which provides shared university-wide access to high-performance computing
clusters for research and education purposes. The GPU instrumentation will
benefit the research and training activities of 22 research groups and impact
400+ users across the entire university. The acquisition advances next-
generation research in artificial intelligence, modeling, and simulations across
a broad range of disciplines including computer science, engineering, life
sciences, and physical sciences. Further benefits include those to cutting-edge
research, research training of graduate and undergraduate students, course and
curriculum development, K-12 outreach impacts, and the participation of
underrepresented minorities. The new resources will also strengthen
interdisciplinary research and broaden collaborative activities across
disciplines with local industry and federal laboratories.

The acquisition of a NVIDIA DGX H100 GPU system will significantly expand the
GPU computing capacity at VCU to help satisfy the increasing high-performance
computing demand across various science & engineering disciplines. The key
research projects that will benefit from this equipment are in the areas of
machine learning for high-speed data streams, deep learning and quantum machine
learning, neuromodulation (transcranial magnetic stimulation and deep brain
stimulation), computational chemistry (quantum chemistry), optics and defects in
semiconductors (gallium nitride), software vulnerability prediction using deep
learning, nanomagnetic materials and nanoscale magnetic devices, real-time
pandemic management architecture, secure and flexible medical IoT infrastructure
(protection from cyberattacks deployed at network edge components), and
ultrafast dissociation dynamics of isolated organic molecular cations. This
project will also support the training of high-school, undergraduate, graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in cutting-edge interdisciplinary research
spanning computer science, engineering, physics, and chemistry, strengthening
existing ties with nearby HBCUs, as well as expanding K-12 minority outreach
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.