* 2316952
* LEAPS-MPS: Mathematical Modeling of Brain Structure in Neurodegenerative Diseases Exhibiting Prion-Like Spreading
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Michael Lindstrom, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's Disease and Parkinson's Disease
are associated with the spreading of neurotoxic proteins in the brain and the
gradual loss of functional brain cells giving rise to symptoms according to
where the damage takes place. Often the toxic proteins interact with and convert
healthy proteins into toxic proteins. Both toxic and healthy proteins are
transported between brain cells through complex pathways. Presently, an in-depth
understanding of this spreading during disease progression is lacking in
critical areas. With reference to clinical and experimental data for parameter
inference, the investigator will develop mathematical models to describe the
spread of toxic proteins qualitatively and quantitatively, with particular
emphasis on brain structure. The results from this research will bring insights
to new avenues of experimental and clinical exploration for treating disorders
of the brain. The project will be conducted at a Hispanic Serving Institution
and will provide research training and mentoring opportunities, including
teaching computing and modeling skills relevant for the scientific workforce, at
the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. The project is focused on
the development of a model system of coupled, nonlinear differential equations
for the biochemistry of proteins in different connectomes of the brain, with
their associated pathways, and of a stochastic network model of protein
transport to account for variations between brains. The system of differential
equations can be studied from a dynamical systems perspective, with scientific
computing, and asymptotic methods. The model results will enhance the
understanding of potential disease trajectories, strategies for optimizing a
particular outcome, and parameters that are of biological interest. The network
model allows for considering distributions of parameters and other natural
variations, quantifying uncertainty, and adding so-called logical conditions
based in biology that are not well handled through differential equations. The
project will address the question of existence of solutions to the model
equations and establish properties of these solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.