* 2316801
* Collaborative Research: CoralReef3D - An open-source toolkit for underwater 3D ecosystem modeling and analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* James Porter, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 68,874.00

Coral reefs are one of the most diverse ecosystems on Earth, hosting at least
30% of all marine species. They generate almost $10 trillion USD per year
globally and provide protein and income for more than 5% of humanity.
Unfortunately, most coral reefs are in severe decline due to the climate change
and local stressors. Some reefs, however, appear to be more resilient than
others. We need to find and identify these reefs quickly to elucidate the
factors that confer this resilience. Historically, the kinds of surveys required
to locate and demonstrate resilience have been slow, expensive, and reliant on
highly trained scientists. These traditional methods are too slow and too
cumbersome to provide 21st Century solutions for our 21st Century challenges. In
this project, advanced 3D computer vision and photogrammetric techniques will be
assembled into a novel computational toolset called CoralReef3D, which will be
made available to divers and coastal surveyors all over the world. This
shareware will allow non-experts to create georeferenced (and therefore
repeatable) 3D reef montages that can easily be assessed for benchmark studies
on coral growth and survival. The impact of this research will be broadened by
open-source software, online workshops, student training, and outreach
activities involving museums and the general public.

CoralReef3D is expected to bring forth significant advancements in underwater 3D
measurements. During this research, novel water-refraction correction methods
will be developed and incorporated into CoralReef3D. Correction for water-
refraction distortions at the camera/water interface will allow production of
accurate measurements of seascape montages. For instance, the programâ€™s advanced
capabilities for object-recognition and semantic-segmentation will allow it to
generate on-image scales for linear or volumetric measurements. This will also
enable precise calculations of ecosystem rugosity (topological complexity) and
geomorphology in surveyed areas. By providing GPS information on all images,
CoralReef3D can fate-track individual colonies and quantify ecosystem changes
over time. Both controlled laboratory validation and in situ field validation
will be conducted. Controlled laboratory validations will be performed in deep
seawater tanks maintained by Reef Systems Coral Farm. In situ field validations
will be performed in Hawaii and the Florida Keys along depth gradients. To
shorten the learning curve normally associated with sophisticated image analysis
programs, CoralReef3D will be extensively documented using both text and
pictorial instructions. These technological advances will produce a benchmark
method for 3D modeling of complex objects in water. CoralReef3D will empower
both experts and non-specialists to make affordable, large-scale, and accurate
assessments of rapidly-changing marine ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.