* 2316039
* Collaborative Research: Drivers and Biogeochemical Implications of Saltwater Intrusion Along Arctic Coastlines
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2027
* Julia Guimond, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 03/31/2027
* USD 380,718.00

Sea-level rise and storm events push saltwater landward (i.e., saltwater
intrusion), driving changes in the chemistry, ecology, and greenhouse gas fluxes
of terrestrial ecosystems. Present knowledge of the drivers and impacts of
saltwater intrusion is based on temperate and tropical environments. Little is
known about saltwater intrusion along Arctic coastlines where permafrost
underlies coastal ecosystems. In this study, we investigate the drivers of
coastal Arctic saltwater intrusion and the impacts of saltwater intrusion on
porewater chemistry and greenhouse gas fluxes along Alaska’s Beaufort Sea coast.
This work will provide baseline understanding of the physical, biological, and
chemical processes occurring along rapidly changing Arctic coastlines; will
train two summer interns, a research assistant, and field technician; and will
fund two early career, female researchers. Findings will be shared with the
scientific community, as well as at local schools and public forums, bringing
the Arctic to Cape Cod communities.

Along coastlines worldwide, sea-level rise and storm events are driving
saltwater intrusion into terrestrial environments. Present understanding of the
drivers and ecosystem ramifications of saltwater intrusion is largely based on
studies conducted in temperate and tropical environments. The influence of
saltwater intrusion on the physical and biogeochemical properties of permafrost-
bound coastlines has been investigated far less, leaving pronounced gaps in
understanding of coastal Arctic ecosystem responses to salinization. This study
will fill these gaps by expanding knowledge of the processes mediating
distributions of coastal porewater salinity and the consequences of Arctic
tundra salinization for greenhouse gas fluxes to the atmosphere and nutrient
fluxes to the coastal ocean. Through an interdisciplinary field and laboratory
study conducted along Alaska’s Beaufort Sea coast, we will (1) characterize
subsurface temperature, water level, thaw depth, and porewater salinity
dynamics, (2) measure porewater nutrient concentrations and greenhouse gas
fluxes, and (3) assess links between water table dynamics, groundwater nutrient
concentrations, and greenhouse gas fluxes across healthy and salinized tundra
sites. The proposed activities will expand system understanding by uncovering
links between tundra salinization and altered physical and biogeochemical
processes, enhancing our ability to project coastal ecosystem function in a
changing climate. The broader impacts of the project include early career
mentorship, participation in K-12 education, and research dissemination to the
scientific and broader community. Specifically, this project will train summer
interns, a research assistant, and a technician both in the field and
laboratory. Through partnerships with the Woods Hole Science and Technology
Education Program, project outcomes will regularly be presented at local schools
and public forums, and PIs will participate in local activities including
mentoring student projects in science fairs. Lastly, results from this project
will be disseminated to the scientific community through journal publications
and conference presentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.