* 2316597
* Conference: Geometric flows and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Natasa Sesum, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 11,000.00

The award will support US participants attending the conference 'Geometric Flows
and Applications', which will take place on July 10-14th at ICMS, Bayes Center
in Edinburgh, UK. The event will bring together researchers in geometry and
topology whose research interests are closely aligned to topics where geometric
flows either already or are expected to play a key role, and will include
experts in the analysis of geometric flows. Specific topics will include aspects
of complex geometry, Hermitian geometry, symplectic and contact topology,
special holonomy, calibrated geometry and gauge theory, as well as Riemannian
geometry and low-dimensional topology. A major goal of this conference is to
support, train and encourage the next generation of mathematicians in the fields
of analysis, complex geometry and mathematical physics. The distinguished and
well-known speakers will draw in junior participants from all over the US. By
inviting promising junior people to attend, some contributing talks, this
conference will help to nurture and support the future leaders of the field. New
collaborations and research papers are expected to emerge from this meeting.

The theme of this conference is the study of geometric flows and their
applications to diverse topics in geometry and topology. Geometric flows are
powerful tools for tackling important problems across diverse areas in geometry
and topology, and beyond. Spectacular successes go back at least to Donaldson’s
work on the Hitchin–Kobayashi correspondence, and continue to the present, with
the proofs of the Poincar\'e and Geometrization Conjectures, the Differentiable
Sphere Theorem, and the Generalized Smale Conjecture. There are still many key
open problems of fundamental importance in a range of areas for which geometric
flows provide a natural approach, and for which other methods have proved
unsuccessful thus far. Geometric flows are nonlinear, parabolic evolution
equations for key geometric quantities, which lie at the heart of a rich and
developing theory combining the study of partial differential equations and
differential geometry. The most well-known examples of these flows are the Ricci
flow and the mean curvature flow, both of which have significant applications,
particularly to topology. By using additional data on the manifold (for example,
a complex structure), one can define geometric flows which now can now be used
to study these more refined geometries. This has proved extremely fruitful, for
example in applications (both potential and realised) to gauge theory, the study
of the minimal model programme and related problems in complex and algebraic
geometry, symplectic topology, Mirror Symmetry and exceptional holonomy. The
website for the conference is: https://www.icms.org.uk/workshops/2023/geometric-
flows-and-applications

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.