* 2316628
* Conference: Participant Support for The 7th World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME); Orlando, Florida; 21-25 May 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Michael Rawlings, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides registration for approximately 15 students, postdoctoral
fellows and early-career professionals studying and working in the US to attend
the 7th World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME
2023), Orlando, Florida, 21-25 May 2023, organized by The Minerals, Metals &
Materials Society (TMS). The objective is to broaden the participation from
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, early-career professionals,
participants from underrepresented communities and women, and undergraduate
students that aspire to learn more about the field of Integrated Computational
Materials Engineering (ICME). Consideration in the selection process will be
given to the inclusion of members of underrepresented groups, diversity of
institutions that the participants represent, and diversity of programs within
engineering. The aim is to showcase the latest research in the field, facilitate
interdisciplinary discussions and grow the pipeline of US researchers interested
in ICME, which has applications in several fields including materials design,
structural and functional materials behavior, advanced manufacturing, energy
storage and conversion, and artificial intelligence and machine learning.

The World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering is held bi-
annually in different cities around the globe since its inception in 2011. It is
considered the world’s premier conference in the field of Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering. ICME is an interdisciplinary approach to
designing materials solutions for specific applications that use computer
modeling programs to predict the behavior of materials and integrate this
information into the overall materials, processing, and manufacturing design
cycle. This integrated approach is one of the foundational pillars of Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI), which combines and leverages computation and data
techniques with traditional materials science and engineering to accelerate the
discovery, development, and deployment of advanced materials “twice as fast and
at a fraction of the cost.” This conference brings together researchers from
across the nation and internationally to share their research findings, foster
and develop new collaborative ideas, and advance the professional development of
a new generation of scientists and researchers with a modern, integrated
skillset which can be used to address the materials challenges that impact
society. The conference will include 15 symposia across 9 topical areas where
the most recent and novel research will be presented.

This conference support is funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures
(MOMS) and Advanced Manufacturing (AM) programs in the CMMI Division, and the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory (CMMT) and Metals and Metallic
Nanostructures (MMN) programs in the DMR Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.