* 2316741
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: The Effects of Electronic Stucture and Coordination Enviornment on the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide in Single-Atom Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Matthew Espinosa, Espinosa, Matthew Ryan
* Fellowship Award
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Mathew Ryan Espinosa is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to conduct a program
of research and activities related to broaden participation by groups
underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Ezpinosa supports the research
project entitled “MPS-Ascend: The Effects of Electronic Structure and
Coordination Environment on the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide in
Single-Atom Catalysts” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host
institution for the fellowship is California Institute of Technology at
Pasadena, CA, and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Theodor Agapie.

This proposal intends to investigate the fundamental factors influencing the
selectivity and activity of heterogeneous single-atom catalysts in
electrochemical CO2 reduction. The proposal will utilize electronically
conjugated multi-metallic phenanthroline macrocyclic catalysts to understand the
influence of the extended electronic structure of single-atom catalysts on the
catalytic activity and selectivity of CO2 reduction to liquid products and
fuels. The project will synthesize novel homogeneous mono- and multi-metallic
systems where electronic structure and secondary coordination environment will
be systematically varied and compared to the catalytic activity and selectivity.
Successful implementation of this work may allow for developing single-atom
catalysts involving electronically conjugated metal centers on a conducting
surface for CO2 reduction to renewable commodity chemicals and fuels. The
conversion of captured anthropogenic CO2 using electrochemical reduction would
enable the production of renewable, carbon-neutral fuels and chemical
feedstocks, displacing current unsustainable petrochemical sources.

The PI intends to increase broadening participation of underrepresented groups
in science by mentoring and providing opportunities to the next generation of
scientists and participating in scientific outreach activities, scientific
communications, and community service to inspire and inform local communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.