* 2316042
* Probing Intermolecular Dynamics with Nonlinear Ultrafast THz Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Scott Cushing, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2026
* USD 535,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Geoffrey Blake and Scott Cushing of the
California Institute of Technology (Caltech) are developing sophisticated
spectroscopies to study the structure and dynamics of liquids and liquid
mixtures. The forces between molecules that determine the properties of liquid
water, for example, can be directly probed only using light that is much lower
frequency than that of visible light, on the order of a few terahertz (THz).
Still, the motions in liquids are very fast, and a significant technical
challenge is to develop very short, yet tailored, pulses of THz light. Drs.
Blake and Cushing and their students will advance ultrafast nonlinear THz
spectroscopies to study the intermolecular forces in hydrogen bonding liquids
(e.g., water) in the presence of dissolved ions. Their discoveries could lead to
new THz methodologies that advance applications in sustainable energy,
telecommunications, and national security. The project will provide a highly
interdisciplinary environment that includes graduate students and
undergraduates, not only from Caltech but from nearby minority/Hispanic serving
institutions, lowering the barriers for entry into quantum science.

Direct probes of intermolecular forces in liquids and other molecular materials,
especially those involving hydrogen bonds, require THz photons, yet the
necessary time resolution is sub-picosecond. Thus, multi-octave pulses with
controllable frequency and carrier envelope phase content must be generated.
This collaborative Caltech team will combine the near-IR/Visible pulse
compression expertise in the Cushing group with novel THz emitters fabricated at
Caltech to drive pump-probe and THz-THz-Raman (TTR) approaches pioneered in the
Blake group into the 10-30 femtosecond regime. The principal scientific focus
will be studies of the hydrogen bond dynamics in liquid water and mixtures,
especially at high ionic strength and with components such as alcohols that
demonstrate unusual thermodynamics of mixing. The broader scientific
applications of the tailored THz pulse capabilities include the selective
nonlinear studies of a broad range of processes in sustainable energy generation
and storage, and in quantum information science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.