* 2316968
* LEAPS-MPS: Sharp Inequalities in Probability and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Phanuel Mariano, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 08/31/2025
* USD 227,184.00

This project will investigate connections between the mathematical fields of
probability, analysis, and partial differential equations (PDEs) – fundamental
tools in understanding physical phenomena – through the study of inequalities. A
classical topic of study in mathematics, inequalities describe relationships
between quantities which may not be known precisely but can be estimated or
approximated. The inequalities to be considered in this project have
applications to physics and engineering in the study of the fundamental
frequency of membranes; the motion of random particles; and the torsional
rigidity, elasticity, electrostatic capacity, and heat content of materials. The
insights uncovered will be relevant to a rapidly changing society, in which data
and randomness are increasingly present in daily life. The project will engage
undergraduate students in hands-on mathematical research with the goal of
increasing the mathematical talent pool in the United States. Graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, and early career mathematicians will be involved in a
conference that will advance knowledge while creating a more inclusive culture
and sense of belonging, particularly among under-represented groups in
mathematics. A distinguished lecture series will be accessible to a general
audience, thereby increasing public scientific literacy and engagement with
science by introducing probability and its impacts on society.

This project will focus on two main research directions: 1) proving sharp
inequalities involving the expected lifetime of a diffusion started inside a
domain and the principal Dirichlet eigenvalue; and 2) addressing functional
inequalities for degenerate diffusions. The first research direction focuses on
proving sharp inequalities involving the fundamental frequency and the torsional
rigidity of domains through exit times of diffusions. The torsional rigidity
measures how much a rod with cross-sections given by a particular domain is
resistant to twisting forces. Thus, obtaining sharp bounds for the torsional
rigidity will have physical applications to engineering problems. The PI will
study the underlying PDEs by applying probabilistic and analytic methods. The
second direction will focus on proving gradient estimates and other functional
inequalities for the harmonic functions related to degenerate diffusions. The
PI’s goal will be to focus on problems in the degenerate hypoelliptic case where
there is no canonical underlying sub-Riemannian structure, which are called weak
Hörmander diffusions. One of the main probabilistic tools that is used involves
developing sharp couplings of diffusion processes. Additionally, the project
features a third research direction, to be explored with undergraduate
researchers, that focuses on the theory of explicit limit theorems for the
products of random singular matrices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.