* 2316599
* Elucidating the Interplay between the ComRS and the ComABCDE Quorum Sensing Circuitries in Streptococci
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yftah Tal-Gan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2026
* USD 552,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Tal-Gan from the University of Nevada, Reno is studying how
multiple communication pathways within the same species of bacteria affect
bacterial behavior. Bacteria utilize a language of chemical signals to
communicate with each other, assess their environment, and coordinate behavioral
changes at the population level. Some bacterial species produce multiple
chemical signals, each of which correspond to a different message and result in
different behavioral responses. However, in some cases, two different signals
can lead to a similar behavioral response through alternative communication
pathways. The proposed study aims to characterize, at the molecular level, how
different communication pathways within the same species of bacteria affect one
another and consequently indirectly affect behaviors regulated by the other
communication pathway. Understanding the interplay and hierarchy between
different communication pathways could pave the way to manage and control
bacterial behavior in diverse environmental niches. This study will allow
undergraduate and graduate students to acquire specialized training in both
chemistry and microbiology, from synthetic peptide chemistry and analytical
characterization to microbiology and molecular biology techniques. This project
also will be integrated into an outreach program aimed at providing
undergraduate students and faculty from Lafayette College, a small liberal arts
college in Easton, Pennsylvania, experience in hands-on research at the
interface of chemistry and biology.

This project aims to utilize Streptococcus mutans as a model system to study the
interplay and hierarchy between the ComABCDE-like and ComRS quorum sensing
circuitries at the molecular level. Competence for genetic transformation in
streptococci is regulated by the competence regulon and relies on a cell-cell
signaling mechanism, termed quorum sensing (QS). In some streptococci species
the competence regulon is composed of a two-component-based QS circuit, termed
the ComABCDE circuitry, while in other species, the competence regulon is
composed of an RRNPP-type QS circuit, termed the ComRS circuitry. Importantly,
some species of streptococci possess both a ComABCDE-like circuit and a ComRS-
like circuitry. The proposed interdisciplinary project will integrate chemical
biology techniques with traditional microbiology approaches to pursue the
following objectives: 1) delineate the molecular mechanisms that govern the
interplay between the ComABCDE-like and ComRS QS circuits in S. mutans; and 2)
expand and generalize the rules governing the interplay between the ComABCDE-
like and ComRS QS circuits to other bacterial species.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.