* 2316861
* LEAPS-MPS: Harnessing materials from nature: from biomaterials to metal oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Michal Marszewski, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,938.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

It is widely appreciated that nature has been perfecting its materials since the
first plants and animals appeared on Earth. Thus, nature gives us inspiration
for some of the best and most unique materials, such as gecko feet, shark skin,
and lotus leaves. Biomimetic materials try to capitalize on these hundreds of
millions of years of evolution by mimicking the structures of natural materials.
Unfortunately, natural materials are often difficult or impossible to reproduce
in our laboratories since each new biomaterial generally requires a new,
tailored strategy to reproduce it as a man-made material. Such strategies, if
exist, are often quite intricate, limiting the possible material compositions
and making them difficult to scale up. A process for "carbon copying" natural
materials would be a perfect solution. This project will study a process of
mineralization of natural materials into metal oxides using chemistry. Such
mineralization process can then be used for quick prototyping of biomimetic
materials by converting samples of natural materials into metal oxide samples
with the same structure but varied compositions. It can also be used to convert
feedstock of biomass and biowaste from agricultural and forestry industries into
new, value-added, materials for catalysis, energy storage and conversion,
adsorption, sensing, and optical applications. The project also integrates a
comprehensive plan for increasing participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM and the numbers of leaders and role models from underrepresented groups in
industry and academia. This plan combines high-school and community outreach
activities with training and mentoring of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Non-hydrolytic sol-gel (NHSG) mineralization demonstrated conversion of natural
cellulosic materials into metal oxides with structure retention. However, we
currently lack the understanding of how this process is completed for solid
materials and if it can be applied to other natural materials. The overall
objective of this research proposal is to understand the mechanism of NHSG
mineralization of cellulose and its compatibility with other natural materials.
The central hypothesis is that NHSG mineralization is compatible with other
polysaccharides and oxygen-rich polymers if they can be swelled by the solvent
and have an appropriate type and amount of oxygen groups. The rationale that
underlines the proposed research is that the generated understanding will unlock
a general strategy for converting natural materials into metal oxides with
tailored composition. PI plans to achieve the overall objective by pursuing the
following specific objectives: (1) elucidate mechanism of NHSG mineralization
for cellulosic materials and (2) elucidate compatibility of NHSG mineralization
with other polymeric materials. To complete Specific Objective #1, PI will use
carefully designed cellulose materials to study the conversion process with
cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy coupled with elemental mapping via
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Specific Objective #2 will be completed by
testing common natural polymers with broad range of chemical and structural
properties in NHSG mineralization to understand requirements for polymeric
materials to achieve effective conversion. The project will also support
training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. High school
students will be hosted for an 8-week summer research project where they will
conduct research and receive mentoring to empower them to continue into STEM
education. Overall, the project will support participation of at least one
woman, one underrepresented minority student, and two disadvantaged students in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.