* 2316849
* LEAPS-MPS: Topological Control of Ligand Hemilability in Organometallic Nickel Complexes for C-H Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Nathanael Hirscher, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,218.00

In this project funded by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Nathanael
Hirscher and his students at Montclair State University will perform studies
that aim to develop new catalysts resulting in increased rates and durability
for important reactions relevant to chemical manufacturing. This research will
combine organic components (ligands) with a metal (nickel) to make
organometallic complexes. The structure of the organic ligand strongly
influences the properties of the organometallic complex. Breaking carbon-
hydrogen bonds (i.e., C-H activation) is an important step in organometallic
catalysis, with applications in the production of pharmaceuticals and polymers.
Professor Hirscher and his students will synthesize ligands with varying
structures, as well as complexes comprised of the ligands and nickel. Their
studies could improve the ability of nickel complexes to perform C-H activation
by precise control of peripheral elements in the ligand. In addition, students
from diverse backgrounds, including those from underrepresented minority groups,
will be trained in organometallic chemistry and mentored as part of a cohort of
undergraduates in chemistry research at Montclair State University.

This work is an endeavor to improve organometallic catalysis by applying
strategies from supramolecular chemistry. Breaking carbon-hydrogen bonds (C-H
activation) is a crucial step in catalysis technology, significant to the
production of chemicals ranging from pharmaceuticals to polymers. The ability of
nickel complexes to perform C-H activation will be studied in this work.
Organometallic chemistry has traditionally focused on the interaction between
metals and organic ligands, but the peripheral parts of the structure (i.e., the
secondary coordination sphere) have attracted much recent attention. This
project involves the exploration of a specific aspect of the secondary
coordination sphere: the interconnectivity (i.e., topology) of ligand structural
features within an organometallic complex. Nickel complexes will be synthesized
and studied to determine whether the topology of the ligand influences C-H
activation. More specifically, the influence of hemilabile donors within the
ligand secondary structure will be studied, regarding their impact on C-H
activation rates of the nickel complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.