* 2316265
* Conference: CALPHAD 50 - 50th anniversary of CALPHAD meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Gregory Olson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 04/30/2024
* USD 27,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The CALPHAD conference is an important event celebrating its 50th anniversary
from June 25 to 30, 2023. The conference will focus on discussing thermodynamic
and kinetic modeling and experiments for advanced materials like alloys,
ceramics, and polymers used in both structural and functional applications. It
will also cover fundamental materials science education, innovation for future
materials, and manufacturing techniques. The conference will offer opportunities
for young researchers and students to learn from industry professionals and
world leaders in computational materials science. The goal of the conference is
to advance technology, leading to collaborations in metallurgy, materials,
manufacturing, and data science. The award supports student attendance to the
CALPHAD conference to promote diversity and excellence in the field.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

CALPHAD is a method used in modern materials science tools for over half a
century. It's critical for developing innovative materials and processing
techniques, which were listed in the "National Strategy for Advanced
Manufacturing" released by the White House. As a tool of the Materials Genome,
the method requires more improvement for advanced manufacturing and materials.
The CALPHAD conference is a platform for scientists to communicate and
collaborate in materials thermodynamics and its applications. This award
facilitates the conference organizerâ€™s ability to support young researchers,
especially women and minority students, in this field. By attending this
conference, students and professionals are discussing the fundamental science
behind developing advanced materials used in different applications. This
activity is helping to develop new manufacturing techniques and improve
technology, which is crucial for innovation and knowledge generation.
Additionally, this conference provides a chance for students to interact with
leaders in the field, helping to promote diversity and excellence in both
academia and industry.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (through
the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures Program, the Ceramics Program, the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter and Materials
Theory Program) as well as the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation (through the Advanced Manufacturing Program and the Mechanics of
Materials and Structures Program).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.