* 2316504
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Searching for a CURE: How to Engage All Students in Research
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rachael Merritt, Merritt, Rachael L
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Rachel Merritt is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Merritt supports her research project entitled “Postdoctoral
Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Searching for a CURE: How to Engage All Students in
Research” under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution
for the fellowship is the University of Colorado Boulder and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Heather Lewandowski.

Dr. Merritt will pursue a research project to work on the identification of
physics-specific challenges and opportunities in creating and sustaining course-
based undergraduate. research experiences, or CUREs. She will use a design-based
research approach to create a CURE course to use as the research ‘laboratory’
for investigating which components of a physics CURE lead to specific outcomes.
This knowledge will result in the development of a framework of effective
practices to create and sustain CUREs in physics.

Dr. Merritt will include Minority Serving Institutions in the CURE project to
ensure the participation of students from historically underserved and currently
underrepresented groups. The framework resulting from this project, and the new
physics CURE developed, will foster the creation and sustainability of physics
CUREs across the Nation. These CUREs will empower physics students by providing
access to authentic research opportunities and better preparing them for their
next career step in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.