* 2316896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Female mate choice in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 35,533.00

The elaborate colors and mating behaviors exhibited by males in many species of
birds and fish evolved as adaptations for female mate choice, however,
comparatively little is known about female mate choice in mammals. This doctoral
dissertation research project examines the evolutionary pressures underlying the
role of female mate choice and its implications for male-male competition and
reproductive success in a non-human primate. Through measurement and analysis of
cues to potential mates – such as scent and color – the results of this project
advance knowledge about the physiological and behavioral correlates of mate
choice in primates. This project supports a female graduate student in
laboratory and statistical training. As part of this project, she collaborates
with a conservation organization to support the conservation of endangered
primate species, and actively mentors high school and undergraduate students
through programs which aim to provide research opportunities to underserved
communities.

Many primates live in multi-male multi-female groups in which both males and
females mate with multiple partners (a polygynandrous mating system). In these
mating systems, there are increased opportunities for males to compete over
reproduction, and increased scope for females to exert mate choice. The study
species displays a unique suite of phenotypic and behavioral traits that appear
contrary to those predicted by sexual selection theory, presenting an
interesting system in which to test existing evolutionary models regarding
female mate choice and male-male competition. This project tests conceptual and
theoretical models of the selective pressures underlying the role of female mate
choice through two primary objectives: 1) characterization of aspects of male
phenotypes (i.e., sexual coloration, chemical profiles of cutaneous glands,
dominance rank); and 2) assessment the role of female mate choice by measuring
the extent to which female preferences predict male reproductive success. This
is achieved by combining behavioral data with innovative biological sampling
techniques. In addition to the novel data generated for the study species,
through deep interrogation of multiple components of mate choice in a primate
this research provides valuable comparative information for the broader study of
the evolution of mate choice in mammals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.