* 2316242
* LEAPS-MPS: Development of Novel Multistage Models for Wolbachia-Based Strategies to Control Mosquito-Borne diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Zhuolin Qu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 246,620.00

Mosquitoes are one of the deadliest creatures in the world because of the
mosquito-borne diseases they can transmit, such as dengue fever, malaria,
chikungunya, and Zika. Wolbachia-based intervention is a novel alternative
mitigation strategy to control the spread of mosquito-borne diseases, as some
Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes are less capable of transmitting diseases. This
project proposes new and innovative mathematical models for the spread of
Wolbachia infection in mosquitoes as a disease control which helps public health
workers better understand the disease dynamics and optimize mitigation efforts.
Besides the complex transmission dynamics, the models will also account for
spatial and temporal heterogeneity that affects the transmission process. With
these practical considerations, the proposed models can provide a comprehensive
and solid understanding of Wolbachia-based interventions, and the results can
better support public health workers to identify effective and sustainable
approaches for reducing mosquito-borne diseases. The project will be based at a
Hispanic-/minority-serving institution, where 67% of the students are
minorities. The research efforts will be fully integrated with engaging students
from various academic backgrounds in modeling infectious diseases and
encouraging the participation of students from underrepresented groups.
Leveraging the diverse student populations and their close connections to
minority organizations, the research results will be disseminated through
campus, professional, and media venues to achieve further impact on these groups
and the general public audience.

The proposed models will be built on solid epidemiological and mathematical
foundations and will account for both the Wolbachia-induced biological effects
and the heterogeneity from seasonality and mosquitoes’ spatial dispersions. The
project will derive models with different levels of biological resolutions to
balance the model’s predictability and analytical challenge, and it includes
three specific aims: (1) analysis of small-scale models to gain a basic
qualitative understanding of the Wolbachia establishment, in particular, the
characterization of critical threshold condition for Wolbachia spreading and
spatial infection wave propagation; this provides important insights into (2)
the design of full-scale models that capture details of the biological effects.
The numerical study of the full-scale models will inform practical scenarios
that concern the field releases and identify efficient practices for
establishing Wolbachia in the field. (3) The PI will also conduct detailed model
parametrizations and quantify model uncertainty at different stages of the
project. The local and global sensitivity analysis approaches will be employed
to quantify the uncertainty in the models and determine their relative
importance to the model predictions so that they can be more useful and
interpretable by the public health community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.