* 2316374
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Feedback between physiological performance and social foraging in multi-species social network of wintering birds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Maria Stager, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 802,385.00

While many birds migrate to warmer climates during the winter, some species are
able to stay and survive cold winters despite their small bodies and need to
maintain high body temperatures. Small birds that stay in temperate latitudes
during the winter have physiological adaptations to promote heat production and
maintain body temperature, as well as behavioral adaptations such as social
foraging in flocks that can be composed of single or multiple species. In these
flocks, the network of social relationships between individuals—within and
between species—affect daily foraging patterns. Thus, these physiological and
behavioral adaptations are linked through a feedback loop: social foraging
allows birds to collect enough food to fuel heat production, and energy expended
for heat creates demand for more food, which affects social foraging dynamics.
This project explores these connections between the physiology of an individual
and the ecological and social relationships that arise between group members and
across species when they flock together in search of scarce resources.

To understand how feedback between physiology and behavior influences the social
dynamics between individuals and species in a community of wintering songbirds,
we will: (1) quantify the effects of physiological variation on social network
stability in the face of variable ambient temperatures; (2) experimentally
manipulate energetic demand among social partners to test the importance of
physiological constraints on social relationships; and, (3) experimentally
manipulate coordination of foraging activities among social partners to test the
importance of social relationships on physiological performance. These aims will
be achieved by characterizing social foraging networks and assaying
physiological performance in wild, marked populations of songbirds using arrays
of feeders equipped with radio-frequency identification receivers to record
social foraging bouts. We will additionally tease apart reciprocal relationships
between physiology and social behavior by altering both the thermal environment
and resource availability in the wild. Together this work will advance our
understanding of the feedback between individual phenotypic variation and
community social dynamics. This project will focus on broader impacts activities
in four main areas: (1) Improving training and inclusivity in STEM through
research experience for undergraduates, baccalaureate students, and graduate
students across two universities, (2) Improving undergraduate STEM education
through integration of course-based undergraduate research experiences, (3)
Improving middle school STEM education through the production of scalable, high-
production, interdisciplinary lesson plans for grades 6-9 that meet U.S. Next
Generation Science Standards, and (4) Public engagement through field activities
and presentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.