* 2316122
* RCN-UBE: Cell Biology Education Consortium: Pathway to Publication
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Lori Hensley, Ouachita Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2028
* USD 500,000.00

The Cell Biology Education Consortium: Path to Publication (CBEC: P2P) research
collaborative network is intended to assist primarily undergraduate institution
(PUI) faculty with publishing research in a peer-reviewed journal. Conducting
and publishing research can be challenging at PUIs where high faculty teaching
responsibilities are balanced with mentoring of undergraduate research students
and teams. This project will address this publication disconnect by helping
faculty prepare single-figure manuscripts from their data, advancing faculty and
their students on a pathway to publication. By reducing barriers to publication,
faculty can help students take ownership of the manuscript preparation process
while generating their own publication record that will help with career
advancement. Collectively, this will help faculty build their research
credentials and allow undergraduate students and faculty to become published
authors in a recognized scientific journal. The infrastructure established by
this project supports the enhancement, expansion, and sustainability of
undergraduate cell biology-related research. Overall, the development of freely
accessible resources that highlight a clear path to publication improves the
STEM pipeline, helps to retain PUI faculty, and will serve as a model for other
disciplines. This project addresses a need expressed by cell biology educators
that while the quality of undergraduate research is high, faculty often do not
have the time to generate the extensive data required to publish research in
traditional scientific journals requiring multiple result figures. Here a
workflow for a path to publication for CBEC faculty and students will be
developed that results in publication of a single-figure research paper in
microPublication Biology, a fully citable journal platform. This workflow will
be a step-by-step mechanism that allows CBEC: P2P faculty to submit a single-
figure paper to network leaders, receive feedback, resubmit for further
comments, and ultimately submit their work for publication in microPublication
Biology. To further enhance research success, CBEC: P2P will also help faculty
align their class-based research with the path to publication workflow. The
protocols developed will be freely shared with others as open education
resources. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate
for STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts
to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/), and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.