* 2316776
* LEAPS-MPS: New Approaches to Achieve Ethylene and Polar Monomer Copolymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Trandon Bender, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

In this project managed by the Chemistry Division at NSF, Professor Trandon
Bender and his students at Old Dominion University will perform studies that aim
to understand fundamental organometallic processes that allow for the efficient
synthesis of polymers used for developing new products like the packaging for
food storage, medical devices, and building materials. Reactions combining
multiple monomers result in plastics with different characteristics than those
containing a single monomer. However, polymerizing ethylene with polar
comonomers can form a stable chelate, limiting the incorporation of the polar
monomers and decreasing the copolymerization rate. Professor Bender and his
students will use a photocatalyst and visible light to break open the stable
chelates and allow copolymerization to continue. They will also investigate how
adding a Lewis acid to the catalyst can be used to disrupt the formation of
these chelates. Their studies could lead to the synthesis of new copolymers of
ethylene with varied incorporation of polar monomers and higher catalytic
copolymerization reactivity. Moreover, this project will train a diverse group
student from Old Dominion University along with undergraduates from Norfolk
State University.

Professor Bender and his students will study the combination of energy transfer
and catalysis using Pd- and Ni-diimine polymerization catalysts to cleave stable
chelates that are formed during the copolymerization of ethylene with polar
monomers such as methyl acrylate. These chelates hinder reactivity and result in
low polar monomer incorporation. It is proposed that triplet-triplet energy
transfer from a photocatalyst to these chelates will produce a chelate-centered
triplet excited state that will promote cleavage of the chelate to achieve
better incorporation and reactivity. Through modification of the diimine ligand
backbones and variation of the photocatalysts, optimal conditions can be
determined to modulate polar monomer incorporation, branching, and polymer size.
Moreover, a ligand-tethered Lewis acid will be studied to understand how a
proximal Lewis acidic center may disrupt chelate formation along with other
detrimental polar monomer interactions that limit incorporation and reactivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.