* 2316965
* LEAP-MPS: Two Conjectures in Mathematical Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Aghil Alaee Khangha, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 07/31/2025
* USD 116,983.00

This project will use geometric methods to address two important conjectures in
the mathematics of general relativity: the Penrose inequality conjecture, and
the Horowitz-Myers conjecture. General relativity is a geometric theory of
gravitation in which gravity can be explained by the curvature of spacetime.
Perhaps the most fascinating prediction of general relativity is the existence
of black holes â€“ extremely dense and massive regions of spacetime where gravity
is extremely powerful. The recent gravitational wave detection of black hole
mergers by LIGO, and the `picture' of the M87 supermassive black hole by the EHT
collaboration, confirm this prediction. In one part of the project, the PI will
consider the Penrose inequality conjecture with angular momentum, which aims to
clarify the relationship between the total energy, horizon area, and angular
momentum of a rotating black hole. The PI will also work on the Horowitz-Myers
conjecture, which would build on the anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory
(AdS/CFT) correspondence, a breakthrough in modern physics relating quantum
field theories and supergravity theory. The project will provide opportunities
for undergraduate students to work on research projects in the mathematics of
general relativity, with an emphasis on the recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups. Outreach activities hosted at Clark University will
encourage local high school students to explore careers in STEM.

In recent joint work with M. Khuri, H. Kunduri, and S.-T. Yau, the PI has
studied singular harmonic maps to negatively curved manifolds and inverse
curvature flows on Riemannian manifolds to prove several geometric inequalities
involving (total or quasi-local) energy, angular momentum, horizon area, and
charges of rotating black holes in general relativity. These results provide the
foundation to address the Penrose inequality conjecture with angular momentum.
On the other hand, in collaboration with P.-K. Hung and M. Khuri, the PI proved
a positive energy theorem for asymptotically hyperboloidal initial data sets
with toroidal infinity and smooth non-empty boundary using the new level set
technique of spacetime harmonic functions. The PI will modify this technique to
deal with complete asymptotically hyperbolic manifolds with toroidal infinity,
which is the setting of the Horowitz-Myers conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.