* 2316804
* Equipment: WHOI SSSE Proposal Sonardyne USBL Repair and Spare Unit R/V Atlantis
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Sarah Fuller, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2025
* USD 211,007.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation (OI) on R/V Atlantis, a
274’ general purpose research vessel operated by Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) as part of the U.S. Academic Research Fleet (ARF) which is
scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
The vessel is owned by the U.S. Navy, has state-of-the-art instrumentation and
supports all disciplines of oceanographic research. The vessel works in all the
world’s oceans supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies.
R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the
human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep
Submergence Facility (NDSF).

With this proposal, WHOI provides technical descriptions and rationale for the
acquisition of the following OI: 1) Sonardyne USBL Repair and Spare Unit – R/V
Atlantis $211,007

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.