* 2316502
* RII Track-2 FEC: Center for Climate Conscious Agricultural Technologies (CCAT)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Srinivas Janaswamy, South Dakota State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Casonya Johnson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,000,001.00

Climate-friendly and sustainable crop nutrition solutions are required to boost
rural farms' economic and environmental sustainability. Microbial fertilizers
offer an easily adoptable alternative to synthetic fertilizers that have high
production costs, contribute to greenhouse gas emissions, eutrophication,
negative human and environmental health, and have adverse socio-economic
impacts. The Center for Climate-Conscious Agricultural Technologies (CCAT), in a
new partnership with researchers from South Dakota State University, North
Dakota State University, the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, and
Sitting Bull College, will stimulate multidisciplinary research in the Dakotas
to develop microbial fertilizers for successful crop nutrient management and
collaborate with crop producers in Native American reservations and underserved
parts of the Dakotas on adoption of such climate-friendly technologies. The
center will benefit K-12, undergraduate education, and graduate education by
adding new course materials and introducing interdisciplinary research in
classrooms. The project’s workforce development activities will synergistically
aid (i) establishing an education-to-workforce pipeline for students, (ii)
providing multidisciplinary training for careers in industry, research centers,
government agencies, and academia, and (iii) strengthening research capability
and technical expertise of early career professionals in the participating
institutions.

The primary source of nitrogen for cereal crops is the addition of ammonia and
or nitrate fertilizer. However, the continuous use of chemical fertilizers to
increase food production is unsustainable as they consume nearly 1% of the
world’s energy and contribute to 3-5% of greenhouse gas production. The Center
for Climate-Conscious Agricultural Technologies (CCAT) aims to mitigate the
effects of chemical fertilizers production on climate change by adopting
microbial biofertilizers as an alternative. By leveraging genomics information,
the CCAT team develops novel aptamer-based identification and isolation to
obtain co-habituating consortia of microbes with nitrogen-fixing, carbon-fixing,
and phosphorous-solubilizing capabilities from local relevant soil and crop
samples. The research will screen bacteria in the rhizosphere for P
solubilization, mineral dissolution, and N2/CO2 fixation, develop methods for
mass production and encapsulation of synthetic consortia, evaluate the
establishment and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions under field conditions,
and model environmental and economic feasibility. We will collaborate with
producers from rural disadvantaged communities to determine preferences and
enhance their ability to implement microbial fertilizers and increase farm
profitability. The project will build a thriving team that will contribute to a
continuum of climate-friendly solutions for crop nutrition, develop a well-
equipped future-ready workforce, and positively impact the socio-economic growth
of rural Dakotas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.