* 2316862
* LEAPS-MPS: Where galaxies keep their cool in the heat: A Pathfinder to detect cool cosmic gas filaments and their effects on galaxy properties in clusters.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* charlotte welker, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 223,210.00

On the largest scales, galaxies are found to be arranged along vast networks of
filamentary structures, commonly referred to as the cosmic web, that evolved
from minute density fluctuations in the very early universe. Recent work by a
team including the principal investigator (PI) concluded that cool, low-
turbulence gas can flow along the cosmic web and penetrate deep into galaxy
clusters and shield galaxies from the hot intra-cluster medium, effectively
prolonging their ability to form stars. This research program will allow (1) a
more precise characterization of the filamentary "shielding" mechanism on the
dynamics and star formation activity of cluster galaxies, with the added
potential to (2) indirectly trace the cool gas streams themselves. This program
will provide unique research and professional experiences for at least six
undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in STEM, with each student
acting as a mentor and role model for another student at an earlier career
stage.

The PI will conduct a follow-up pilot study combining a completed integral-field
spectroscopic (IFS) survey of 3,068 low redshift galaxies (SAMI) with mock IFS
data cubes for 150,000 galaxies generated using the Horizon-AGN cosmological
simulation. The PI and her students will extend the pipeline used to create mock
IFS image cubes for simulated galaxies occupying filaments and cluster
environments to include newly developed quenching diagnostics. These will be
used in conjunction with standard IFS measures of galactic dynamics (e.g., maps
of rotational velocity, velocity dispersion, and rotation asymmetry) to find
observational signatures best suited to trace galaxy-filament interactions,
assess how galaxies are affected by their proximity to intra-cluster filaments,
and determine how the merging status of filaments might influence the results.
This LEAPS-MPS research program promises to make a significant contribution
regarding the interplay between galaxies and the cosmic web.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.