* 2316622
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Coherent Control of Nonlinear Schrodinger Dynamics in the Presence of Uncertainty
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jimmie Adriazola, Adriazola, Jimmie
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Jimmie Adriazola is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broaden participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Adriazola, supports his research project entitled
“Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Coherent Control of Nonlinear Schrodinger
Dynamics in the Presence of Uncertainty” under the mentorship of a sponsoring
scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is Southern Methodist
University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Alejandro Aceves. Dr. Adriazola
will study two projects with a common theme: understanding and controlling wave
dynamics governed by nonlinear Schrodinger-type equations. The first of these
projects involves optimal control theory applied to coherent manipulations of
stochastic Gross-Pitaevskii equations, and the second involves a study of field
operators governed by a quantum nonlinear Schrodinger equation modeling
propagation of quantized light. Dr. Adriazola will be an active mentor to
undergraduate and graduate students from groups traditionally underrepresented
in STEM, both through teaching and through involvement in the community. He will
participate in and learn from workshops and conferences focused in bringing
diversity to the STEM community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.