* 2316305
* Collaborative Research: III: Small: Physics Guided Graph Networks for Modeling Water Dynamics in Freshwater Ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xiaowei Jia, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,993.00

Fresh water plays an important role for the global economic, food, water, and
energy networks, but freshwater ecosystems continue to degrade due to pressures
from increasing demands for freshwater ecosystem services and a shifting
climate. Timely monitoring of water properties can provide useful information
for sound policy and management decisions to address important water-related
challenges such as droughts, floods, and water security. Moreover, the
information of water properties such as water temperature and streamflow can
help better understand relevant biogeochemical and ecological processes in the
water cycle. The recent investment on large-scale water data repositories
provides a tremendous opportunity for using machine learning to capture complex
water dynamics over space and time. In particular, graph neural networks have
shown great promise for modeling interactions amongst streams in large river
basins. However, in the absence of underlying physical knowledge, direct
applications of existing graph-based models remain limited in capturing complex
water-related processes, modeling the shift of data distribution caused by human
infrastructure or changing climate, and learning from a paucity of data samples.
To overcome these limitations, this project will explore a deep coupling of
graph network models with physical knowledge to model complex, non-stationary,
poorly observed water dynamics in freshwater ecosystems. This project will
provide research opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds, and the results of this project will be incorporated into
curriculum development.

This project aims to develop new physics-guided graph network models by
designing new model architectures, learning strategies, and initialization
methods. This project will also explore different ways to leverage physical
knowledge, both directly by integrating physics from known mathematical
equations, and indirectly by making use of the knowledge embodied in existing
physics-based models. In particular, there are three innovations that are
pursued in this project. First, new graph-based architectures will be developed
to model the complex nature of physical objects and the dynamic interactions
between physical processes. Second, new graph-based continual learning
strategies will be investigated to model long term system evolution caused by
newly added infrastructure and changing climate. Third, new model initialization
methods will be developed by transferring knowledge from existing physics-based
models to the proposed graph network models to facilitate learning physically
consistent patterns in data-scarce scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.