* 2316905
* LEAPS-MPS: Time-Discrete Regularized Variational Model for Brittle Fracture in Novel Strain-Limiting Elastic Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mallikarjunaiah Muddamallappa, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 224,848.00

The study of evolving fractures in brittle elastic solids has been and still is
a challenging topic for applied mathematicians, physicists, and engineers, and
its interest to the archival literature continues to increase rapidly. The
instantaneous impact and growth of brittle fractures are inherently dangerous to
a variety of mechanical systems such as large structures, ships, pressurized
airplane cabins, and orthopedic implants in the human body. Therefore, a
fundamental understanding of the failure of materials due to fracture is
essential for applications. A central theme of this project is the development
of models using novel implicit constitutive relations applicable to brittle
fracture in elastic solids. Developing convergent numerical schemes for the new
fracture theory and simulation of evolving fractures is another crucial
objective of this research. The project will provide research training
opportunities in mathematics and scientific computing for postdoctoral
associates and graduate students.

In the last few decades, substantial progress has been made in formulating
mathematically well-posed models for quasi-static and dynamic propagation of
fractures in ideally elastic solids. However, many of these approaches use a
linear constitutive relation which admits a well-documented logically
inconsistent singularity. An alternative approach is to use constitutive
relations which limit the strain values uniformly in the entire material body.
The overarching objective of this project is to use the latter to study the
behavior of elastic materials and to predict experimentally observed phenomena.
The investigator will develop a fully discrete finite element method for quasi-
static as well as elastodynamical fracture evolution. Both will be formulated as
a constrained energy minimization of a regularized variational model consisting
of two terms, one representing the nonlinear elastic bulk energy defined by
virtue of strain-limiting constitutive relationship, the other the surface
energy of a fracture. Another objective of this project is to develop parallel
finite element solvers for the regularized phase-field fracture model and to
analyze the numerical solutions. The computational framework will be tested on
classical benchmark cases in solid mechanics and convergence analysis will be
performed using a manufactured solution. The mathematical models and the finite
element techniques emerging from this research will have broader applicability
in computational mechanics, for example they will be of practical interest in
the study of fractures in high-strength materials such as gum metals and
titanium alloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.