* 2316129
* Travel: Supporting Students and Early Career Scientists in Quaternary Research: the 2023 USNC/INQUA Congress Travel Fellowship Program
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Ourania Kosti, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This travel award supports U.S. student and early career scientist participation
in the 21st INQUA Congress, which will be held in Rome, Italy, on July 14-20,
2023. The INQUA Congress presents scientists from around the world with the
quadrennial opportunity to present their original research and discuss the
latest developments across a wide range of Quaternary disciplines. The
USNC/INQUA will competitively award at least 10 travel fellowships at up to
$2,000 each for U.S. citizens or permanent resident graduate students and early
career scientists working on Quaternary research at U.S. institutions presenting
papers as first authors at the 21st INQUA Congress and organize mentoring
activities for the cohort before and during the Congress. The travel award
selection process will aim at increasing the active participation of those who
have been traditionally underserved and underrepresented in the Earth sciences
and support a diverse spectrum of participants from multiple institutions.

The critical and interrelated goals of this program are to advance the careers,
enable new collaboration opportunities, and increase the visibility of young
U.S. students and early career Quaternary scientists who would not be able to
otherwise attend this Congress. Helping awardees present their research at the
INQUA Congress gives them the opportunity to learn about cutting-edge research
and hear comments about their research from people trained in other parts of the
world. These exchanges can also foster collaborations with members of the travel
award cohort and/or with international scientists, interactions that will, in
turn, serve to advance U.S. Quaternary science. This travel award is co-funded
by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program, the Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology Program, and the P4CLIMATE Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.