* 2316865
* CIF: Small: Ubiquitous RF Sensing with Smart Metasurfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hongbin Li, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,986.00

Radio frequency (RF) sensing is becoming increasingly pervasive due to the
proliferation of wireless communications. Remarkably, the upcoming WiFi standard
IEEE802.11bf will enable wireless devices to function as radars to sense the
surroundings and determine the position of nearby objects. Most RF sensors,
however, are unable to look around the corner and locate non-line-of-sight
targets. To address this problem, a commonly employed approach involves
deploying multiple RF transmitters and receivers across the surveillance area,
so that the target can be observed by at least one transmitter-receiver pair.
Unfortunately, such a distributed RF sensing system is bulky, costly,
operationally burdensome, and environmentally unfriendly due to excessive
radiation. To overcome these shortcomings, this project aims to develop an
alternative distributed RF sensing paradigm that can effectively “look” around
the corner by leveraging a reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS), which is a
thin planar structure comprising numerous small low-cost metamaterial elements
that can be independently adjusted to control the reflection of incident RF
signals. Like wallpaper, RIS can cover parts of buildings, walls, and ceilings,
allowing RF engineers to proactively customize the radio environment based on
specific needs. This work will advance fundamental theory and practical methods
for RF sensing aided by RIS. Research outcomes of this project will have the
potential to be integrated with future wireless networks, empowering service
providers to offer intelligent RF sensing and communication services to their
customers.

The objective of this project is to establish a systematic signal processing
framework for ubiquitous RF sensing aided by RIS in distributed environments. In
these settings, the transmitter and receiver may be co-located or spatially
distributed, with RISs deployed to assist in target illumination and/or
observation. The proposed framework encompasses both active sensing, where a
dedicated transmitter is jointly optimized as a part of the system, and passive
sensing, which employs ambient wireless sources, such as cellular and WiFi
signals, to probe the environment. The research efforts are structured into
three thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on system design and optimization, taking into
account multipath and asynchronous propagation inherent in the distributed
sensing system. Thrust 2 develops training-efficient channel estimation
techniques, including methods to estimate the cascade channel that serially
links the transmitter, RIS, targets, and receiver, as well as approaches for
estimating the statistics of the cascade channel. Lastly, Thrust 3 explores RF
sensing using RIS with a multi-layer structure, which provides additional RF
signal processing capabilities, while simultaneously reducing hardware
complexity and energy consumption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.