* 2316155
* The Ethics of Randomization in Social Science Experiments
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Tara Slough, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 12/31/2025
* USD 399,724.00

Over the past twenty years, randomized experiments have become increasingly
common in the social sciences. They involve randomly assigning research
participants to an experimental group or condition. While randomization can be a
measure for improving data quality, it is also a means of distributing harms and
benefits of those experimental conditions to research participants and their
communities. This project will examine the question of when it is ethical to
determine through random assignment which participants receive a given treatment
in social science experiments. By seeking to answer this question, the project
will generate new tools for social scientists who are considering randomized
experiments. The goal of these tools is to offer greater protections to
individuals and communities that are participants in research experiments.

This project consists of three research objectives. First, a set of formal
(mathematical) models will be developed to analyze the welfare consequences of
random and non-random methods for research participant treatment assignment.
While formalization is rare in the literature on the ethics of human subjects
research, these models offer a new, more direct mapping between experimental
design decisions regarding how treatment is assigned and the potential ethical
implications of these decisions. The research team will create models that are
informed by the expected harms and benefits to research participants. The second
research objective is to measure anticipated benefits and harms of social
science or policy interventions by adapting and field-testing methods that
reveal prospective research participants’ expectations. This testing will occur
in the context of two field experiments. The tools developed through the project
will enable researchers to measure expected harms and benefits when designing
experiments. The final research objective takes both tools, the formal models
and the measures of expected harms and benefits, to create new pedagogical
materials that incorporate ethics formally into experimental research design.

This project is funded through the ER2 program by the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.