* 2316271
* RII Track-2 FEC: Community-Driven Coastal Climate Research &amp; Solutions for the Resilience of New England Coastal Populations
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* David Reidmiller, Brown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,999,924.00

The "Community-Driven Coastal Climate Research & Solutions (3CRS)" project is a
significant and timely initiative that addresses the pressing issue of climate
change in low-lying, working waterfront communities in New England. These
communities, which are deeply intertwined with ocean resources, are
disproportionately vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. With
large parts of these communities, including critical infrastructure, projected
to be increasingly impacted by nuisance flooding and potentially permanently
underwater by the end of the century, the need for climate adaptation strategies
is urgent. The project's importance lies in its focus on developing a scalable
and transferable framework for such strategies, thereby enhancing coastal
resilience. Specifically, the project aims at developing the knowledge, data,
modeling, and human network infrastructure to support a New England Hub for
coastal climate resilience that is community-driven. This aligns directly with
the NSF's mission to promote the progress of science to advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare. The 3CRS Hub seeks to address and explore solutions for
the intersect of fundamental issues of poverty, limited healthcare access,
inadequate infrastructure, and limited climate change adaptation capacity in
waterfront communities. Beyond addressing these immediate challenges, the
project also holds potential for broader societal benefits. It aims to advance
the field of climate resilience, support education and diversity through the
mentorship of early career scientists, and benefit society by increasing the
resilience of communities that play a crucial role in the nation's economy and
cultural heritage.

The 3CRS project is designed to tackle three key research challenges for climate
resilience planning. The first challenge is to identify and measure dynamic
changes in human health, wellbeing, habitability, environment, and other climate
vulnerabilities. This involves a comprehensive understanding of the complex
interplay between climate change and various socio-economic factors that
influence community resilience. The second challenge is to downscale climate
models outputs and information to the community level and project the impacts of
climate resilience for planners. This requires sophisticated modeling techniques
(e.g. dynamical and AI-based) that can translate large-scale climate models
projections into actionable information at the community level. The third
challenge is to expand the capacity to incorporate data, knowledge, and expert
networks into community resilience planning processes. This involves building
robust systems for data collection, analysis, and dissemination, as well as
fostering strong relationships with expert networks. To address these
challenges, the project will develop a Community Knowledge Collective, which
will co-produce three primary knowledge streams: observational data, community-
driven metrics of resilience, and climate adaptation narratives. A novel tool,
the New England-wide Coastal Hazards Analysis Modeling and Prediction System
(NE-CHAMP), will be deployed to enable communities to visualize and analyze the
impacts of present and future climate on critical infrastructure, health, socio-
economic, and other community-driven resilience metrics. In the final phase of
the project, a series of shared resilience roadmaps will be produced that
digitally document the transferable processes for developing coastal adaptation
strategies, thereby providing a blueprint for other communities facing similar
challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.