* 2316269
* IntBIO Collaborative Research: Assessing drivers of the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis at continental scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Claudia Solis-Lemus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2027
* USD 239,239.00

Nitrogen is an essential nutrient for all life on earth. It is also the most
abundant element in the atmosphere, but most organisms cannot access it from the
air directly. Only certain specialized microbes have the ability to convert
nitrogen in the atmosphere into a biologically useful form in a process known as
nitrogen fixation. Some of these microbes are free-living, but most live in a
close symbiotic association within the roots of plants, exchanging nitrogen for
carbon. This nitrogen-fixing symbiosis is a central component of the global
nitrogen cycle, and it is central to agricultural systems because nitrogen is
often the limiting factor for crop growth. It is therefore imperative to
understand how nitrogen-fixing plant-bacterial partnerships form in nature and
how they respond to an environment filled with challenges and in constant flux.
The purpose of this project is to provide a data-intensive framework to learn
how plants and bacteria choose their partners and how this choice influences and
responds to surrounding species, soil, and climate. A second purpose of the
project is to train students from groups underrepresented in science. Students
will be prepared for the data-intensive careers now needed across STEM
disciplines using an innovative mentorship program and interdisciplinary
research including fieldwork, laboratory work, and computational biology.

The project will investigate the diversity of nitrogen-fixing bacteria and other
microbes associating with plant roots across the North American continent using
NSF-sponsored ecological monitoring resources through NEON (the National
Ecological Observatory Network). At each of 45 NEON sites, environmental data
will be combined with data on the nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. Specifically,
investigators will sample the microbiome in the soil and root nodules, and will
assay leaf isotopes to determine the level of function of nitrogen-fixing
symbionts. Leveraging data from these different sources, the PIs will be able to
determine whether microorganisms and plant partners are each limited by the same
environmental factors, such as aridity. They will also be able to determine the
extent to which choosiness of plant or microbe partners limit the extent of the
association. In addition, by examining patterns in the tree of life, the PIs
will be able to infer whether highly specific partnerships have persisted across
evolutionary time. Finally, models will be used to address synthetic questions
across all data sources. For example, a model can test the prediction that arid
environments favor highly specific associations, in which both microbes and
plants choose specific partners in those stressful settings.

This project is jointly funded by the BIO Emerging Frontiers Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.