* 2316538
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Understanding Fukaya categories through Homological Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Catherine Cannizzo, Cannizzo, Catherine Kendall Asaro
* Fellowship Award
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Dr. Catherine Cannizzo is awarded a National Science Foundation Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Ascending Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (NSF MPS-Ascend) to
conduct a program of research, education, and activities related to broadening
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This fellowship supports the
research project entitled "Understanding Fukaya categories through Homological
Mirror Symmetry". The project activities will be conducted at the host
institution, University of California, Berkeley, under the mentorship of
Professor David Nadler. The PI will use the Fukaya category and homological
mirror symmetry to study the symplectic geometry of Landau-Ginzburg models,
including algebraic implications from microlocal sheaf theory and automorphism
groups. Other projects include studying the A-infinity structure of the Fukaya
category as well as regularity in its structure map computations. To broaden
participation by groups underrepresented in STEM, the PI will build on previous
experience co-facilitating a virtual reading group, part of a call to action
called Symplectic Group Action, centered around Black Lives Matter in
mathematics teaching and advocating for students of color. She will facilitate a
similar reading group with department members at the host institution. She will
volunteer at the Expanding Your Horizons conference at UC Berkeley, one of
TechBridge Girlsâ€™ STEM events for 6th-8th grade students, whose mission is to
increase participation of BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and people of color) girls
in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.