* 2316595
* LEAPS-MPS: Simultaneous Multiaxis Atom Interferometry for Inertial Sensing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Xuejian Wu, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,776.00

Matter-wave interferometers, using photon recoil momentum to split, reflect, and
combine matter waves, are precise tools for measuring gravitational and inertial
forces. Compared with classical inertial sensors, quantum inertial sensors based
on matter-wave interferometry have shown unprecedented sensitivity and long-term
stability in measuring accelerations and rotations. The state-of-the-art quantum
inertial sensors are limited by the insensitivity to full axes of the inertial
reference frame, the slow data update rates, and the vulnerability to
vibrational noise. In this project, Dr. Wu will demonstrate matter-wave
interferometers that are capable of simultaneously measuring multiple axes of
accelerations or rotations, with the potential to advance quantum inertial
sensors for future in-field inertial sensing and navigation. Dr. Wu will use
laser cooling to trap rubidium atoms inside a pyramidal mirror and use multiaxis
Raman laser pulses to carry out multiaxis interferometry of the cold atoms.
Through this project, Dr. Wu will develop methods to cool the atoms inside
pyramidal mirrors, split matter waves into multiple superposition states, and
detect the superposition states. Dr. Wu will also implement educational
activities to encourage students from underrepresented groups to join
experimental physics research, teach them hands-on lab skills, and prepare them
for the ongoing second quantum revolution.

In this project, Dr. Wu will develop an approach and build an apparatus to
demonstrate four simultaneous atom interferometers for measuring multiaxis
accelerations and rotations. Dr. Wu will create a cold rubidium cloud via a
magneto-optical trap inside a pyramidal mirror, and then split, reflect, and
combine the atomic cloud using simultaneous Raman transitions formed by the
incident laser beam and its reflections from the pyramidal mirror. Dr. Wu aims
to achieve three research objectives: (1) demonstrating sub-recoil temperature
cooling inside a pyramidal mirror; (2) demonstrating simultaneous Doppler-
sensitive Raman transitions formed by the incident laser beam and its pyramidal
reflections; (3) detecting multiple atom interferometers through an optical
nanofiber-based imaging system. Additionally, Dr. Wu will promote students from
underrepresented groups participating in experimental atomic physics research by
developing a quantum sensing course, establishing an open-source Makerspace, and
creating research positions for undergraduates and high school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.