* 2316878
* LEAPS-MPS: Quantum Simulation with Classical Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Xiaofeng Qian, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,994.00

Quantum science and engineering holds immense potential for transforming modern
technology by offering more efficient and secure devices for computing,
communication, sensing, and more. However, quantum systems often face challenges
such as fragility, limited controllability, and high costs. While the search for
optimal quantum platforms to address these issues is crucial, it is also
strategically important to explore alternative macroscopic classical physical
systems that are robust, easily controllable, and cost-effective for simulating
quantum-like tasks. This LEAPS-MPS award aims to investigate analogies between
microscopic quantum systems and macroscopic classical light fields, leveraging
these analogies to simulate various quantum tasks. This research will advance
the field of quantum simulation and classical coherence optics. Furthermore, the
analogy between quantum and classical optics will contribute to the development
of novel methods for teaching quantum physics, employing visualizable optical
systems to enhance the efficiency of quantum education for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students.

This LEAPS-MPS award aims to support research activities focused on simulating
quantum tasks using classical light beams. This research is grounded in the
emerging recognition that classical wave systems, such as classical light, share
many important properties with quantum systems that are essential for quantum
tasks. These properties include vector spaces, vector superpositions, coherence,
entanglement, and more. By developing novel approaches to information processing
within light structures, this research seeks to enhance our ability to
manipulate the multi-dimensionality and multi-party nature of light in a
coherent manner. The primary outcome of this project will be the establishment
of new physical platforms and protocols for simulating and realizing quantum-
like tasks using classical light. Leveraging the inherent advantages of
classical light, such as robustness, ease of control, and low cost, this effort
will pave the way for the practical implementation of quantum information
science using classical analogs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.