* 2316787
* Planning: Track 1: Engineering WISE (Wellness through Integrated Support and Engagement)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Renee Kaufmann, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,663.00

This planning grant will allow for the development of a blueprint for a Center
for Equity in Engineering, the Engineering WISE Center, that will drive cultural
change in the College of Engineering (COE) at the University of Kentucky (UK)
through prioritization of Wellness through Integrated Support and Engagement.
Mental health differentially impacts students who are traditionally underserved
in engineering. For instance, sexual minority, first generation, Black and
Latinx students perceive that mental difficulties impact their academics more
frequently than their engineering peers. Thus, we must drive cultural change to
create a supportive and equitable engineering environment that prioritizes and
supports student mental health. The Center Mission Statement is: to create
equitable and inclusive practices aimed at enhancing student well-being and
improving sense of belonging within a COE. The Center will increase access to
resources that support student mental health and ensure students receive
positive messages about their identities and challenges. Relationships are an
important tool in meeting this goal, which is to help a diverse community of
engineering students thrive through their engineering training and beyond. While
the Center will broadly impact all engineering students, activities will be
designed to improve mental health and sense of belonging outcomes for students
traditionally underserved in engineering. Additionally, the planning grant will
ensure that the Center activities are transferable to outside institutions,
including those that serve students who are historically underserved not only in
engineering but higher education more broadly. This work will provide insight
into how to create supportive and inclusive environments for all students,
allowing students to thrive through their engineering training and beyond.

This planning grant will develop, identify and refine activities for a Center
for Equity in Engineering focused around supporting student mental health and
wellness through five concurrent stages: 1) Refine Center activities established
based on prior research, 2) Identify novel Center activities, 3) Integrate
activities into existing institutional resources, 4) Ensure transfer of
activities to outside institutions, and 5) Collect baseline data and develop a
plan to evaluate Center outcomes. Participatory research methods will be used
with key engineering stakeholders (e.g., students, faculty, administrators) to
define the problem of mental health in engineering, identify priority areas and
develop interventions for integration into the future Center. Faculty and
student interviews will facilitate understanding of how faculty communication
can positively (and negatively) impact mental health culture and sense of
belonging in the classroom. This will allow for the development of tailored and
specific communication training for engineering faculty that is informed by the
engineering student experience. Finally, focus groups with students, faculty,
staff and administrators will guide strategies for Center structure, function
and branding to enhance student engagement. An internal advisory board will
ensure that the Center activities complement and integrate with existing campus
mental health and wellness resources. Further, an external advisory board
consists of faculty from diverse institutions with experience in research on
student mental health and supporting pathways for diverse students through STEM.
This external advisory board will ensure that activities developed for the
Center meet the needs of students that are traditionally underserved in
engineering across diverse institutional contexts. This planning grant will
result in a blueprint for the Engineering WISE Center that will maximize impact
on mental health culture in engineering (with a focus on students who are
underserved in engineering) that is feasible not only at UK, but also outside
institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.