* 2316650
* National Historical Geographic Information System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Steven Manson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,249,705.00

This project will enhance and expand the IPUMS National Historical Geographic
Information System (NHGIS). NHGIS is the nation's most comprehensive source of
geographic information for American people and places from 1790 to today. The
project will add new data and tools to NHGIS to support broader, more effective
studies of how populations and places have changed over time and space.
Extending key data products back to 1970 and forward to include new 2020 data
will enable researchers to investigate patterns and dynamics in population and
housing characteristics at an exceptionally fine geographic resolution,
leveraging data spanning over half a century. Providing new options for
customizing data requests and accessing contextual information will streamline
data access, interpretation, and analysis by connecting researchers more rapidly
to the information they need. Redoubling outreach efforts will ensure that a
diverse audience is aware of the scientific potential of NHGIS and that users
have the support needed to apply relevant NHGIS resources toward productive
research ends. These efforts will broaden the impact of NHGIS by making it both
more powerful and more accessible, advancing a wide array of academic research
as well as social science education, journalism, policy research from local to
national levels, and private sector research. The project also will educate and
train undergraduate and graduate students and participate in a program to
recruit students from diverse backgrounds.

NHGIS provides a unique laboratory for the spatial analysis of economic and
social processes and offers the empirical foundation needed for developing and
testing models of societal change. Over five years, this project will implement
three major improvements to NHGIS: (1) Database expansion. The project will
expand opportunities for high-impact research on small-area population change by
producing new digital boundary files for 1970 census blocks and generating
geographic crosswalks that link 1970 data to current census units. The project
also will update the NHGIS collection to continue enabling linkages between the
past and present by ingesting new 2020 census data and incorporating them into
time series tables. These advances will allow for direct, reliable comparisons
between census and American Community Survey small-area data from 1970 through
2026. (2) Data access and product enhancements. The project will add several new
options for customizing the geographic extent of data extracts and for obtaining
contextual information with data extracts. (3) User support, outreach, and
dissemination. The project will sustain and expand NHGIS outreach efforts,
offering user support and workshops, and creating blog posts and visualizations
that highlight unique or underutilized NHGIS data on subjects of interest to a
broad audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.