* 2316667
* LEAPS-MPS: Machine Learning-guided Identification of Mechanically Stabilizing Solid-state Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mingjian Wen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,860.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Lithium-ion batteries are playing an increasingly important role in our daily
lives, powering devices like smartphones, tablets, and electric vehicles.
Current batteries, however, have major limitations such as safety issues and the
need for frequent recharging. To meet the growing demand for energy storage,
longer-lasting batteries that can store more energy are needed. A promising
solution is to replace the graphite used in the negative electrode of batteries
with lithium metal, which has the potential to store about 10 times more energy.
However, a major challenge with lithium metal is the formation of
dendritesâ€”small, branch-like structures that grow over time and can cause short
circuits, leading to battery failure. This project aims to understand how to
prevent dendrite formation by studying the mechanical properties of materials
and identifying electrolytes with superior mechanical characteristics. The
research is conducted at the University of Houston, a major Hispanic-Serving
Institution, which provides a fertile ground for broadening participation from
underrepresented groups. Graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited
for this project and professionally trained in the new cross-disciplinary area
of big data, artificial intelligence, and computational materials science, which
is highly relevant to national economic and scientific advancement.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project aims to discover solid materials with tailored mechanical
properties to be used as electrolytes in all-solid-state batteries with lithium
metal anode. Replacing the liquid electrolyte in commercial Li-ion batteries
with solid-state electrolytes is considered the most promising approach to
suppress dendrites due to the superior mechanical properties of solid materials.
However, despite extensive research efforts, no solid material that can
completely suppress dendrites has been successfully identified. There are
several gaps in the current understanding of dendrite suppression, including (i)
limited understanding of the criteria on mechanical properties, (ii) lack of
tools to accurately probe the full mechanical behaviors of solid materials, and
(iii) lack of a systematic approach to identifying new solid materials as
candidate electrolytes. Based on recent theoretical and experimental work, the
PI hypothesizes that mechanical anisotropy, characterized by the directional
dependence of elastic properties, plays a significant role at the solid-solid
interface between Li metal anode and a solid material, and can thus be leveraged
to design solid-state electrolytes that suppress the formation of dendrites. The
project embraces the principles of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) and
establishes a unique data-driven approach for the production and analysis of
anisotropic elastic properties of materials and the investigation of their
effects on Li dendrite nucleation and growth. Specifically, the project will
address the gaps by (i) developing uncertainty-quantified machine learning
models to predict the full elastic tensors and thus anisotropic behaviors of
materials and (ii) conducting high-throughput screening to identify mechanically
stabilizing solid-state electrolytes. This machine learning-guided computational
screening of Li-containing materials is an efficient and effective approach to
identifying promising candidates for further experimental verification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.