* 2316906
* LEAPS-MPS: Fluorous Photocatalysts for the Activation of Organic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lorenzo Mosca, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,724.00

In this project, co-funded by the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and managed by the Chemistry Division, Professor Lorenzo Mosca and his
students at the University of Rhode Island will perform studies to advance the
applications of organic photocatalysts in functional group transformations and
C–H bond activation of organic substrates. Efficient and robust photocatalysts
will be needed to perform chemical transformations in greener, more economical
ways. Such photocatalysts will be both resistant to photodegradation and
amenable to easy recovery and purification. Professor Mosca and his students
will design and synthesize fluorous photocatalysts with absorption spanning the
visible and near-UV visible wavelength ranges, study the photophysical and
electrochemical performance thereof in both fluorous and non-fluorous
environments, and demonstrate their successful application in organic
transformations. This research will generate new insights into the design of
robust and recyclable photocatalysts for more efficient organic syntheses. Prof.
Mosca and his students will perform outreach and provide mentorship to students
in regional high schools serving underrepresented groups from urban and suburban
neighborhoods, with a focus on engagement of the students with STEM disciplines
and on improving retention rates in lower-level college classes.

Professor Mosca and his research group will prepare and study fluorous organic
photocatalysts with the goal of improving their resistance to photodegradation
and photobleaching, increasing recovery of the intact photocatalyst from
reaction mixtures, and lengthening the usable lifespan of the photocatalyst.
Comprehensive photophysical and electrochemical characterization of the prepared
photocatalysts will inform the design of successive generations of
photocatalysts, enabling selective organic transformations. These studies will
constitute a critical step in pursuing the selective tuning of catalytic
activity in fluorous and non-fluorous phases, whereby competing reaction
pathways can be enhanced or suppressed by using different reaction environments.
Two commonly competing reaction pathways for an organic compound are photoredox
reactions, involving reduction or oxidation of the substrate, and atom transfer
reactions with no net charge generation, each with different reaction product
outcomes. Prof. Mosca and his students will demonstrate the use of fluorous
photocatalysts for the tuning of organic functional group transformations as
well as C–H bond activation reactions by leveraging the properties of fluorous
phases alone or in combination with traditional organic and aqueous phases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.