* 2316651
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Jet-Energy Loss Measurements with the sPHENIX Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Anthony Hodges, Hodges, Anthony
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Anthony Hodges is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by groups underrepresented in STEM. This
fellowship to Dr. Hodges supports his research project entitled " Postdoctoral
Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Jet-Energy Loss Measurements with the sPHENIX Detector",
under the mentorship of a sponsoring scientist. The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) and the
sponsoring scientist is Dr. Anne Sickles.

Dr. Hodges will pursue a research project to better understand the nuclear
strong force and Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) at extreme temperatures by
measuring properties of the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP) produced in high-energy
collisions between large nuclei. The studies in this proposal will utilize a
new, state-of-the-art particle detector known as sPHENIX, which will begin
collecting data from nuclear collisions produced by the Relativistic Heavy-Ion
Collider at Brookhaven National Laboratory in the summer of 2023. Hodges will
have a wide range of outreach activities including mentoring high school
students through the Grainger College of Engineeringâ€™s Young Scholars (GEnYuS)
program, engaging in recruitment through the National Society of Black
Physicists (NSBP), kick-start sponsorship opportunities for other minority
science individuals, and engage in local efforts at the Long Island Science
Center STEAM Museum to elevate under-represented minorities in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.