* 2316364
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Phenotypes of the Anthropocene: integrating the consequences of sensory stressors across biological scales
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Sara Lipshutz, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 08/31/2028
* USD 792,127.00

Animal responses to environmental stressors ultimately influence survival and
reproduction, and some animals are better prepared to face challenges than
others. This research examines physiological and behavioral responses to sensory
pollution caused by human activities to predict population vulnerability across
different species. The project will explicitly link the effects of light and
noise pollution on avian physiology, behavior, and reproductive success in a
landscape where these stimuli are isolated from other urban features. The
interdisciplinary research team includes experts in physiology, behavior, and
ecology who will quantitatively evaluate connections between the individual and
population, advancing our knowledge of the effects of human activity on nature
across multiple fields. The team embodies the IntBIO program mission by
incorporating different sub-disciplines and levels of biological organization
using a holistic, integrated approach. The research is the first to rigorously
evaluate and link physiological, behavioral, and fitness responses to sensory
pollution, and does so across several species and multiple sensory stressors for
greater generalizability. The project aims to (i) reveal whether noise and light
pollution consistently select for a similar phenotype across six bird species;
(ii) identify generalizable relationships between physiological, behavioral, and
ecological responses, if they exist, and, if not, (iii) unveil key differences
among species that underlie sensitivity to these widespread forms of global
change. In doing so, the project will build a testable framework for
generalizing avian response to human-caused sensory pollution, which can be used
to predict whether species will fail or thrive in an increasingly bright and
noisy human-dominated world. Project impacts have important societal benefits to
conservation and education, with efforts spanning (a) culturally responsive
training of underrepresented minorities in STEM to become integrated, early-
career biologists, (b) developing and disseminating outreach materials via
hands-on outreach events and presentations across large networks, and (c)
informing policy through collaboration with the National Park Service and the
International Dark-Sky Association.

This project addresses three integrative questions that require expertise from
different sub-disciplines to answer: 1) Do sensory stressors shape a
generalizable phenotype? 2) Do phenotypes of behavior and physiology affect
ultimate outcomes of fitness? and 3) How do combined multi-sensory stressors
affect organisms across biological scales? Across gradients and combinations of
light and noise, at the proximate level the team will measure (a) physiology
(e.g., glucocorticoids, melatonin, testosterone, hormone receptors, clock
genes), and (b) behaviors of nesting birds (e.g., aggression, boldness, song
structure, settlement, movement). At the ultimate level, they will monitor (c)
fitness outcomes via offspring success (e.g., clutch size, fledgling survival)
to measure singular and combined consequences of light and noise pollution. The
researchers will focus on six songbirds that vary in life history traits and
anthropogenic tolerance, increasing our understanding beyond single-species
approaches. Importantly, the direct and indirect links among responses will be
analyzed using structural equation models, facilitating integration to reveal
whether proximate and ultimate relationships are generalizable across species.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.