* 2316506
* RCN-UBE: The BUZZ: Engaging Community College Students in Native Bee Biodiversity Research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Jennifer Foltz-Sweat, College of the Canyons
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 09/30/2028
* USD 500,000.00

RCN-UBE: The BUZZ: Engaging Community College Students in Native Bee
Biodiversity Research will build upon the success of the RCN-UBE Incubator
project, Campus as a Living Lab, to expand a network of educators from Minority-
Serving Institutions (MSIs) and supporting organizations to develop biology
undergraduate research experiences (UREs) for underrepresented students.
Students involved will gain practical experience in field research under the
mentorship of participating faculty while supporting local biodiversity and
ecosystems. This project will provide students with a rare opportunity to
develop and share bee data and analysis skills with peers across U.S. and
international borders. Beyond the educational benefits to students directly
involved, the project will advance broader conservation research efforts while
establishing a replicable program model for undergraduate research at two-year
MSI colleges.

Key objectives for the project include recruiting an estimated 45 STEM faculty
members for the network from at least 15 MSI community colleges and engaging at
least 500 students. Students will conduct authentic field research using their
campuses as “Living Labs” to investigate, collect, document, and analyze
information about native bee species and local ecosystems. Faculty will select
different educational pathways based on their expertise, institutional culture,
and student interests and needs. These include habitat enrichment on campus and
in the community and implementing a Course-Based Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE). These efforts will strive to stabilize native bee diversity
by developing an extensive network of habitat pockets resulting in resilient
metapopulations. A project-hosted annual Zoom conference will allow students to
present their findings and articulate scientific concepts. Faculty will be
involved in continuous professional development and receive support from field
experts for activity implementation. Bilingual deliverables will include a
blueprint for other colleges to replicate, including refined professional
development materials, steps for data integration with national databases,
student engagement, and habitat enrichment. The project is highly sustainable
due to its low cost of entry, faculty-driven perseverance, and efforts to engage
administrative leadership throughout the process. This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Directorate for STEM Education, Division of Undergraduate
Education, as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed by Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/). This project is co-funded by the IUSE:
Innovation in Two-Year College STEM Education (ITYC) program. This project is
also supported by the NSF IUSE: Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) program,
which has the goals of enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education,
and increasing the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students
pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.