* 2317610
* Testing a framework of soil-stream interfaces that expand and contract to affect biogeochemistry in headwater catchments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kenneth Davis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

Textbooks often depict the interface between a flowing freshwater stream and the
land and soil over and through which it flows as a narrow band running parallel
to the stream. This project challenges the standard paradigm with a new
framework that depicts the soil-stream interface as a dynamic expanding and
contracting volume encompassing near-stream zones and periodically saturated
upland areas. The new framework has important implications for water quality
policy and management. As nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus leach from
uplands and encounter water-saturated conditions at the soil-stream interface, a
suite of reactions mediated by plants and soil microorganisms can filter out
nutrients before they enter the stream. In locations where water is polluted by
excess nitrogen and phosphorus, such as the Chesapeake Bay Basin where this
research will take place, states and municipalities often meet their legal
obligations to Clean Water Act enforcement, in part, by funding the planting of
hundreds of miles of forest along streambanks. These near-stream forests (often
called riparian buffers) are expected to filter nutrients and improve water
quality. Yet, if the soil-stream interface and associated ecological filtering
expand into upland soils as this project asserts, then forest plantings focused
solely on streambanks may be an inadequate approach to improving water quality
and managing the Nation's freshwater resources. While testing a new land/stream
conceptual model the project will also engage pre-college, undergraduate and
graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups, in the
research.

This project leverages a long history of research and model development at the
Shale Hills Observatory, a small catchment in central Pennsylvania. No part of
Shale Hills is at the soil-stream interface by the conventional definition, but
each spring, soils in the valley floor are water-saturated and an ephemeral
stream flows for a variable duration into summer. Shale Hills has distinct
swales - convergent flow paths that cut into otherwise planar slopes â€“ that are
also periodically saturated. New field measurements will quantify when these
valley floor and swale soils are hydrologically connected to the catchment
outlet with anaerobic nutrient cycling that is characteristic of soil-stream
interfaces. Soil moisture, soil gases, soil pore water chemistry, and
groundwater chemistry will be sampled at key locations throughout the catchment.
At the whole-catchment scale, surface runoff export of dissolved gases and ions
and an eddy covariance tower will measure water, energy, and carbon fluxes.
Field data will be assimilated with a new spatially distributed, coupled,
hydrology-reactive transport-ecosystem biogeochemistry model that can simulate
the transient saturated biogeochemistry of an expanding-contracting soil-stream
interface. Integrated field measurements and model results will test hypotheses
that emphasize temporal (hypothesis 1) and spatial (hypothesis 2) variation in
the soil-stream interface, the impacts of a dynamic soil-stream interface on
ecosystem carbon and nitrogen pools and fluxes (hypothesis 3), and the ability
to simulate dynamic soil-stream interfaces with the new coupled model
(hypothesis 4). The project will also broaden participation and include research
training for pre-college, undergraduate and graduate students.

This project is co-funded by the Ecosystem Science Cluster in BIO/DEB and the
Hydrologic Sciences program in GEO/EAR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.