* 2317018
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: The Early Universe Laboratory: Primordial Phenomena as Probes of New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sarah Geller, Geller, Sarah R
* Fellowship Award
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Sarah Geller is awarded an NSF Mathematical and Physical Sciences Ascending
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship to conduct a program of research and activities
related to broadening participation by members of groups underrepresented in
STEM. This fellowship to Dr. Geller supports her research project entitled
“Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: The Early Universe Laboratory: Primordial
Phenomena as Probes of New Physics” under the mentorship of a sponsoring
scientist. The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California, Santa Cruz and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Stefano Profumo. Dr.
Geller will pursue a research project to study cosmological phenomena which are
relics of the first fraction of a second after the Big Bang, including
primordial black holes, first-order phase transitions, and gravitational waves.
She plans to identify the generic features characterizing large classes of early
universe models and to make predictions to compare with forthcoming
measurements, helping to determine the plausibility of various early-universe
scenarios for early-universe physics. Dr. Geller will bring a workshop series
that she co-created at MIT to UC Santa Cruz. This workshop series, entitled
"Filling the GAPS", is designed to teach application and professional skills to
senior undergraduate students with an emphasis on providing mentorship to
members of under-represented groups, including students who identify as members
of traditionally underserved groups in STEM, women, and students with
disabilities. She will teach a two-quarter course on professional skills and
strategies at the graduate student level. In addition, she will design and build
an (eventually open source) interactive accessibility app which will allow
students and visitors to navigate accessible routes around campus, beginning
with UC Santa Cruz.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.