* 2317998
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Deciphering the Role of Phytoplankton Community Composition in Southern Ocean Carbon Fluxes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Hannah Joy-Warren, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 212,172.00

Carbon primarily leaves the atmosphere by dissolving in the ocean or by being
used in photosynthesis by land plants. While the physical processes that
modulate Southern Ocean carbon fluxes are relatively well understood, the
biological processes controlling the fluxes are less constrained, due in part to
uncertainties in phytoplankton spatial and temporal variability. Characterizing
the phytoplankton community composition of the Southern Ocean is important
because different types of phytoplankton will use different amounts of carbon.
Projections of changes in Southern Ocean carbon flux are hampered since most
models do not differentiate different types of phytoplankton when parameterizing
carbon fluxes. This research will improve understanding of how different
phytoplankton species will change the amount of carbon entering the surface
ocean and being exported to depth in the Southern Ocean, constraining climate
projections. The researchers will tackle this problem by mapping phytoplankton
community composition and characterizing the physical environment (e.g., mixed
layer depth, ice cover, time of year, macronutrient concentrations, ocean
temperature, region) in which each taxa dominates. Using a combination of
atmospheric reanalyses, ship-based measurements, and profiling biogeochemical
SOCCOM floats, researchers will then estimate how much carbon enters the ocean,
how much carbon is exported to the deep ocean, and the total amount of
phytoplankton. Finally, they will analyze these estimates in concert with
phytoplankton community composition to quantify how efficiently each taxa
exports carbon to the deep ocean. Synthesizing modeled phytoplankton community
composition with estimates of carbon fluxes in the ocean will enable researchers
to explore the role of phytoplankton diversity in Southern Ocean carbon fluxes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.