* 2317399
* Collaborative Research: NSF/MCB: Repurposing metabolite-responsive aptamers for real-time sensing and dynamic control of Cas6-mediated metabolon assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrej Luptak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 590,000.00

The aim of the research is to develop novel strategies for metabolite sensing
and metabolite-induced enzyme localization; this will contribute to fundamental
cellular knowledge and improve the efficiency of bioprocesses that are
associated with synthetic biology. In nature, many microorganisms have evolved
to survive across different growth-permissive conditions. This adaptability is
achieved through a highly coordinated metabolic network that tightly regulates
the activity of cellular components at the required level in order to adjust to
fluctuating nutrient conditions. A detailed analysis of these metabolites would
provide a deeper understanding of their physiological roles in promoting and
regulating cellular processes. To achieve this, the research exploits the
reversible reconstitution of split RNA aptamer fragments for real-time
metabolite sensing. The same reversible split aptamer assembly design is also
exploited to create dynamic metabolons to reveal insights into yeast metabolism
for optimizing product synthesis. The tool sets developed are easily
transferrable to other eukaryotes such as mammalian cells to address fundamental
questions about regulation and rewiring of metabolism. The research spans the
core disciplines of biology, chemistry, and engineering, in providing ample
opportunities for student training at all levels and in multiple areas. This
project also facilitates outreach activities to local high school teachers and
students through existing programs available at the University of Delaware and
UC Irvine.

Real-time quantification of intracellular metabolites is essential for our
ability to interrogate, understand, and engineer metabolism in a range of
biological systems. This project exploits the reversible reconstitution of split
RNA aptamer fragments as a new framework for real-time metabolite sensing. Using
a Cas6-mediated protein-RNA assembly strategy, real-time probing of metabolite-
induced split RNA aptamer reconstitution is monitored using the reversible
assembly of a split fluorescent protein reporter. The reversible nature of split
aptamer assembly is also exploited to create dynamic metabolons for metabolite-
responsive control of metabolism that is useful for a wide range of fundamental
studies and synthetic biology applications. This research impacts the field of
synthetic biology by creating a new method for real-time metabolite sensing and
for metabolite-mediated dynamic assembly of metabolons in many organisms of
interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.