* 2317814
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Magmatic Underplating on the Evolution of Lower Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gregory Dumond, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 259,286.00

Spectacular volcanic eruptions are visible evidence for the fundamental role of
magmatism in shaping Earth’s continents. But how does magmatism create and alter
the continents at great invisible depths? Earth scientists have long inferred
that mafic magmas rise from the mantle and pond near the bottom of the crust in
a process called “underplating”. This process produces “hot zones” in the deep
continental crust which lead to melting, magma generation, and magma mixing. Few
localities exist on Earth where hot zones have been uplifted and exposed at the
surface for direct observation. This project explores the development and
evolution of magma in an ancient hot zone of underplating, now exposed at the
surface in northern Saskatchewan. This team hypothesizes that the region once
existed above a major zone of underplating near the base of the continental
crust. Students and scientists will collect data to understand the timing and
duration of magmatism, metamorphism, and densification of the deep crust. They
will develop models to better understand complex images of the lower continental
crust detected by geophysicists throughout North America. The project will
provide insight into the processes that lead to the formation of magmas of
varying composition, the mechanisms that weaken or strengthen the deep crust,
and ultimately, the processes that facilitate formation and stabilization of
continental crust on Earth.

Magmatic underplating is a first order petrologic and tectonic process that is
central to many models for the development and evolution of continental crust.
However, remote studies of the deep crust via geophysics or xenoliths commonly
lack the resolution to unequivocally constrain the impacts of underplating. This
project explores the hypothesis that ”intraplating”, i.e., the emplacement of
mantle-derived magma into the lower continental crust above the underplate, is
critical for magmatic processes (assimilation, mingling, hybridization),
deformation (weakening and crustal flow), and subsequent densification +/-
foundering or delamination of lower continental crust. Key insights will be
gleaned from direct field observations of the most deeply exhumed section of the
>20,000 km2 Athabasca granulite terrane (1.1-1.6 GPa). These exposures are
inferred to have experienced >650 m.y. of lower crustal residence prior to
exhumation. They represent a rare opportunity to explore crust-mantle
interaction and long-term evolution of lower continental crust due to
intraplating, metamorphism, melting, and densification in three distinct
tectonic settings. Deliverables include: (i) constraining the timing and
duration of magmatic intraplating and metamorphism in each setting, (ii)
identifying and quantifying densification mechanisms, (iii) constraining the
influence of metasedimentary gneisses on the composition, density, and seismic
velocity structure of intraplated lower continental crust, and (iv) using field-
based observations and data to develop more robust geophysical models of
underplated lower continental crust. Critical geophysical goals include: (1)
evaluating the degree to which the settings of underplating and intraplating can
be distinguished in seismic surveys, and (2) evaluating the degree to which the
integrated geophysical properties in each tectonic domain can inform more robust
interpretations of the pattern of seismically fast lower crust detected beneath
parts of North America. Broader impacts include: (i) Two Ph.D. and 2-4 B.S.
students will carry out research projects; (ii) A virtual international workshop
for Earth scientists and graduate students focused on the origin and evolution
of lower continental crust will be hosted; (iii) PIs and students will convene a
Lower Crustal Field Forum where participants will visit and explore the
Athabasca granulite terrane and discuss general implications for lower
continental crust; (iv) PIs and students will engage in Earth science outreach
as part of field work in the vicinity of Stony Rapids, Saskatchewan. The goal is
to involve interested teachers and students in our virtual workshop and field
forum, giving them opportunities to share their own insights on the culture,
people, and landscape along the edge of the Athabasca granulite terrane.

This project is jointly funded by three EAR programs (Petrology & Geochemistry,
Geophysics, and Tectonics) as well as the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.