* 2317681
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Leveraging Community Structure Data and Machine Learning Techniques to Improve Microbial Functional Diversity in an Arctic Ocean Ecosystem Model
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2025
* Emelia Chamberlain, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2025
* USD 343,194.00

The Arctic Ocean is undergoing rapid environmental change, with cascading
effects on nearly all aspects of the polar marine ecosystem, including the
abundance and community composition of marine microbes, microscopic organisms
(i.e., bacteria and archaea) that play critical roles in the cycling of elements
within the ice-ocean system. Numerical modeling is a critical method for testing
ecological mechanisms and predicting the impacts of change. However, current
approaches are typically not well resolved for bacterial diversity or activity
rates, a source of uncertainty for future projections of critical marine
ecosystem functions such as biological carbon drawdown. Through statistical
exploration of sequence-based observations of the current Arctic microbial
community, this research aims to transform our understanding of cellular
environmental responses into a scale relevant for ecosystem processes and
improve numerical modeling of microbial community structure and functional
diversity. This project funds one post-doctoral scholar and supports
undergraduate student training to build capacity in computational Arctic
research.

Leveraging publicly archived genomic, biogeochemical, and environmental time-
series data from the central Arctic Ocean, this project seeks to update a
microbial oriented, one-dimensional biogeochemical model to assess the variable
contributions of specific members of the polar bacterial community in modeled
ecological processes. Applying machine learning modeling techniques, upper ocean
community structure data will be segmented into distinct bacterial ecotypes.
Predicted metabolic information and co-located biogeochemical rate measurements
will be used to identify critical physiological and functional differences among
community types. These results will inform modifications to the bacterial state
variable(s) used within the numerical modeling framework. A series of modeling
experiments will then be used to compare model skill between the machine-
learning integrated and base model frameworks and explore possible improvements
to the fidelity of Arctic climate change predictions. Adapted source codes of
the produced model will be made accessible through open-source archiving as a
resource for the Arctic science community.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.