* 2317583
* NSF-BSF: Real-Time Robust Estimation and Stochastic Control for Dynamic Systems with Additive Heavy-Tailed Uncertainties
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jason Speyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2026
* USD 412,500.00

The bell-shaped curve, known technically as the Gaussian probability density
function (pdf), has been a central element in engineering and financial
algorithms that process data and automate a desired operation. However, it has
been well recognized that reliance on the Gaussian pdf can be overly simplistic,
since many practical systems in engineering, economics, biology, financial
movements, earthquakes, atmospheric turbulence, etc., are poorly described by
Gaussian pdfs. It was demonstrated that those phenomena are better described by
“heavy-tailed” pdfs. For example, in air traffic control, an active radar
measures the distance and bearing of an aircraft in a dynamic environment. These
measurements are not exact, having an uncertainty or error in their values. This
uncertainty is not described well by the Gaussian pdf because the portion of the
bell-shaped curve far from its peak, called the tail of the pdf, is far smaller
than what the radar data would suggest; the Gaussian-shaped bell curve is known
to have a light, rapidly (exponentially) decaying tail, while radar data is said
to have a heavy tail, decaying inversely to an algebraic power. Currently, only
linear dynamic systems with additive Gaussian uncertainties have resulted in a
recursive and analytic algorithm that allows tractable, real-time
implementations. The engineering literature is packed with heuristic variations
of this algorithm. Hence, a new rigorous algorithm is needed.

Our newly developed recursive and analytic estimation algorithm, based on a very
heavy-tailed Cauchy pdf, is a paradigm shift. Since the Cauchy pdf tail over-
bounds other realistic densities, estimators and controllers that are based on
the Cauchy pdf are hypothesized to be robust to unknown realistic physical
densities. We refer to robustness in the statistical sense, meaning that the
estimator achieves adequate performance when faced with outliers or unexplained
events, and where these events may arise either as large measurement errors,
large process deviations, or due to misspecification of the dynamic model.
Numerical experiments have demonstrated this robustness. Since extreme data is
assumed likely, the Cauchy estimator is rich in structure and hence is
computationally more intense than its Gaussian counterparts. We are addressing
new analytic techniques to make the computation streamlined and have implemented
this Cauchy estimator on general purpose graphical processing units. Our study
also focuses on new stochastic control laws. Because our estimator is analytic
and recursive, new stochastic cost criteria can be formulated, leading to a host
of new stochastic controllers and, in general, new control technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.