* 2317599
* Collaborative Research: EAR Climate: Earth-System Responses to the Penultimate Icehouse-Greenhouse Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Lily Pfeifer, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2028
* USD 16,029.00

About 300 million years ago, large glaciers and ice sheets at high latitudes
waxed and waned as Earth’s climate alternated between glacial and interglacial
states, continuing a pattern that had persisted for several millions of years.
Shortly thereafter, however, the glaciers collapsed entirely, and the Earth
system lurched beyond an ice-free state into an increasingly severe “hothouse”
climate, powered in large part by a massive and sustained release of greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere, ultimately culminating in the largest extinction of
life known in Earth history. This project will examine a complete record of this
dramatic transition by recovering and studying a 2000 m-long rock core from what
was, at that time, the equatorial region of the planet, which is now the US
midcontinent (Oklahoma). The principal goal is to uncover the driving forces for
these extreme environmental changes, shedding light on the fundamental workings
of the Earth system (geosphere-atmosphere-biosphere connections) during an
interval of unprecedented upheaval. This project involves many students and
early-career researchers across twelve US research institutions, in addition to
international collaborators, and additionally will engage Native American youth,
educators, scientists, artists and poets in Oklahoma and beyond.

This project seeks to elucidate paleoenvironments, biogeochemical cycling, and
responses of the terrestrial biosphere to climate forcing during the Permian
Period, a critical time in the evolution of Earth and life. A drill core will be
taken in the Anadarko Basin (Oklahoma), which is a deep continental basin that
preserves a globally unique and stratigraphically complete archive of the
continental Permian in equatorial Pangaea. A well-preserved paralic-to-
continental transition is overlain by a succession of red-bed, paleo-loess/dust,
lacustrine, and evaporite deposits that collectively record the demise of the
Late Paleozoic Ice Age and an intensifying greenhouse climate, culminating in
the most severe mass extinction in Earth history. The project will establish a
high-resolution chronostratigraphic framework by integrating U-Pb geochronology,
astrochronology, magnetostratigraphy, and biostratigraphy. The resulting
framework will serve as the scaffolding for subsequent research designed to test
hypotheses focused on the interrelationships among climatic, orogenic, and
biotic changes during an interval characterized by pronounced Earth-system
upheavals. This research addresses major questions relevant to both Earth’s past
and its future, as it will elucidate various mechanistic linkages, e.g. among
atmospheric dust, climate, mountains, and the biosphere on an Earth experiencing
a cold-to-hot climate transition. Owing to the known importance but great
uncertainty of the role of dust in the Earth system, exploration of these links
will measurably expand the knowledge of Earth system behavior across the
Phanerozoic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.