* 2317180
* I-Corps: Technology Towards Next Generation Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Ximin He, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology applied to the ever-growing sectors of consumer
products, transportation, and biomedical devices that rely on portable and
flexible power. The lithium-ion battery market has already reached a valuation
of $44 billion in 2021, driven by both consumer demand and government
legislature. This project seeks to offer a step forward via battery components
that are safer than conventional batteries in that they are immune to explosions
and fires, offer flexible properties, and all the while improve performance
(e.g., electric vehicle driving range).

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology that improves
both the performance and safety of current lithium-ion batteries. The unique
mechanical and ionic conductivity properties of the technology’s porous,
inflammable, composite nano- and micro- structures will improve the lifetime and
capacity of batteries produced by electric vehicle and electric vehicle battery
manufacturers, increase manufacturing due to reduced testing requirements, and
remove risks of fire and explosion associated with current battery electrolyte
technologies. By marrying the advantages of polymer materials (mechanical
robustness, hierarchical nano- and micro-structures, scalable solution
processing) with those of ceramics (improved conductivity and electrochemical
stability), a state-of-the-art porous material is produced that is tougher than
Kevlar with simultaneous ion transport capabilities. In the context of
batteries, this material has shown higher energy densities, longer cycle life,
and unprecedented safety compared to current liquid electrolyte-based lithium
batteries that are known to pose significant fire and chemical risks.
Furthermore, effective dendrite resistance, ultra-high ion transport, and
electrochemical stability of the materials supports the improved performance and
overall impact of the novel product.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.