* 2317089
* International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Sanctions
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Galip Ozhan, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 459,000.00

This research develops an analytical framework to understand the short-,
medium-, and long-term consequences of economic sanctions on international trade
and macroeconomic activity. The results provide a roadmap on how several types
of sanctions, trade and financial, might work, how they might affect individual
agents, trade, and macroeconomic aggregates in the targeted country and the
global economy when that country is not small. The results also show that the
exchange rate is not a useful metric for evaluating the effectiveness of
sanctions. The targeted country's currency depreciation or appreciation reflects
the type of sanction and how economies adjust by reallocating resources across
production sectors. The framework provides guidance for policy by determining
the optimal menu of sanctions that a government would want to impose, how this
menu is affected by international coordination or lack thereof, and the
implications of sanctions for the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies. This
research is relevant for the discussions of the economic effects of ongoing
geopolitical tensions and for an understanding of economic warfare.

The analysis begins with a tractable mathematical model of two countries, Home
and Foreign, with comparative advantage in production of differentiated
consumption goods (Home) or a homogeneous commodity (e.g., gasâ€”Foreign). Home
imposes trade and financial sanctions on Foreign. Trade sanctions are introduced
through (i) a ban on international gas trade or (ii) the exclusion of most
productive consumption-sector firms from international trade. Financial
sanctions imply the exclusion of a portion of Foreign agents from international
asset markets (when all Foreign agents are excluded, financial sanctions imply
financial autarky). Changes in the range of products available to consumers are
central to the transmissions of sanctions. For instance, in response to
sanctions that prohibit the most productive Home firms from exporting to
Foreign, average Home exporter productivity falls, and the average price of
Foreign imports rises. Foreign households shift demand toward domestic goods
produced by Foreign firms that are less productive than Home exporters. A higher
average import price and the shift in demand toward domestic goods cause the
Foreign price level to rise and the Home exchange rate to depreciate. In
response to a ban on gas trade, Foreign adjusts by shifting resources to
production of consumption goods to replace lost export revenue. The number of
Foreign consumption exporters rises, and their average productivity falls,
resulting in a higher average price of Home imports and Home exchange rate
appreciation. When a third country is added to the framework, the impact of
substitution effects on trade and international sanctions coordination can be
investigated. The results of these exercises, in which sanctions are taken as
exogenously given, provide the foundation for the next part of the research
agenda, which focuses on the optimal choice of sanctions, their interaction with
fiscal and monetary policies, and how macroeconomic policymakers should respond
to the effects of sanctions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.