* 2317726
* GCR: Transition to green energy in gas-producing regions: How the convergence of Engineering, Social Sciences and Geoscience can enable carbon-free H2 technologies
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Firat Demir, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,199,999.00

The vision of this project is to enable the transition to green energy in gas-
producing regions using a unique proposition: To engage local communities in the
co-development of research goals related to hydrogen energy transition. This
effort will involve cutting-edge capabilities in producing hydrogen from natural
gas in a way that does not produce carbon-containing gases that pollute the
environment. The project will use social science to guide engineering and
geoscience research, based on issues, perceived risks, and interests of rural
communities that are expected to be immediately impacted by a transition to
hydrogen energy. By identifying and clearly articulating the needs of rural
communities, including members of Indigenous communities, researchers will
develop viable ways to pursue hydrogen production and storage research. In this
manner, the project will discover how to utilize the resources of a state like
Oklahoma, which has significant oil and gas production, to generate green
energy. Enabling a region rich in fossil-fuel resources to use these to create a
hydrogen-based economy can help create a diversified and robust free market
economy, less prone to boom-and-bust cycles. It can also help develop high-
technology, skill-intensive new industries in the production, storage, and
distribution of hydrogen.

Most hydrogen today is produced in oil refineries or coal power generation
plants through the century-old steam methane reforming (SMR) process that emits
large amounts of carbon dioxide. For zero-carbon emissions during SMR, carbon
dioxide would have to be captured and sequestered, but this approach adds cost
and is not feasible in all areas. Truly green hydrogen can be produced with
electrolysis using power only from renewable sources, but this technology is
also quite costly and requires clean water and scarce materials as electrodes.
This project focuses on an alternative path, one more appropriate for gas-
producing regions in the US: catalyst-assisted methane pyrolysis, where methane
decomposes directly into hydrogen and solid carbon (with zero carbon dioxide
production). The solid carbon byproduct can be utilized in other industries.
Yet, because of the history of the fossil fuel industry and because of potential
resistance to novel technologies, any viable research and development program
will need to be calibrated to local geological, social, and economic conditions.
How can we formulate a hydrogen-focused research model that considers the
special social and economic conditions of a state that depends on oil and gas
production? Addressing this challenging question requires a deep understanding
of intersecting social and economic factors involved in an energy transition,
including decoding potential new vulnerabilities or other negative impacts that
could be created by decarbonization. This project will investigate local
perceptions of the energy transition and use these findings to fine tune
research goals to address the points of concern.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.