* 2317757
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: 3D Bioprinted Organoids for Studying the Mechanism of Cerebrovascular Aging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Kunal Mitra, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2025
* USD 135,000.00

Cognitive health is associated with the maintenance of a well-functioning
cerebrovascular system throughout life. However, age-dependent changes in
morphology/structure and function in different cells in the cerebrovascular
system contribute to the development of different aging-associated diseases. One
of these changes during aging is the induction of a complex cellular stress
response termed cellular senescence. Senescent cells are viable cells that
undergo alterations in metabolic activity and can compromise tissue repair and
regeneration processes, thereby contributing toward aging. The use of novel,
highly efficient, and reproducible 3D bioprinted organoids for cerebrovascular
models will enable production of specific organoids with precisely controlled
proportions and different types of senescent cells. This approach can mimic
natural aging or different neurodegenerative diseases by decreasing the time
burden without moving the research onto lengthy, more complex, and expensive in
vivo experiments. Finally, the project will provide excellent educational
training opportunities in multi-disciplinary subjects for students at all
levels, especially by involving underrepresented minority participants in STEM
and the development of interesting and effective outreach activities.

The goal of this research is to develop 3D cerebrovascular organoids composed of
human-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived neurons, astrocytes, and
cerebromicrovascular endothelial cells to study the impact of senescent cells on
differential expression and exosomal secretion of senescence-associated miRNAs.
Cellular senescence is recognized as one of the major mechanisms of tissue
deterioration and the cause of many age-associated diseases. The innovative
approach of using a microfluidic-based 3D cell culture model will enable the
study of the aging process by producing a 3D organoid resembling a young organ,
a pre-aging phenotype, or an old organoid, which will be achieved by controlled
input of different percentages of senescent cells during the 3D organoid
bioprinting process. In addition, an organoid model with senescent cells
overexpressing senescence-associated miRNAs will be studied for cellular
delivery of miRNA mimics to regulate the expression of senescence-associated
secretory phenotype (SASPs) miRNA in healthy organoids. There is little data on
the regulatory mechanisms of miRNAs during the process of cellular senescence
and the role of miRNAs in cerebrovascular responses to senescence inducers such
as radiation exposure. Moreover, in vitro investigation of such mechanisms and
associated pathways has been extraordinarily challenging, and most studies have
been limited to two-dimensional (2D) culture systems failing to capture complex
vascular tissue functionalities. Importantly, the successful completion of this
high-risk novel research to study the aging process will enable the
establishment of highly precise models allowing manipulations and studies of
different age-related diseases and will also provide a base for developing
similar studies related to senescence in various organ-specific studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.