* 2317257
* SHF: SMALL: Language-agnostic Proofs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Matteo Cimini, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2025
* USD 213,336.00

The correctness of programming languages is paramount for the development of
reliable software. Accordingly, language designers often engage in an effort to
mathematically prove that their programming languages satisfy key correctness
properties. These proofs often follow a schema that does not apply just to one
language but, rather, applies to a plethora of other languages. The projectâ€™s
novelties are (i) to discover the scientific knowledge necessary for developing
language-agnostic proofs, that is, proofs that apply to classes of languages
rather than to one language, and (ii) to provide evidence that language-agnostic
proofs are an effective tool for validating programming languages. The project's
impacts are (i) to provide suitable methods and a software tool for quickly
validating programming languages, which leads to more correct and reliable
software, and (ii) to delineate the core insights of proof methods for
programming languages in a generalized and teachable form.

This project develops a domain-specific language for expressing language-
agnostic proofs and implements a software tool that automatically produces
machine-checked proofs from a programming language definition and a language-
agnostic proof given as input. This project also develops the language-agnostic
proofs that capture the type safety of most common stateful languages and
demonstrates the use of these proofs to automatically generate the mechanized
proof of type safety of a number of programming languages, including languages
such as WebAssembly and Middleweight Java. As expected, the type safety of some
languages with sophisticated features cannot be established with the language-
agnostic proofs that this project offers. Nonetheless, these proofs enable an
approach based on their useful partial outputs, that is, they can generate a
mechanized proof for a large fragment of sophisticated languages, which then can
be used as a head start to manually complete the proof. The project demonstrates
this approach on programming languages from the literature with sophisticated
features and documents the effectiveness of the approach. The language-agnostic
proofs that this project offers are akin to pseudocode that is written to apply
to many languages. Therefore, these proofs can be used for teaching type safety
with a generalized perspective, and the investigator is including them within a
course in programming languages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.