* 2317546
* MCA: Arbitration between cortical and subcortical control of behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Pamela Reinagel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Forlano
* 07/31/2026
* USD 333,000.00

Science has made major strides in understanding how animals including humans use
sensory information to guide actions. Higher brain areas, including cerebral
cortex, are involved in accumulating evidence and triggering decisions. But much
of our every-day behavior is controlled by unconscious, automatic, or
instinctive responses to sensory stimuli. Those responses can be accomplished by
sub-cortical sensory brain areas alone. This study will address the crucial
question of how these two types of sensory-driven behavior interact. In
particular, when these two mechanisms conflict, what processes in the brain
determine whether the more deliberate, cortical, or the more automatic, sub-
cortical, response will prevail? This study will leverage the fact that some
visual behaviors of mice require cortical processing, while others do not. By
creating a novel task in which these two behaviors come into conflict, the
researchers will observe how mice resolve the conflict, and determine what brain
mechanisms underlie the arbitration for control. This simple case relates to
broader questions about how conscious, intentional choices shape or override
implicit or innate behavioral drives, and how factors like stress or fatigue
affect the balance of power between cortex and subcortex. As a Mid-Career
Advancement award, the project has the important additional objective of
providing advanced technical training to an established research investigator
through an interdisciplinary collaboration, thus contributing to strategic
workforce development, broadening participation in STEM, and enabling
convergence research. The project will also further the investigator’s work on
promoting rigor, robustness and reproducibility of science through educational
and research initiatives.

In rodents, some visual behaviors depend on the intact function of primary
visual cortex (V1), including discriminating the orientation of stripes in a
grating patch. Other visual behaviors are cortex-independent, including
reporting the location of a grating patch. This study will train freely behaving
mice to report which of two simultaneously presented grating stimuli has a
target orientation, and separately train them to report which of two
simultaneously presented grating stimuli has higher contrast. They will use
optogenetic silencing to confirm that V1 is required for the orientation
discrimination task, but not the contrast discrimination task. Then they will
challenge the mice to perform the orientation discrimination task while the
contrast cue either supports the same choice, is neutral, or is in conflict. The
researchers expect that mice will be able to learn to override subcortically
driven salience responses, and choose correct orientation targets even when they
are less salient. But they expect that this conflict will induce a significant
increase in errors. They will use machine-learning-based pose estimation to
analyze in detail the orienting behavioral responses and model the underlying
decision-making. Finally, they will record bilaterally in all layers of the
superior colliculus to observe the dynamics with which the competing visual
targets vie for determination of motor control, in trials in which cortex wins
versus loses the contest for control of behavior. This work will establish a new
model system for dissecting the neural circuitry and computational algorithms
through which cortical processing exerts influence over cortex-independent
sensory-guided behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.