* 2317513
* Organizations in a Post-Liberal World: A Cross-National Investigation into the Changing Scales, Strategies, and Missions of NGOs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kristopher Velasco, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 292,287.00

This project aims to understand how non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
operate amidst on-going threats around the world. Over the 20th century, NGOs
became instrumental in providing social services, advocating for marginalized
communities, and working as partners in state governance. Now, however, these
organizations are increasingly confronted with political repression and
decreased access to necessary resources that sustain their work. How are these
new challenges are transforming NGOs: their strategies, missions, and their
overall numbers? Findings from this investigation offer important insights into
how NGOs are navigating this moment and how external supporters can ensure their
instrumental work continues.

This project investigates how different political, economic, cultural, and
ecological threats influence the missions and strategies of NGOs, along with
their overall scale, using different quantitative and causal methods. To do so,
this study develops two types of original data. The first builds on a previously
assembled dataset of roughly 10,000 minority-serving NGOs from 172 countries
between 1980-2022. This dataset tracks the founding rates and mission statements
of each NGO over time. The second component is an original survey administered
to each NGO. This survey asks organizational leaders how strategies have
fluctuated amidst different types of potential threats. Together, these datasets
have the ability to unlock a variety of insights into the cultures, needs,
strategies, and operations of NGOs, even beyond the current proposal. This
research not only advance theoretical understandings of how organizations
operate during a period of unprecedented threat but contributes a new resource
of minority-serving organizations accessible to those in need.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.