* 2317629
* ECLIPSE: Adaptable Model Predictive Control on a Chip for Personalized and Point-of-Care Plasma Medicine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ali Mesbah, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 456,193.00

Biomedical devices are becoming increasingly ubiquitous for medical diagnosis
and therapies, wherein point-of-care devices have shown great promise for
personalized medicine. Nonetheless, the increasing complexity of medical
therapeutics and devices necessitates the development of advanced decision-
making and automatic control systems to ensure safe, predictable, and
therapeutically effective operation of biomedical devices. To this end, this
project focuses on harnessing the medical potential of low-temperature plasma
biomedical devices. Some of the most promising plasma medicine applications
include treatment of biofilm-related infections, treatment of wounds and skin
diseases, assistance in cancer treatment, treatment of virus infections, and
surface modification of bioimplants. This project aims to leverage advances in
machine learning and optimization-based control to develop intelligent decision-
making systems for personalizing plasma dose delivery for individual subjects
using point-of-care plasma biomedical devices. Intelligent decision-making
systems can create unprecedented opportunities by enabling safe and
(therapeutically) effective control of plasma devices for point-of-use plasma
medicine and biotechnology applications, for example, in resource-limited
communities. The results of this research will be used in a new graduate course
on learning-based control, and the PI will partner with the Berkeley Engineers
and Mentors program to mentor undergraduate students in conducting high school
level science lessons.

Despite recent advances in model predictive control (MPC) of plasma biomedical
devices, there yet remains important challenges towards personalized and point-
of-care plasma biomedical applications. This project aims to develop a systems-
theoretic framework for optimal design and data-efficient adaptation of MPC-on-
a-chip controllers for safe and personalized plasma treatment of complex
interfaces using point-of-care biomedical devices. This objective will be
realized through: (1) developing a multi-objective optimization framework for
co-design of software and hardware for MPC-on-a-chip for uncertain nonlinear
systems with fast dynamics (i.e., kHz sampling rates); (2) developing Bayesian
optimization methods for safe and optimal performance-oriented adaptation of
MPC-on-a-chip that is especially suited for applications in which performance
data for control policy adaptation are scarce; and (3) experimentally
demonstrating adaptive MPC-on-a-chip of a cold atmospheric plasma jet with
prototypical biomedical applications for bacterial disinfection. The impact of
the systems-theoretic developments of this project will be beyond plasmas and
can translate to other technical systems in which adaptive MPC-on-a-chip
controllers can play a critical role. The project also delivers computational
benchmarks and open-source codes to provide a measurable demonstration of the
improvements achieved over the state-of-the-art.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.