* 2317207
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Assessing Accountability of Tax Preparation Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Ashutosh Trivedi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 11/30/2026
* USD 220,000.00

As the U.S. tax law frequently changes, decision-support software plays a
crucial role in helping taxpayers, professionals, and the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) navigate its complexities. The use of tax preparation software has
witnessed a significant increase, with over 72 million people utilizing it in
2020. However, there has been limited independent research conducted to assess
the accountability of tax software. This project takes on two main challenges:
i) ensuring the software's compliance, accuracy, and fairness based on tax law
and experts' perspectives, and ii) enhancing scalability and precision in
testing, debugging, and patching tax software. The project specifically focuses
on exemptions, credits, and deductions for low-income taxpayers, with the aim of
ensuring that all taxpayers, including those from vulnerable communities, pay
all and only the taxes that tax law prescribes.

While it is expected that software with legal and social implications should be
fair and compliant with the law, the absence of formal specifications regarding
expected behaviors in legal-critical domains like tax software poses significant
challenges in ensuring accountability. Since U.S. tax law adheres to the legal
doctrine of precedent (stare decisis), this project proposes that these
specifications naturally exist as metamorphic relationships between individuals
who are considered similar within a given context. The project team plans to 1)
explicate metamorphic relations from a large set of challenging requirements in
U.S. tax law, 2) automate the extraction of such metamorphic relations by
leveraging principles from the psychology of perception pertaining to
relateness, 3) develop artifacts for assessing tax software that leverages those
relations using formal verification techniques, and 4) experimentally compare
the tax software's accuracy and perception of procedural justice to that of
human tax experts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.