* 2317974
* EFRI BRAID: Emulating Cerebellar Temporally Coherent Signaling for Ultraefficient Emergent Prediction
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Mark Hersam, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Although artificial intelligence (AI) has been applied to many computational
problems, biological intelligence remains superior to AI for most cognitive
tasks. For example, the brain is constantly receiving and ignoring massive
volumes of sensory signals yet remains perpetually vigilant to anomalies in
order to respond rapidly to unanticipated inputs. In contrast, modern AI
performs poorly on similar tasks, requiring extensive training and propagation
through multi-layer artificial neural networks. Consequently, robust anomaly
detection in AI is slow and energy inefficient, posing challenges for high-value
applications such as cybersecurity. Neuroscience research has shown that the
cerebellum allows anomaly detection to emerge through contextual prediction,
pattern separation, and response actuation. In an effort to emulate cerebellar
functions, this project develops electronic devices that switch between
asynchronous and synchronous behavior when triggered by sensory inputs. These
devices are derived from nanoelectronics materials that realize temporally
coherent signaling for diverse applications including cybersecurity, autonomous
robotics, and power-delivery control. In addition, this project comprehensively
analyzes the ethical, legal, and societal implications of the proposed research
in collaboration with multiple stakeholders including college students,
educators, and community workers. To ensure that these transformative outcomes
are communicated to the most diverse audiences, multiple education and outreach
initiatives aim to broaden participation among underrepresented and marginalized
sections of society.

Neuromorphic hardware chips are emerging as disruptive technologies to process
and categorize vast amounts of digital data. The majority of the current
implementations are based on well-studied feed-forward and recurrent neuronal
architectures of the mammalian cerebrum and are thus optimized to perform only
certain types of classification tasks. In contrast, theoretical neuroscience
concepts derived from the cerebellum are underrepresented in artificial
intelligence hardware even though the cerebellum has evolved to efficiently
solve a wide range of problems such as anomaly detection in complex and noisy
environments. Cerebellar accuracy and robustness are achieved by a unique
neuronal coding architecture based on high firing rates, temporally coherent
signaling, and complex spiking. To achieve similar functionality, this project
develops electronic hardware that emulates the essential features of cerebellar
neuronal coding. The resulting bio-realistic implementations are tested against
the use cases of anomaly detection in cybersecurity, autonomous robotics, and
power-delivery control. Specifically, this cross-disciplinary project combines
ideas from theoretical neuroscience, materials science, and computer engineering
to develop hardware prototypes based on two-dimensional semiconductors and van
der Waals heterojunctions including synaptic devices based on memtransistors and
spiking neurons based on Gaussian heterojunction transistors. In addition, this
project comprehensively analyzes the ethical, legal, and societal implications
of the proposed research in collaboration with multiple stakeholders including
college students, educators, and community workers. To ensure that these
transformative outcomes are communicated to the most diverse audiences, multiple
education and outreach initiatives aim to broaden participation among
underrepresented and marginalized sections of society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.