* 2317086
* DASS: A Multi-level Collaborative Design Framework for Cross-sovereignty Software Accountability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yu-Che Chen, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 749,232.00

This project addresses the salient challenge of ensuring software accountability
for collaboration on emergency management across tribal nations and the United
States government. Indigenous communities are among the most vulnerable
populations during natural disasters. Establishing effective collaboration
between U.S. governments at all levels and tribal nations is pivotal for
managing emergencies on tribal lands, with software systems playing a vital role
in enabling this cooperation. This project aims to tackle the distinct software
accountability challenges arising from the unique governance structures,
cultures, and technological conditions of tribal nations, as well as their
intricate relations with other sovereign entities. This project develops and
implements a multi-level participatory design framework and an AI (artificial
intelligence) chatbot for emergency management. This initiative enhances
emergency management in tribal nations, improves cross-sovereignty software
accountability, and elevates AI system literacy among indigenous communities.

This project has two primary aims: (a) the development, implementation, and
validation of a multi-level collaborative design framework for ensuring software
system accountability across sovereign entities and (b) the development and
implementation of an integrative operational AI-enabled chatbot for emergency
management in indigenous communities. The project creates a novel multi-level
software design framework, engaging stakeholders from tribal nations and the
U.S. government in a participatory process. This framework guides the
development, implementation, evaluation, and refinement of the AI chatbot in
working closely with two mid-western tribal nations and receiving input from
indigenous communities across the country. This project contributes to the
advancement in the knowledge and practice in three areas: (a) multi-level
participatory design and implementation with indigenous people and government
stakeholders, specifically for accountable software systems, (b) the performance
of tribal emergency management through the collaborative utilization of AI
techniques, and (c) validation of the design framework and software
implementation's general applicability and local adaptability with indigenous
communities.

This project is jointly funded by Designing Accountable Software Systems program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.