* 2317293
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Long-distance Metallurgy Trade in Establishing Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Virginie Renson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 180,912.00

Researchers are reconstructing the early history of mining and long-distance
trade of metals within a region which saw the origins of metallury between about
400 and 1750 AD. Mining and metallurgy are major portions of the modern
economies in the region, but most residents of the region are not aware that
there was significant mining or trade of metals before the late nineteenth
century, when European colonists began commercial mining. Many precolonial mines
were noted at the beginning of the twentieth century, but these scattered
historical records are largely forgotten, and almost of these mines have since
been destroyed. This project focuses on indirectly reconstructing precolonial
mining and trade of two metals – copper and tin – by comparing the chemical and
lead isotopic ratios of objects from dated archaeological sites with those of
ore minerals from copper and tin mines around the region. This approach is quite
new for the region, and the results of the project are of interest to news
media. They should be incorporated into high school and university history
classes. This award funds a young researcher for six months of advanced training
in these techniques at Missouri University.

Small samples are extracted from copper objects excavated from archaeological
sites dating from ca. 400 AD, when metal-using farmers first occupied this
region, through the rise of the first state (Mapungubwe) around 1220 AD, its
collapse around 1300 AD, and the emergence of a new state around 1650 AD. The
chemical compositions and lead isotope ratios of these samples are measured at
Missouri University. To identify the mines from which these metals derived, the
lead isotope ratios of the samples are matched to a database of ore minerals
from mines throughout the broader region. Since the archaeological sites are
dated by the radiocarbon method, this project reveals when individual copper
mines were exploited, and how far the copper from them was distributed. The
project also determines when bronze (the alloy of copper and tin) first appears
in the regional record, and from which mine(s) the tin came. At present the
earliest bronzes along with the earliest gold – are in the royal cemetery but
the project examines whether there are earlier bronzes. In summary, this project
provides the first direct evidence of the origins and early history of regional
metal mining and of the development of internal long-distance trade in the
precolonial era.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.