* 2317595
* Data Services in Support of Marine Geoscience Research: Preservation, Synthesis and Access
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vicki Ferrini, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,394,867.00

This project provides continued support for a facility that shares marine
geology and geophysics data. Users can download and use data from the global
oceans for new research projects. Software allows scientists, educators, and
students to easily explore and visualize the seafloor. A topography synthesis
integrates seafloor and land data for use by researchers and the public. Broader
impacts include workshops to the user community and engagement of summer
undergraduate students from Minority Serving Institutions.

This project supports complementary disciplinary data services focused on the
preservation and access of marine geology and geophysics (MGG) data acquired
throughout the global ocean. The Marine Geoscience Data System (MGDS) curates a
coherent collection of disciplinary data about the seafloor and subseafloor, and
provides data documentation and preservation services that support data
publication, discovery and re-use. The Global Multi-Resolution Topography (GMRT)
synthesis is a multi-resolution Digital Elevation Model (DEM) that seamlessly
integrates curated multibeam bathymetry data with other publicly available
elevation data to deliver custom maps and elevation data products on-demand for
interdisciplinary researchers and the public. The visualization and data
discovery tool GeoMapApp (GMA) provides map-based quantitative access to
published and community-sourced geoscience data sets, including GMRT, and
empowers researchers to visualize and analyze their own data within the context
of complementary data. The combined data services of MGDS, GMRT, and GeoMapApp
ensure that marine geoscientific data are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
and Reusable (FAIR), and the complementary aspects of data stewardship handled
by each system adds value to these unique and spatiotemporally sparse
observational data. The tools and curated data collections that are made
publicly available through this project support disciplinary and
transdisciplinary research and education.

This project is supported by the Marine Geology and Geophysics program in the
Division of Ocean Sciences and the Antarctic program in the Office of Polar
Programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.