* 2317730
* Collaborative Research: The interplay of surface evolution, shallow magmatism, a large hydrothermal system, and hazards at Puyehue-Cordon Caulle Volcanic Complex, Chile
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Matthew Pritchard, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 09/30/2028
* USD 247,233.00

Volcanic landscapes pose a variety of natural hazards to local and regional
communities, including volcanic explosions and outpouring of lava, large-scale
land sliding of resulting steep terrains, and the formation of shallow
hydrothermal systems. The hydrothermal systems affect water quality and weaken
the overlying rocks further increasing the likelihood of major landslides.
Larger volcanic eruptions may impact air traffic and therefore disrupt the
global economy. Several of these geohazards occurred during the large 2011-12
eruption of Cordón Caulle, Chile, with its volcanic ash plume reaching large
parts of South America including Buenos Aires. The natural hazards continue to
pose a major risk for the region, because the eruption was accompanied by a
shallow intrusion of magma that has established a vigorous hydrothermal system
within a steep edifice scarred by numerous large surface cracks, indicative of
slope instability. This eruption sequence, the near-surface intrusion, and its
surroundings present a unique opportunity to advance our understanding of the
genesis and current state of this recently formed intrusion, which serves as a
model for near-surface magmatic intrusions globally. The goal of this project is
ability to evaluate and understand the natural hazards associated with
intrusions, in particular those arising from the interactions between surface
processes, hydrothermal, and magmatic processes. Furthermore, the proposed work
aims to advance our understanding of how volcanic eruptions transition from
explosive to effusive behavior and these transitions may lead to the formation
of shallow intrusions. In addition to building a strong US-Chilean collaborative
effort with this project, the team will facilitate a large community-research
component, where students will be invited to participate in field and other
research activities.

Subduction zones create volcanic arcs that are dynamic environments of steep
terrain built and modified by the interplay between volcanic, plutonic, and
landscape processes. Water acts as the key agent for dynamical interactions, in
the form of the hydrothermal system that exists in the shallow subsurface and in
the form of erosional processes. Understanding of how the magmatic-hydrothermal
sphere and surface- and hydrosphere interact when volcanic activity
fundamentally alters the landscape on decadal time scales remains a major
challenge. The proposed project is centered around the 2011-12 Córdon Caulle
laccolith, one of the most dynamic landscapes on Earth. It is unique because of
the intersection of an active plutonic and volcanic realm with the shallow
subsurface and surface. It affords the opportunity to study ongoing processes
that act at the intersection of magma pathways to the surface, shallow magma
intrusion, hydrosphere, and surface. The focus will be on enhancing knowledge
about laccolith initiation and development through the integration of existing
and newly proposed observations with geophysical and geochemical models, in
order to ascertain the current state of the system and project its future
evolution. The project combines methods of volcanology, geophysics, aqueous
geochemistry, and geomorphology. It will add new insight into the internal and
external processes that build and modify near-surface intrusions. It aims to
answer why buoyant magma, despite having already an open path to the surface,
intruded laterally within hundreds of meters of the surface. Beyond exploration
of laccolith genesis, the project seeks to provide a basis for assessing its
current state and future evolution through the integration of a wide range of
existing and newly proposed observations of structure, mass and heat flux in and
out of the intrusion, and its surface evolution as modulated by the interior and
exterior processes. The project will foster international collaborations that
strengthen scientific relationships between the US and Chile. The project will
have an open structure that actively broadens the science community working on
this volcanic system via a field school component. An outreach component will
involve rural middle schools that are directly affected by regional volcanism.
This project is jointly funded by Frontier Research in Earth Sciences (FRES) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.