* 2317412
* Coping with Stressors: Understanding Negative Emotions, Harmful Strategies, and the Role of Fire Service Culture
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Xiangyu Li, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 511,794.00

Firefighters, like other first responders such as police, EMS, and medical
personnel, are facing increasing concerns about their mental health and well-
being due to the stressful nature of their jobs. Moreover, for firefighters
struggling with stress, the "fire service culture" discourages showing weakness
and seeking help, contributing to their struggles. These issues have led to
staffing issues and a shortage of recruits in many areas. This project examines
various coping strategies as well as the influence of fire service culture that
varies across departments, stations, and shifts. Focusing on the impact of the
fire service culture provides unique insight into the role of organizational
culture on mental health outcomes. Findings of the project contribute to an
improved understanding of stress and coping for first responders, ensuring that
communities continue to receive high-quality emergency responses while promoting
the well-being of first responders.

This project tests a multilevel model of the effects of fire service culture,
operationalized as masculinity contest culture, a culture that emphasizes
competition, risk, and hiding weaknesses. Through stratified random sampling,
the researchers collect data from employees of fire departments that vary by
size, region, and type across the United States. Preliminary data suggest that
masculinity contest culture at the team level interacts with individual coping
strategies to moderate the effects of stressors on emotional states and
ultimately mental health (e.g., PTSD and suicidal ideation) and job outcomes
(e.g., job withdrawal, job performance, and turnover intentions). The findings
help to diagnose the role of culture more precisely in the stress and coping
process and connect the dots for organizational interventions that can promote
healthy coping and potentially mitigate the effects of various job stressors. In
addition to more traditional stressors, this project addresses key pandemic
stressors that can be of interest to other researchers, practitioners, and
policymakers. The award disseminates the findings in a variety of academic and
practitioner outlets so that it reaches not only other academics but also
leaders in first responder organizations.

This project is jointly funded by the Science of Organizations Program (SoO) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.