* 2317542
* A Flexible Circuit Design that Restores Locomotion after Injury
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Karen Mesce, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Forlano
* 08/31/2026
* USD 680,000.00

A huge barrier for restoring locomotion after injury in mammals, including
humans, is that the descending brain inputs needed to initiate and regulate
downstream spinal circuits are unable to regrow across the damaged spinal cord.
Unfortunately, biologically ‘tricking’ neurons to reconnect with former targets
has been met with limited success. Might there be another way of activating
locomotor spinal circuitry below the site of injury? Our newest experiments in
the medicinal leech indicate that the remodeling of the stretch-sensitive
neurons, activated during the elongation and shortening phases of crawling
behavior, are likely key to the understanding of how locomotor circuits are once
again turned on and contribute to coordinated locomotion. Our work provides a
rare and unique opportunity to explore how a novel sensory-based circuit design
replaces a centrally-based governing system for the initiation and coordination
of locomotion. Importantly, we can examine the cellular basis of this switch in
the same individuals over time. This flexibility in design should have
significant ramifications for the creation of locomoting robotic systems,
especially those that are soft-bodied like the leech. Our research is highly
interdisciplinary and will involve the use of innovative molecular and
anatomical approaches to understanding neuronal plasticity; we also aim to
include citizen-scientists and other volunteers around the globe in our
research. The PI and Co-PI will continue to develop ways to support women,
first-generation college students, and underrepresented scientists in their
labs, and through the development of new inclusion and diversity initiatives
through their respective scientific organizations.

Our interdisciplinary team will explore how novel neural circuits, in the
medicinal leech, emerge and orchestrate a recovery of locomotion after the nerve
cord and brain become separated. When descending inputs from the brain neuron
R3b-1 are removed, crawling is completely lost, yet surprisingly returns after
about 2 weeks. Our goal is to study the underlying circuit design that accounts
for this restored crawling. Key to crawl recovery are the proprioceptive stretch
receptors (SRs) that pepper each body-wall segment. These proprioceptors,
although not injured themselves, sprout new centrally-located (and
intersegmental) output branches that are predicted to target crawl-related
circuitry, especially in the ‘lead’ ganglion directly below the site of nerve
cord injury. We will use electrophysiological recording, voltage-sensitive dye
imaging, and electron microscopy to interrogate the role of the lead ganglion
and SRs in establishing crawl recovery. To study changes in gene expression
across neurons in the lead and adjacent ganglia, and in the SRs, we will use
spatial transcriptomics, whereby genome-wide expression analysis will be mapped
back to precise locations in specific ganglia and SR processes obtained from
histological sections. Our methods and instrumentation, at our respective
institutions, will allow for subcellular localization of mRNA molecules in
somata, neuronal processes (intrinsic and extrinsic), and synaptic terminals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.