* 2317076
* Conference: IEC Asset Driven Equitable Partnership (ADEP) Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Connor, Inclusive Engineering Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,997.00

The IEC Asset Driven Equitable Partnerships (ADEP) Workshop offers Core Members
of the Inclusive Engineering Consortium (IEC) the opportunity to explore ideas
for identifying, utilizing and building on existing assets for research and
education in cooperation with collaborators from Predominantly White
Institutions (PWIs), government and industry. The mission of IEC is to enable
electrical and computer engineering (ECE) programs at minority-serving
institutions (MSIs) produce more and better prepared graduates by building
partnerships with PWIs, industry, and government agencies. These partnerships
must be equitable with all voices being heard and all relevant assets identified
and utilized. This has led IEC to address what makes an asset-driven equitable
partnership and how to develop and sustain such partnerships. This workshop will
be a major step in implementing ideas developed within IEC to collectively
address common opportunities and problems by more fully and productively
utilizing Asset Based Equitable Partnerships to graduate more and better
prepared minority engineers; increase efficiency and productivity at MSIs; and
develop a sustainable and effective infrastructure to support minority students,
faculty and staff. In time, the IEC effort will grow and the model being
developed can be replicated and implemented for other disciplines.

The overall Inclusive Engineering Consortium (IEC) vision is to be a
collaboration of Minority Serving Institutions Working as One to Advance the ECE
Enterprise. It has become clear that there is a need to get a representative set
of Core MSI Members in the same room as potential colleagues from PWIs, industry
and government to specifically address the barriers to real collaboration and
identify the kind of long-term investments required on both sides to achieve
success. Workshop participants will develop strategies that join IEC Core,
Affiliate, and Corporate members together to create the organizational support
structure and activities necessary to realize IEC’s grand vision. For such
collaborations to work, the partners must know one another, commit to one
another, invest in one another, and take responsibility for one another’s
success. Equitable partnerships are built on mutual investment, respect, and
clear identification of each partner's assets. This includes tangible resources
like funding or expertise and intangible assets like relationships and networks.
When partners work equitably with one another, all voices are heard and
considered in decision-making, and partners work together to achieve specific,
mutually agreed upon outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.