* 2317424
* I-Corps: Sustainable Optimization of Circular Economy Practices During Post-Disaster Recovery Phase
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Mohamed ElZomor, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology which provides knowledge to support stakeholders and
decision makers take astute and engineered decisions during the disaster
recovery phase. In the United States, the market size of building demolition and
deconstruction exceeds $7 billion per year. On the other hand, the market size
of the Natural Disasters and Emergency Relief Services industry is approximately
$14 billion. This research provides technologies to advocate new policies and
management strategies that can empower impacted communities by ensuring a faster
and more sustainable recovery, providing employment opportunities to
underrepresented minority groups who become extremely vulnerable to poverty and
homelessness, particularly post-disasters, and offering a paradigm shift to
utilize circular economy practices during a post-disaster recovery phase.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology to help decision-
makers make informed decisions to determine the time required to disassemble
building components, predict the amount of waste generated in the process, and
estimate the dollar salvage value of the recovered components. To achieve this
goal, the research activities will adopt multiple technologies including using
LiDAR technology to assess the reconstruction site and any damages, cracks,
deformation, or defects in building components, use databases and ASP.NET web
applications to determine disassembly time, waste produced, and value of
recovered materials, and apply machine learning and predictive modeling to
automate the deconstruction process. This technology will be developed by
leveraging approaches and technologies from multidisciplinary fields of
knowledge from civil engineering, programming, and disaster management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.