* 2317787
* A Graph-based Methodology for Modeling the Nucleation of Weak Electrolytes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jordan Schmidt, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 149,315.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jordan R. Schmidt of University of
Wisconsin-Madison will develop new methods for simulating the growth of crystals
in solution. The nucleation and growth of crystals is a ubiquitous phenomenon
that underlies many chemical and biological processes, from the formation of
water ice to the growth of bone via biomineralization. Schmidt and his research
team will develop and apply new methods that allow the initial stages of crystal
growth to be examined in atomistic detail via computer simulations, potentially
opening the door to a better understanding for how to direct and control the
growth of important crystalline materials. A special emphasis will be placed on
modeling the growth of important solutes with low solubility, e.g., emerging
nano-porous materials, where existing simulation methods are inadequate.
Professor Schmidt will also conduct additional efforts to broaden participation
in theoretical chemistry, both in this project and in the wider scientific
community, via participation in the UW Madison Chemistry Opportunities (ChOPS)
and ACS Bridge to the Doctorate programs. The Schmidt team will also focus on
K-12 outreach activities, including live chemistry demonstrations, including
those on crystal nucleation, at local elementary and middle schools and the
Wisconsin Science Festival.

In this project, the Schmidt group at U. Wisconsin-Madison will develop and
apply a graph theory-based methodology that is tailored toward materials whose
crystal structure exhibits directional bonding, whether purely electrostatic, or
via coordination complexes, and thus can be described as a “graph” of connected
monomers. Using a bootstrapping approach, the free energies of growing nuclei
will be calculated via a rigorous approach rooted in statistical thermodynamics.
The methodology eliminates the length- and timescale limitations inherent to the
nucleation of such weak electrolytes (e.g. mass transport, desolvation) that
currently preclude the atomistic simulation of weak electrolyte nucleation.
Following development, validation and optimizations to further enhance the
efficiency of this graph-based approach, the team will explore applications to
simple salts, weak electrolytes, and nano-porous materials (i.e., metal-organic
frameworks), an important class of low-solubility material where nucleation
plays a key (and often limiting) role in materials synthesis and crystal
engineering. The resulting codes/scripts will be released in open-source form
via GitHub to enable applications to other domains by the scientific community
at large.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.