* 2317630
* Toward an Improved Understanding of Particle Dry Deposition Velocity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Markus Petters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 432,369.00

The investigators in this project will conduct experimental and theoretical work
in order to improve our understanding of the rate of the dry deposition of
particles, one of the processes by which particles settle and deposit onto
surfaces. The speed at which particles undergo dry deposition, which is
fundamental to our understanding of particles and our atmosphere, still has
large uncertainties due to the complexity of making observations at the small
spatial scales in which this process occurs. The project team will take
measurements in controlled laboratory settings as well as in the field and use
the knowledge gained to update model representations of the particle dry
deposition process. This research is expected to lead to improvements in air
quality and climate models. The project team will also develop a 5-week
meteorology and air quality instrumentation seminar, which will count towards
college credits, geared towards junior and senior undergraduate students.

There are two primary scientific objectives in this work: (1) chamber
measurements for exploring the impact of size, chemistry, and other parameters
on dry deposition velocity; and (2) ambient measurements of refractory black
carbon fluxes using both eddy covariance methods and filter deposition
techniques. This project will provide the research community with updated
parameters for the representation of dry deposition velocity, which could be
used by a wide variety of models. The project team is motivated by the
persistent large uncertainty (approximately two orders of magnitude) for dry
deposition velocity. In order to reduce this uncertainty, the project team will:
(1) carry out chamber measurements to assess the effects of aerosol size, phase,
and shape on dry deposition velocity; (2) optimize techniques for measuring
black carbon from filter extracts; (3) conduct ambient measurements of
refractory black carbon turbulent fluxes and filter deposition; and (4) improve
the current analytical formulation used in models for aerosol dry deposition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.