* 2317537
* DISES: Cumulative effects of ecological and social stressors on the dynamics of integrated ranching-wildlife systems: drought, wolves, and human decision-makers
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Chloe Wardropper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 10/31/2026
* USD 1,403,573.00

As environmental changes intensify around the world, both humans and wildlife
face greater uncertainty and risk, threatening both human livelihoods and
wildlife biodiversity. This research seeks to understand how multiple sources of
stress impact humans, free-ranging livestock, and wildlife in shared rangelands
in the western US. Increasingly frequent and more severe droughts make plant
forage for wild herbivores and cattle less predictable and abundant, even as the
return of gray wolves to parts of the landscape increases predation risk. As a
result, wildlife such as deer and elk, as well as free-ranging livestock, may be
forced to trade off food and security, and ranchers grazing their cattle on
public land may face more uncertainty. This research will assess (1) how drought
and wolves interact to affect wild herbivores and free-ranging cattle
distributions across the landscape, (2) how decision-makers respond to these two
sources of stress, and (3) how information, provided via a new wildlife and
plant forecasting application, is received and used by both ranchers and
wildlife managers. The project will also increase public awareness of human and
wildlife connections and interactions in rangeland ecosystems via a documentary
film, as well as by training citizen scientists to classify camera-trapped
images of rangeland wildlife. A diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students as well as a post-doctoral researcher will be trained over the course
of this project. Outcomes of this project include a better understanding of how
climate and carnivore risks affect human decision-making, as well as how humans
impact rangeland food webs via cattle stocking and wildlife removal, potentially
leading to increased opportunities for coexistence between humans and wildlife
in changing environments.

Ecological shifts brought about by climatic change can strongly interact with
other sources of change, such as recolonizing large carnivores, to alter food
web dynamics and potentially reduce ecosystem provisioning for humans. The
uncertainty created by such interactions also challenges human decision-making.
A critical gap exists in our knowledge of how climate change affects human-
wildlife systems via wild food webs, and how natural resource decision-makers
respond to such stress. We hypothesize that multiple environmental stressors
(e.g., climate change and novel predators) will have complex and interactive
effects on human-wildlife systems. Effects will likely occur via trophic
interactions among predators, prey, domestic animals, and plants within shared
food webs, potentially reducing the provisioning of humans from the shared
ecosystem and human tolerance for predatory and competitive wildlife, and
increasing uncertainty for natural resource decision-makers. There is a pressing
need to advance models, tools and theory to (A) understand how multiple
stressors interactively affect food webs in which humans and domestic animals
are embedded, and (B) identify and quantify feedbacks among natural resource
decision-makers and human-wildlife systems in response to multiple environmental
stressors. Such information would assist in identifying potential “tipping
points” in system resiliency and allow for better management of interacting
wildland and agricultural systems. Using a factorial design of study sites
across combinations of wolf presence and drought in Oregon and Idaho, we will
study rancher-wildlife-plant dynamics. Data will stem from rancher surveys,
wildlife camera grids, and ground-surveyed and remotely-sensed plant data. We
will integrate social and ecological data into a structural equation modeling
framework, which will drive ecological forecasts of predation and competition
risk to livestock for ranchers and managers to use in future decision making. To
understand natural resource manager decisions, which occur at larger spatial
scales than rancher decisions, we will conduct a broad-scale analysis of the
rangeland SES across the Western US using publicly-available wildlife and social
data and remotely-sensed environmental characteristics. By analyzing decision-
making across these spatial scales, we anticipate being able to identify key
feedbacks, emergent phenomena, and potential tipping points in resilience for
the human and wildlife components of the rangeland SES.

This project is jointly funded by the Dynamics of Integrated Socio-Environmental
Systems (DISES) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.