* 2317302
* CAREER: Single-Atom Alloy Nanocrystals for Catalyzing Sustainable Nitrogen Cycling
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Huiyuan Zhu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2027
* USD 444,029.00

The industrial production of fertilizer – produced from ammonia (NH3) generated
by the energy-intensive, fossil fuel-dependent Haber-Bosch (H-B) process - has
disrupted the natural nitrogen cycle, resulting in groundwater pollution from
nitrates (NO3-). The project utilizes electrochemistry to react nitrate
compounds with hydrogen (derived sustainably from water) to manufacture NH3,
while simultaneously decomposing the nitrate pollutants and restoring balance to
the nitrogen cycle. Specifically, the research focuses on the discovery and
design of catalysts that enable efficient nitrate-to-ammonia transformation
driven by renewable electricity. Beyond the technical aspects, the project will
train students from diverse groups at the interface of catalysis, chemistry, and
engineering. The research will be integrated with educational and outreach
efforts to illustrate the importance of sustainability in daily life while
stimulating excitement for STEM amongst K-12 youth, especially those from low-
income families.

The electrochemical nitrate reduction reaction (NO3RR) offers a potentially
attractive distributed NH3 production route, because it utilizes nitrate
pollutants as the N-source, thus circumventing activation of the strong N≡N
triple bond associated with the H-B process. The project will develop design
strategies for single-atom alloy (SAA) electrocatalysts for the NO3RR and
advance the fundamental understanding of both the catalytic active sites and the
elementary mechanisms. The project is built on the central hypothesis that
surface doping of Cu nanocrystals with isolated metal atoms (for example, Pt,
Pd, Rh, or Ru) creates well-defined sites that activate water molecules and
generate H-atoms that spill over to the Cu. The H-atoms hydrogenate N-species at
low overpotentials and selectively tailoring of the binding strength of NO3RR
surface intermediates through narrowly distributed d-states of single atoms for
high-rate production of NH3, can potentially go beyond adsorption-energy scaling
limitations. Catalyst synthesis, characterization, and electrochemical
evaluation will be facilitated by advanced characterization techniques including
operando surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy, differential
electrochemical mass spectrometry, in-situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
advanced electron microscopy, and computational tools such as density functional
theory. The educational components of the project include (1) integrating
research into the curriculum, (2) interdisciplinary student training, (3)
involving diverse underrepresented students in science and engineering, and (4)
implementing STEM-based outreach programs through the Center for Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity at Virginia Tech and summer programs at Wonder Universe: A
Children’s Museum. In addition, the newly launched Virginia Clean Energy and
Catalysis Club will be leveraged as a platform to promote student training. The
outreach plan also includes the development of an interactive play-based
pedagogical platform, “Sustainable City in Minecraft,” that will provide young
students the opportunity to design and construct a futuristic sustainable city.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.