* 2317254
* Building-Block-Flow Model for Large-Eddy Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Adrian Lozano-Duran, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

Computational fluid dynamics stands as an essential tool for the design and
optimization of aerodynamic/hydrodynamic vehicles. It is estimated that the
impact of reducing transportation drag by 5% would be equivalent to that of
doubling the US wind energy production. However, computational predictions of
fluid flows around realistic vehicles poses a unique challenge due to the
ubiquity of complex flow physics, including adverse pressure-gradient effects,
flow separation, and laminar-to-turbulent transition. While some computational
models predict one or two scenarios, no model performs accurately across all
flow phenomena. This project will seek to devise a unified closure model for
computational fluid dynamics capable of accounting for a rich collection of flow
physics. The goals of this project are to couple fundamental physics and
machine-learning modeling for a new computational fluids model. The project also
leverages existing programs to promote diversity and inclusion in engineering,
including participation in annual summer research programs and undergraduate
research opportunities to engage women and underrepresented minorities.

The core assumption of the closure model proposed is that a finite set of simple
canonical flows contains the essential physics to predict more complex
scenarios. The approach is implemented using artificial neural networks with
large-eddy simulation and brings together five unique advances: (1) the model is
directly applicable to arbitrary complex geometries, (2) it is constructed to
predict different flow regimes (zero/favorable/adverse mean-pressure-gradient
wall turbulence, separation, statistically unsteady turbulence with mean-flow
three-dimensionality, and laminar flow), (3) the model can be scaled-up to
capture additional flow physics if needed (e.g., shock waves), (4) the model
guarantees consistency with the numerical discretization and the gridding
strategy by compensating for numerical errors, and (5) the output of the model
is accompanied by a confidence score in the prediction used for uncertainty
quantification and grid refinement. The cases of study range from canonical flat
plate turbulence to complex flows such as realistic aircraft configurations. The
foundations established in this work will enable new venues to model multiple
flow regimes in computational fluid dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.