* 2317500
* I-Corps: A Dedicated Foundry Service for Emerging Materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Saptarshi Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of advancements in the use of emerging materials for semiconductor
manufacturing. The dedicated emerging materials foundry could alleviate the chip
shortage concerns which have disproportionately affected small and medium-sized
businesses which use chips in their products. There may be four classes of
customers: scientists/engineers in the fields of chemistry, biology, etc.;
scientists/engineers who grow nanomaterial in their labs; small/medium sized
internet of things companies; and semiconductor packaging facilities that are
interested in integrating chips with their existing products. For each class, an
application-specific chip will be developed which will harness certain unique
properties of 2-dimensional materials. The low-to-medium volume production line
of the proposed business will enable the flexibility to meet the targeted needs
of a large variety of customers who will not be reliant on the rigid tape-out
schedules of foundries.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a dedicated emerging
materials foundry for producing novel chip designs using unconventional
materials with a quick turnaround time. With the continued scaling of
transistors in silicon chips, Mooreâ€™s law has reached a phase of stagnation. To
overcome this challenge, novel semiconductor materials have been used to
experimentally demonstrate superior performance in ultra-scaled transistors.
Despite their fascinating properties, there has been very little progress in
transitioning these state-of-the-art technologies from the lab to the
marketplace. As a result, there are hardly any foundries today which manufacture
chips based on novel and emerging semiconductors. All this while, the growth of
2-dimensional materials on a large scale, which is crucial in mass producing
transistors, has been drastically improved. This is a unique opportunity to
commercialize an emerging materials semiconductor foundry at a time when the US
wants to regain its leadership in semiconductor and chip manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.