* 2317549
* I-Corps:  Trustworthy Synthetic Data Generation
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Guang Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
software products that support modern privacy enhancing technology. The
project's core technology proposes data-rich applications for a new and
trustworthy way to maintain data utility and protect data privacy. Using
generative artificial intelligence (AI), the proposed technology unlocks greater
data impact for small and medium sized businesses and organizations while
aligning with modern privacy law. In addition, the software products have
potential to target marginalized communities in "digital rights deserts," where
clients and customers' digital rights are significantly limited by businesses
and organizations capacity, data privacy awareness, and cost. With the proposed
software products and accompanying auditing service, more individual businesses
and companies may receive more access to their data benefits and care of their
customers' digital rights regardless of their demographic and socio-economic
background.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of deep learning technology for
tabular data synthesis. The project leverages the use of generative adversarial
networks for trustworthy tabular data synthesis. The interdisciplinary academic-
industrial collaboration experience provides a proven framework to integrate
data synthesis technology into modern machine learning workflow to support and
develop modern digital businesses and services. Pilot research was used to
develop an integration of artificial intelligence algorithms towards audit
quality and trustworthiness of synthesized tabular data to unlock safe, secure,
cross sector data sharing. In addition, research has been performed with
industrial partners in the social media platform sector to assess and polish the
technology towards providing users privacy-preserving metrics and exercise
evaluation through industrial-level machine learning pipelines. The proposed
technology has the potential to positively change platform users' digital rights
by significantly enhancing safety, security and anonymity, advancing digital law
enforcement, and increasing data benefits for both digital service providers and
users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.