* 2317751
* CAREER: Towards Gray-Fault Tolerant Cloud through Harnessing and Enhancing System Observability
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Peng Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2025
* USD 306,687.00

Cloud systems are the crucial infrastructure to many services existing today.
Ensuring cloud software runs continuously without disruptions is both vital and
challenging. Decades of research have developed mature techniques to detect and
mask faults in distributed systems. But these techniques often use a simple
model that assumes a system component either works or completely stops. Numerous
real-world cloud incidents, however, suggest that production cloud systems
frequently experience gray failures---a degraded operational mode in which a
system component appears to be working but is in fact severely impaired. Gray
failures cannot be effectively dealt with by current solutions. The overall
objective of this proposal is to develop a holistic approach to detect, pinpoint
and diagnose gray failures in production cloud systems.

To realize the objective, four synergistic research activities are proposed.
Specifically, the project conducts a study on real-world gray failure cases in
popular distributed systems, measure and characterize the observability of
existing systems. The project then designs a novel hybrid analysis that
automatically inserts report-generation hooks across the whole systems stack to
harness observability for detecting gray failures. To pinpoint the culprit
component, this project further proposes algorithms to infer causality from the
collected observations. Lastly, this project designs a runtime checking
framework for increasing observability and online diagnosis of gray failures.

Gray failures are a common cause of cloud service outages, resulting in
significant financial loss. This project can effectively improve our
understandings of gray failures and help detect and debug gray failures to
reduce their impact on the ubiquitous cloud infrastructures. Software is moving
to be more distributed with increasing subtle failure modes. Observability,
fault detection, and localization are critical skills for this paradigm shift
but are rarely covered in the existing curriculum. This project addresses this
educational gap through curriculum development and student training. This
project also promotes Computer Science education to underrepresented Baltimore
high school students by organizing workshops in partnership with a non-profit
organization, Code in the Schools, for local high school students to showcase
cloud and system failure concepts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.