* 2317068
* Conference: Fall 2023 Mathematics Conference: Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Alin Pogan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 14,880.00

On September 29-30, 2023, the Department of Mathematics of Miami University in
Oxford, Ohio, will hold a conference on Differential Equations and Dynamical
Systems and their Applications. In conjunction with the conference there will be
a meeting devoted to research presentations by undergraduate students
celebrating the Ohio Delta Chapter of Pi Mu Epsilon National Honorary
Mathematics Society. The main goals of the conference are to inspire the new
generation of mathematicians by exposing students to cutting-edge research in
the area of Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, foster collaborations
between participants between researchers in the Tri-State region (Ohio,
Kentucky, Indiana), and encourage involvement of underrepresented minorities in
mathematical research on this topic. The 2023 Mathematics Conference will have
an additional goal of reviving in-person interactions and rebuilding the
community negatively impacted by the recent pandemic.

A broad range of topics will be presented in invited talks by Janet Best (The
Ohio State University), Todd Kapitula (Calvin University), and Milena
Stanislavova (The University of Alabama at Birmingham). Participants will
present their research results in a series of parallel talks. Sessions devoted
to student presentations are planned. Students will be addressed by Stephanie
Edwards (Hope College), the President of Pi Mu Epsilon National Honorary
Mathematics Society. The conference will serve as a platform for social
interactions between students and junior researchers with senior mathematicians
through a sequence of organized events. Conference information is available on
the following website:
https://miamioh.edu/cas/academics/departments/mathematics/about/events/annual-
mathematics-conference/index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.