* 2317868
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Fluorspar Ages and Geophysical Models to Constrain the Timing and Mechanisms of the Collapse of the Cordillera in SW North America
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* William Holt, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2027
* USD 699,380.00

About 60 million years ago Southwestern North America was a mountain belt with
the length of the Himalayas and height of the Andes. These mountains collapsed
under their own load starting about 30 million years ago, ending in the classic
Basin and Range province that exists in the region today. The geological history
of this collapsing mountain belt is also connected with the formation of
deposits of minerals critically necessary for the security and maintenance of
the economic well-being of the United States. The research team will test the
hypothesis that fluids flowing through the crust were key to the collapse
through the dating of fluorspar deposits that are geographically associated.
These deposits themselves are a critical mineral resource. The research will use
innovative dating methods to estimate the time of formation of the fluorite and
associated minerals and compare this with the time of collapse of the highlands.
The timing for the emplacement of these deposits will provide key information
for proposed numerical simulations of the processes. Previous geophysical
studies have provided three-dimensional imaging of the Earth’s interior for the
region that will also be used to inform and test the numerical simulations, and
these geophysical studies will be updated to better aid the simulations. The
computer simulations will also contribute to a better understanding of the
sources and magnitudes of tectonic forces responsible for earthquakes in the
region, contributing to a better seismic hazard assessment. The project involves
a collaborative plan to engage a diverse undergraduate and graduate student
population with all components of laboratory, computational, and field work.

Outstanding questions remain about the thermomechanical processes involved in
the extensional collapse of the North American Southwest Cordillera, including
the evolution of thermal input, crustal fluids and melts, topographic change,
and plate tectonic and mantle flow evolution. Low upper mantle seismic wave
speeds, together with active volcanism, are insufficient to predict rapid
lithospheric strain rates in the southwestern US. Instead, in addition to the
slow upper mantle wave speeds and volcanism, the lithosphere is characterized by
abundant geothermal waters, enriched in F and 3He (indicating mantle fluid
sources), which predicts rapid lithospheric strain. Belts of fluorspar deposits,
which are associated with highly extended zones, are therefore likely to be
precipitates of paleofluids emplaced during times of rapid transtensional
crustal strain. The proposed work will test this hypothesis by using U/Pb and
(U–Th)/He dating combined with a high-resolution time-dependent thermomechanical
model. Furthermore, 40Ar/39Ar dating of associated sericite and alunite deposits
will provide validation and confidence in the fluorite dating methods.
Thermomechanical model outputs will be compared with geologic,
thermochronologic, sedimentologic, and geophysical observations. The proposed
thermochemical modeling will 1) quantify the causes and consequences of the
topographic changes of the study area by modeling the collapse of the Nevada-
plano and Arizona-plano; 2) identify the mechanisms for lithospheric weakening,
including the role of thermal and magmatic evolution; 3) provide direct tectonic
context for deformation and seismic hazards within the modern Basin and Range
Province; and 4) integrate the latest seismic results from the Earthscope
project by incorporating seismic, thermal, and compositional information of the
lithosphere-asthenosphere system. Metamorphic core complex formation is
hypothesized to be linked to collapse of highlands, but to date no 3-D models
have directly addressed the effects of body forces set up by realistic
topography. Methods developed for this proposal are poised to address the
physics of the development of the core complexes as well as the structural
evolution of the Basin and Range in the context of the inferred timing of
rheological weakening informed by fluorspar dating. The novel approach to dating
fluorspar, together with the integrated thermomechanical modeling plan, can be
applied to other regions of the world where fluorspar deposits are associated
with extensional zones. The proposed work involves a collaborative plan to
integrate a diverse undergraduate and graduate student population with all
components of laboratory, computational, and field work. The collaboration
involves colleagues and students from Suffolk Community College, Kingsborough
Community College, SUNY Oswego, Columbia University, and Stony Brook University.
The integrated work will engage under-represented minority undergraduate
students and will train the next generation of geoscientists in an exciting
interdisciplinary effort. Students will be engaged every summer in training
seminars, and will be involved in laboratory work, computational geodynamic
modeling using Python and Jupyter Notebooks, and field preparation, training,
and field work. Outreach efforts will culminate in short courses at GSA and AGU
on communicating science to a broader audience. This collaborative work explores
the cutting-edge linkage between critical mineral formation and the 3-D
evolution of the dynamics of Southwest Cordillera.

This project is jointly funded by the Frontier Research in Earth Systems Program
and the Division of Earth Sciences to support projects that increase research
capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety of institution
types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.