* 2317987
* Conference: Resilient Cooperative AI/ML in Compromised Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Daniel Wolf, Cyber Pack Ventures, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 197,850.00

The workshop series, Computational Cybersecurity in Compromised Environments
(C3E), explores the impact of recent technological advances and innovations in
cyber-physical systems that must operate in environments that might themselves
be hazardous and contested spaces. This project is part of the C3E workshop
series, known as the “Challenge Problems”, where students as members of teams,
mentored by researchers from government, industry and academia, conduct novel
case studies, motivated by the themes of the workshop. These special studies are
structured to provide insights into the challenges of adaption and adoption of
new technologies and their implications for system engineering, operations,
behaviors, and what is knowable.

Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning (AI/ML) technologies are increasingly
part of a broad range of systems and a current subject of great interest and
potentially considerable benefit to society yet, these new systems are raising
profound concerns for system safety, dependability, security, resilience, and
the evolving relationship between humans and technology. The Challenge Problems
for this workshop focus on the role of AI/ML in critical infrastructure systems
operating in these compromised environments where decision support involves
human teaming and where resilience is seen through the lens of system risk and
risk mitigation. Topics for the challenge problems are prepared largely by
students in cooperation with their faculty advisors and mentors. The topics are
reviewed by a subcommittee of the workshop program and organizing committees.
Those teams whose topics are selected present the results of their year-long
studies at the opening plenary session at the C3E workshop the following year.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.