* 2317111
* Protein Manipulation and Engineering with an Electronic Biochemical Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Yongki Choi, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 357,033.00

Diseases are often the result of proteins that are malfunctioning. They may not
be interacting with other molecules as they usually do. They might no longer
perform their assigned function in a cell or tissue. Measuring the movements of
individual proteins would help determine the exact nature of the problem causing
the disease. However, capturing the rapid movements of single proteins is
difficult. A single-protein manipulation technique will be employed to study the
dynamic protein-protein interactions. A range of research-based, active-learning
opportunities will be directed towards K-12 students and undergraduates.
Underrepresented and disadvantaged students, as well as local Native Americans,
will be actively recruited.

The goals of this project are to identify the dynamics of protein-ligand
interactions and to attempt to manipulate these interactions relative to
specific functions. A single-molecule manipulation approach will be developed.
It will combine fluorescence assay methods with a high-speed, high-temporal
resolution electronic single-molecule nanocircuit. The approach should allow the
detection of subtle and transient conformational fluctuations and transitions.
In addition, this project will probe ligand-dependent enzyme fluctuations,
conformational transitions, and catalysis, and link them through protein-ligand
binding models. Furthermore, this project aims to control enzyme functions by
perturbing and stimulating enzyme activities during ligand interactions using a
weak, non-thermal oscillating force field. Tuning the oscillation rate and the
strength of the driving force may confirm the presence of stochastic resonance
and stochastic activation in a driven nonlinear dynamic enzyme system. Once such
activation is established, it could be used to trigger protein conformational
dynamics and manipulate overall protein activities and functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.