* 2317099
* American Political Science Association Dissertation Improvement Grants
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Steven Smith, American Political Science Association
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 05/31/2026
* USD 942,221.00

The APSA Dissertation Improvement Grant project provides support to enhance and
improve the conduct of doctoral dissertation projects in political science. The
program continues the success of the APSA program in place since 2020. Each year
the program will provide approximately twenty-five awards that support doctoral
dissertation research that advances knowledge and understanding of citizenship,
government, and politics. Along with this direct support, the program provides
professional development and public engagement resources, to amplify the effect
of the award on the awardee's career and on the impact of their work. This
project promotes the progress of science by identifying and supporting doctoral
dissertation research projects that have the potential to advance knowledge of
citizenship, government, and politics. In addition, the project supports the
advancement of national health, prosperity, and welfare, by supporting projects
that identify ways to use knowledge of citizenship, government, and politics to
benefit society and the national defense. Along with its direct effects on the
potential for supported research to advance knowledge, this project also
supports increased participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
political science research by recruiting diverse applicant and reviewer pools to
support doctoral students from diverse groups and institutions. In addition, the
project supports increased public engagement with political science through
ongoing attention to training and support for public engagement to strengthen
and enhance the exchange between the public and political scientists.

The APSA Dissertation Improvement Grant project provides support to enhance and
improve the conduct of doctoral dissertation projects in political science. The
program continues the success of the APSA program in place since 2020. The APSA
Dissertation Improvement Grant program awards approximately twenty-five grants
yearly of between $10,000 and $15,000 to support doctoral dissertation research
that advances knowledge and understanding of citizenship, government, and
politics. Awards support basic research (applied research will not be funded)
which is theoretically derived and empirically oriented. Successful proposals
focus on research costs not normally covered by the student's university and
will be evaluated based on their intellectual merit and broader impact. The
program will be executed by APSA staff and supervised by the APSA Executive
Director. In addition, the program will also connect awardees to APSA’s
extensive professional development and public engagement networks and resources,
to amplify the effect of the award on the awardee’s career and on the impact of
their work. This project advances knowledge through support of highly promising
doctoral dissertation research in political science. Importantly, the program
maximizes impact through diversifying the applicant pool, thus identifying and
supporting dissertation research that explores solutions to a wide range of
institutional, political, and social challenges. Through recruiting diverse
applicant and reviewer pools to support doctoral students from diverse groups
and institutions, this program also has a broader benefit to society by
supporting increased participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
political science research and the development of a diverse, globally
competitive political science workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.