* 2317030
* LEAPS-MPS: Dynamics of Quantum Information in Strongly Interacting Many-Body Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Bihui Zhu, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2025
* USD 188,793.00

Understanding how quantum information propagates across many interacting
components and how to control it to make improved quantum devices is an
important challenge. Systems with a collection of quantum particles can provide
powerful resources for efficient computation and enable properties distinct from
individual components. However, such quantum mechanical effects are usually
fragile to system imperfections and environmental perturbations and are
challenging to harness. This research aims to address the challenge through
developing new protocols to understand the dynamical process in systems relevant
to present quantum platforms and uncover new types of many-body phenomena robust
to these environmental effects, leveraging recent advances in atomic physics and
quantum information science. Alongside these research goals, this project will
implement a diverse set of education and outreach activities to train and
recruit graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, increasing their
literacy in quantum science and preparing them as the next generation workforce
in science and technology. The past decades have witnessed remarkable progress
in building controllable quantum platforms, such as those using cold atoms and
ions. These platforms open exciting opportunities to examine complex quantum
systems beyond equilibrium, where the dynamics of entanglement and correlations
remain largely poorly understood. This project seeks to address fundamental
questions regarding the dynamics of quantum information in many-body systems and
to explore new classes of dynamical behaviors. To this end, this research
project will include two intercorrelated thrusts. The first thrust will
investigate the growth of quantum correlations in spin ensembles described by
nonintegrable lattice Hamiltonians relevant to cold-atom platforms. This part of
study will quantitatively analyze the unitary many-body dynamics in various
geometries and target practical procedures that can be realized in current
experiments using cold atoms. The second thrust will focus on systems subject to
environmental effects, through investigating quantum circuits with nonunitary
measurement operations. This part of the study will employ a combination of
analytical tools and state-of-the-art numerical calculations to characterize the
different dynamical phases and entanglement structures generated. These research
directions can further provide guidance for efficiently steering many-body
systems into quantum correlated states against noises. This project is jointly
funded by the Physics Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.