* 2317071
* Travel: Kokes Awards for the 28th North American Catalysis Society Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Nathaniel Deskins, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The project provides travel assistance for approximately 54 graduate students
from U.S. universities to attend the 28th North American Catalysis Society
Meeting (NAM28) in Providence, Rhode Island, June 18-23, 2023. Catalysis has
long served as a critical industrial and environmental technology for
facilitating the efficient and targeted conversion of raw materials to fuels and
chemical products, while also remediating waste products and pollutants. The NAM
meetings are the premier U.S. conference in the areas of catalysis, surface
science and catalytic reaction engineering. The meetings bring together
academic, industrial, and government laboratory researchers to share the latest
technical advances through oral and poster presentations, as well as plenary
talks, panel discussions, and topical workshops addressing key challenges in the
field of catalysis. Graduate student attendance is critical for providing
opportunities for the students to present their own research while learning of
recent advances in the field and new directions in catalysis research enabling
critical technologies related to renewable and sustainable energy for chemical
manufacturing, alternative fuels, and environmental remediation. The meeting
will also provide networking and collaboration opportunities for the graduate
students as they plan their post-graduate careers. Financial assistance to
graduate students will be through the Kokes Travel Award program. NSF funding
covers the registration fee and hotel costs â€“ together totaling $933 per student
for the 5 conference days. A total of 54 students have been identified to
receive NSF travel assistance from a total of 145 awardees (based on expected
funding from the North American Catalysis Society and other government funding
sources in addition to NSF) and a cumulative award budget of $145,000. The
awardees are selected based on a rigorous review process from 288 student
applications based primarily on merit, but with consideration of need-based
criteria that will enable the Kokes Awards committee to ensure appropriate
representation from underrepresented groups, including minorities and women,
first-time attendees to the NAM meeting, students of junior faculty, and
geographical distribution. Merit-based criteria include 1) peer-reviewed
evaluation of the student's submitted presentation abstract, 2) a letter of
recommendation from the student's adviser, and 3) the student's CV. The awardees
are expected to attend the entire conference and provide service to the
conference through assisting in the organization of the meeting as appropriate.
In addition to scientific learning, NAM28 will provide student attendees
opportunities for networking, social interaction and informal discussions. The
meeting is particularly beneficial as a career development tool for graduate
students from U.S. institutions, who will form the backbone of the future U.S.
chemicals, fuels, and environmental sustainability industries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.