* 2317734
* Resilience and risk in word inferencing and vocabulary growth for grade schoolers from low socioeconomic status homes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jackie Nelson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 802,000.00

In grade school, learning new words allows children to access, think about, and
discuss new ideas and building a robust, age appropriate vocabulary supports
reading comprehension throughout school. Evidence shows that children from low
socioeconomic homes, on average, have more difficulty learning new words from
written materials in the classroom, though whether this carries over to learning
from auditory materials is unclear. Further, some children from similar
environments defy the odds and excel at word learning. In this project we use
brain and behavioral measures to identify which children struggle vs excel at
word learning, in which context (auditory vs written) and why. From this data we
can provide tailored learning plans to help support vocabulary growth for all
children in grade school, allowing each to reach their full potential.

The objective of this proposal is to use behavioral and brain measures to study
variability in the process of word inferencing (a key component of word
learning) in the auditory and written modalities within a group of children from
lower SES homes, and the implications of those differences for vocabulary growth
6 months and 1 year later. We study 250 children across 2 age groups: ages 8-9
and 11-12 (approx. 3rd-7th grade). These are ages when reading greatly improves,
and expectations of “reading to learn” become critical across academics.
Children complete language and cognitive assessments as well as auditory and
written word inferencing tasks as their EEG is recorded. This is measured in
relation to parent-completed home environment surveys. Assessments are conducted
after 6 months and 1 year to measure vocabulary growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.