* 2317582
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Polymers for a Circular Economy (PCE)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chuanbing Tang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Greg Collins
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Polymers for a Circular Economy (PCE) is supported by the
Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry.
Plastics are ubiquitous and essential for modern society, but unfortunately
place a heavy toll on the environment. Ideally, replacements could be developed
for conventional plastics that would lower their environmental burdens yet
retain the unique physical properties that have made them indispensable. The
goal of PCE is to develop new strategies for synthesizing effective replacement
polymers from inexpensive starting materials that include carbon dioxide,
biomass residues from agriculture and forestry, and oils from food waste. An
equally important objective of PCE is to understand how to design novel polymers
that at the end of their life cycle, instead of entering a landfill, can be
effectively degraded or broken apart into safe, easily recyclable components.
PCE will be encouraging the advancement of student careers in science through
the development of training programs in entrepreneurship and the establishment
of joint academic/industry projects. Center team members will initiate a
student-led Sustainability Club to build social and cultural bridges among
scientists and citizen-scientists with different backgrounds in sustainable
chemistry. PCE will also develop a series of videos to educate the public on the
future of ensuring a sustainable future for plastics.

Creating true polymer circularity ultimately requires a massive shift from
petrochemicals to carbon-negative and neutral feedstocks in the synthetic
generation of the foundational monomer building blocks. New synthetic methods
and approaches will be developed for polymer synthesis, taking advantage of
sustainable feedstocks that include carbon dioxide, biomass residues, and oils
from food waste. Adhering to this theme of circularity, PCE will also
investigate monomers with intentionally positioned functional groups and
structural features that, after polymerization, instill a capability for
controlled degradation and/or depolymerization. Chemical approaches for
environmentally degradable polymers include functional group-containing
condensation polymers and polymers generated from bicyclic lactam- and lactone-
monomers. Depolymerization approaches for polymers will be investigated by
synthesizing polymers from vinyl monomers that form tertiary radicals and from
oligomers that form end group radicals. PCE will develop predictive multiscale
modeling to guide the synthesis of monomers, predict polymeric properties, and
understand the impact of functional group placements on degradation and
depolymerization at the molecular and mesoscopic scales. The simulation tools
utilized will include density functional theory and dissipative particle
dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.