* 2317318
* Collaborative Research: Academic Change and the RED Community of Practice: Sustaining a Revolution Through Change Leadership and Research
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Eva Andrijcic, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2026
* USD 255,655.00

The slow progress for change despite repeated calls for improving the way
undergraduate students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) are educated is the basis for this projectâ€™s importance. Although many
years of funding and development have been provided to help make improvements,
change in STEM education is not pervasive. Tradition, culture, structure, and
decision-making patterns set higher education apart from other organizational
settings and introduce unique challenges for creating systemic and sustainable
changes. This project will enable the creation of research-based practical
support for teams of change leaders trying to make change through the
Revolutionizing Engineering Departments (RED) grant mechanism. The project will
introduce faculty, graduate students, and staff serving on RED projects to
knowledge and research-based skills that are necessary to initiate, implement,
and sustain academic change on their campuses, build and support a consortium of
RED teams, and study the process of academic change.

The goals of the project are to help change leaders grow in knowledge, skills,
and resources by providing professional development, a community of practice and
research-based information, so that academic change can be successfully
implemented and sustained. The project team, Revolutionizing Engineering
Departments Participatory Action Research (REDPAR), represents a unique
practice-research partnership between the Making Academic Change Happen team at
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology and the Center for Evaluation and Research
for STEM Equity (CERSE) at the University of Washington. This partnership will
enable REDPAR to link practical, applied faculty development focused on making
academic change with research that identifies important change practices that
emerge in RED projects. The outcomes of the project will be accomplished through
summer faculty development workshops and during the RED Consortium Annual
Meeting. The faculty will be further supported through bi-monthly RED Consortium
calls which serve as opportunities for the RED Community of Practice to share
experiences and advice, and identify opportunities for collaboration. REDPAR
will match new RED teams with mentors (from more experienced RED cohorts) who
can provide practical advice. The research team will use RED grantee focus
groups and interview data to qualitatively examine 1) how organizational context
matters for teams and what they have been able to achieve, and 2) the aspects of
projects that have been sustained, and the role that institutional learning
mechanisms, organizational change models/theories, and context play in project
institutionalization. This project will partner with current and former RED
grantees to ensure that the work is useful to the STEM education changemaking
community. With the addition of the community colleges in RED, the project and
therefore the field will gain insights into the role of context in the wider
ecosystem of higher education. The findings from this project will improve our
understanding of institutionalizing systemic changes in higher education, and
how organizational contexts impact the success and sustainability of academic
change initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.