* 2317015
* Investigating assembly dynamics of a bacterial photosynthetic system and its impact on light-harvesting efficiency
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Po-Lin Chiu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,014,212.00

Photosynthetic bacteria thrive in diverse environments and possess unique
strategies to regulate photosynthesis under stress. As current knowledge of
these regulatory mechanisms is limited, this project delves into the
photosynthetic processes of these bacteria using a range of biophysical
techniques to unlock valuable insights into the physical principles. The study
of these simpler photosynthetic machines will provide insight into the evolution
and adaptation of the photosynthetic molecular apparatus. This project will
investigate the overall protein architecture and assembly dynamics of the green
sulfur bacterial (GSB) photosynthetic supercomplex, focusing on light regulatory
mechanisms. This project involves the training of graduate and undergraduate
students, particularly those from underrepresented minority backgrounds,
equipping them with the necessary skills to contribute to this cutting-edge
research. In addition, this endeavor is intertwined with the BioSense Network
platform, which will engage high-school teachers and students, to ignite their
interest in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

GSB are anaerobic photoautotrophs thriving in extreme conditions with low light
intensity and scarce nutrients. They have developed a highly efficient system
for harvesting and transducing photosynthetic energy. One system component is
the chlorosome, a large, specialized, membrane-bound light harvesting system,
that efficiently captures the limited number of photons available and transfers
the energy to the reaction center. This project aims to uncover how GSB
regulates this photosynthetic system to efficiently use minimal light for
cellular needs, by studying the spatial organization and assembly dynamics of
proteins, involved in maintaining and regulating photosynthetic energy transfer.
Cutting-edge cryo-EM methods will be applied to study the assembly dynamics,
while structural mass spectrometry (MS) will provide information about highly
flexible and unstructured protein domains within the supercomplex. The spatial
arrangement of relevant protein complexes will be visualized with Cryogenic
electron tomography to determine their positions in the cellular context. The
overall architecture and assembly dynamics of the GSB photosynthetic system will
be determined under various light intensities to understand how the molecular
assembly responds to changes in light levels while maintaining high levels of
energy transfer efficiency. The knowledge gained from this project will shed
light on energy flow within GSB and contribute to our understanding of molecular
evolution in photosynthesis.

This project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics program of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.