* 2317307
* Upcycling Waste Polyethylene into Nylon Precursors and Platform Chemicals via A Hybrid Pyrolysis-Biomanufacturing Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hsi-Wu Wong, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 463,136.00

Polyethylene (PE) is one of the most commonly produced plastics, primarily used
for plastic bags, containers, bottles, and toys. Currently, over 100 million
tons of PE are produced annually, accounting for 34% of the total plastics
market. Unfortunately, most PE products are single-use and discarded in
landfills, and waste PE contributes to over 50% of the plastics waste stream.
The projected 12% annual PE production rate growth combined with the lack of
effective recycling options make PE a major environmental concern. To recycle or
upcycle waste PE, mechanical disruption, thermochemical treatment, and
biochemical conversion processes have been explored, but these methods all
ultimately result in low product qualities, inefficient conversion rates to
value-added products, and high processing costs. None of the existing PE
recycling or upcycling methods alone will likely contribute to a circular
plastics economy. The objective of this project is to explore a two-step hybrid
oxidative catalytic pyrolysis–biochemical approach to upcycle waste PE into
chemical products with significantly higher values. This concept takes advantage
of the benefits of both thermochemical (oxidative catalytic pyrolysis) and
biochemical (biomanufacturing) methods for plastics upcycling. The proposed
technology will lead to reduced waste plastics disposal, mitigating its negative
environmental impacts. As UML being one of the Minority Serving Institutions
(MSI) in Massachusetts, the project team will recruit students from
underrepresented groups from underserved communities of the state to conduct
research. Outreach events targeting local high schools and learning-disabled
students pursing STEM careers will also be planned via UML’s Biomanufacturing
Center and Center for Autism Research and Education, respectively.

A novel hybrid process is proposed to upcycle waste polyethylene (PE) into a
series of value-added products. The first step of the proposed hybrid process
consists of an oxidative pyrolysis reactor to decompose PE over redox metal
oxide or mixed oxide catalysts on porous supports into C5–C20 alkanes, alcohols,
aldehydes, and carboxylic acids. The fundamental chemical kinetics associated
with reaction pathways on the catalyst surfaces, as well as the effects of
species diffusion in the pores, will be quantified. Oxidative pyrolysis will be
followed by a biomanufacturing step using an engineered yeast Yarrowia
lipolytica to produce value-added platform chemicals such as long-chain diacids
(LCDAs) as nylon precursors and triacetic acid lactone (TAL) and phloroglucinol
(PG) for a wide spectrum of industrial applications. The research team will
identify metabolic pathways leading to high yields of various products and will
use reaction engineering principles to overcome mass transfer limitations in
bioreactors. The success of this project will pave the way to a new paradigm,
enabling future manufacturing of a wide range of strategic platform chemicals,
particularly the molecules derived from the omega-oxidation, beta-oxidation, and
related metabolic pathways, leading to more energy efficient, economical, and
robust valorization of not only waste PE but also other similar waste
polyolefins, such as polypropylene (PP) and polystyrene (PS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.