* 2317286
* Homelessness and health: Integrating structural, social, and behavioral pathways
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Leo DuBois, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 359,999.00

This research aims to develop a holistic understanding of the factors that drive
variation in health among people without housing in the United States. People
without housing endure high risks of illness and death across all categories,
yet the specific pathways leading to variable health outcomes in this vulnerable
population are under-investigated. This project investigates the individual,
community, and structural factors that shape health for people without housing,
aiming to understand the nuanced ways that factors at different levels may
interact to affect specific vulnerabilities. The results of this project are
disseminated broadly through scholarly publications and fact sheets produced for
policymakers and the public. It includes a public education podcast project,
where people without housing share their experiences with a wide audience of
general listeners. It trains graduate and under-graduate students from under-
represented groups.

This research uses an innovative combination of methods from the health and
social sciences to collect information about peopleâ€™s lived experiences with
houselessness and to assess their physical health and factors that contribute to
health risks. It seeks to answer a range of questions surrounding: how physical
structures such as shelters and forced relocation impact health; how social
relationships are leveraged by people without homes to manage resource and
health shortfalls; and how interventions can be implemented effectively to
achieve better health and welfare outcomes. To answer these questions, we
compare four distinct groups of people experiencing houselessness: those who
sleep unsheltered on the street; those who live in unsanctioned encampments;
those who sleep in temporary shelters; and those who have lived in permanent
supportive housing arrangements. No previous study has taken this comparative
and holistic approach; as such, it will provide new insights into the most
important factors that shape health for people in this vulnerable population,
contributing to scientific theories and applications in cultural anthropology,
human biology, public health, and epidemiology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.