* 2317021
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an ICP-MS for Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiaoping Li, Georgia Gwinnett College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 203,047.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Georgia Gwinnett College, a
Primarily Undergraduate and Hispanic Serving Institution, is acquiring an
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) to support novel research
of faculty and undergraduate students in the chemical, biological, and
environmental sciences. The instrument will be used in the interdisciplinary
research efforts of Dr. Kathryn Zimmermann and 10 additional colleagues.
Inductively coupled mass spectrometry has the ability to simultaneously measure
multiple elements, such as dissolved metals, across a wide range of
concentrations. This technique is then, essential for measuring trace elements
in a variety of sample matrices. This instrument, not widely found at
undergraduate institutions, is commonly used in industry, enhancing its
importance for training and research use by a diverse group of undergraduate
research students.

The inductively coupled mass spectrometer will be used to enhance the
undergraduate research infrastructure at Georgia Gwinnett College, and will also
be employed in upper-level course-embedded research experiences (CUREs). The
instrument will support research in several areas including: a) investigation of
metal sources and concentrations in atmospheric particulate matter; b)
microchemical analysis of local fish and their migratory habitats; c) detection
of ions in membrane fouling in water treatment; d) trace metals in food samples;
e) measurement of concentrations of metals in local freshwater and marine
waterways in efforts to inform mitigation/remediation efforts; f) development of
functionalized wood for bioremediation of metals in aqueous samples; and g)
analysis of waste oil and grease, biodiesel, and combustion products for heavy
metal concentrations. This proposed shared-use instrument will enable the
advancement and evolution of research projects at Georgia Gwinnett College and
is also expected to be used, collaboratively, by other regional institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.