* 2317197
* I-Corps - Seismic Fragility Monitoring and Estimation System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Priyank Jaiswal, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a tool for checking the health of a structure, such as a high-
rise condominium, by continually monitoring its resonance. The rate of
degradation, or “fatigue,” is a critical parameter required for risk assessment
but is difficult to determine as the key damage indicators such as cracks,
warps, and shear generally appear in inaccessible locations, e.g., behind wall
coverings, in ceilings, and under foundations. Assessing fatigue without relying
on conscious identification of such indicators remains a gap in the current
knowledge. The proposed technology is based on the fundamental understanding
that as structures degrade with time and exposure to the elements, their
resonance changes. Currently, there is a strong demand for technology to assist
with predictive structural maintenance in areas such as single and multistory
buildings, windmills, oil platforms, dams, and bridges. The proposed technology
is designed to alert the owners and operators to any significant changes in
their assets, which will allow them to schedule more detailed inspections in
time to identify the exact nature of the ongoing failure and have it repaired
before it turns into more significant problem and expense.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a technology to estimate the
fragility of a structure by monitoring its resonance. The proposed technology
uses both hardware and software development. The proposed hardware comprises a
multi-sensor unit with telemetry capabilities to capture the full scope of
motion and relay the information in near real time. The multi-sensor unit
comprises elements of an accelerometer, gyroscope, and GPS, which respectively
allow the recording of linear and torsional motions and displacements. The
software uses windowing and stacking methods that minimize noise and enhance the
characteristic modes of a structure. The hardware may be installed in stationery
as well as mobile structures irrespective of their shape complexity and
constituent material. The recorded data are transmitted to a “base” high-
performing computing infrastructure. At the base station, the data are
cataloged, archived, and analyzed for changes in the resonance pattern using
advanced processing algorithms. In general, a greater change in resonance has
been associated with higher fragility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.