* 2317586
* How does water move through the subducting slab? Slab-scale fluid pathways and deformation-fluid flow feedbacks at eclogite facies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* William Hoover, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rachel Teasdale
* 12/31/2026
* USD 395,622.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate dives beneath another, are the
location of damaging geologic hazards including explosive volcanic eruptions and
the largest earthquakes on Earth. These hazards are catalyzed by water that is
released by metamorphism of hydrous minerals and must travel to the source of
earthquakes or melting along pathways such as veins and zones of ductile
deformation. These pathways are too small to resolve with remote sensing of
modern subduction zones, but their spatial and temporal distribution exercises a
first-order control on subduction zone hazards. Subducted rocks that have been
exhumed and exposed at Earthâ€™s surface provide an opportunity to study the
pathways transporting water from the micro- to plate-scale. However, previous
studies of such rocks have focused at the small scale hindering a plate-scale
view of where, when and how water moves to the source of geologic hazards. Using
a complete cross-section of a subducting plate exposed in the Italian Alps, this
project will combine field mapping of water pathways with chemical and
structural characterization of rocks and minerals that interacted with passing
water to construct a map of how water is transported in the subducting plate.
This map will inform conceptual models of how water can initiate subduction zone
hazards and be used to interpret remote observations of modern subduction zones.
The broader impacts of this work focus on engaging a diverse group of
undergraduate students in hands-on research. Four undergraduate students will
have the opportunity to map and collect samples in the field, operate scientific
instruments, collect data, and present their findings at conferences. To
decrease barriers to participation in research among low-income students,
students will be paid for their research time, and all travel expenses
associated with field work, data collection and conferences will be covered.
Benefits from this research will be returned to the communities around the field
area in Italy through public lectures on the local geology.

Aqueous fluids modulate key subduction zone processes like seismicity and arc
magma production, and geochemical cycling. These fluids are produced by
metamorphic reactions in the subducting slab and transported to the locations of
these processes along a network of pathways that influences the location,
timing, and magnitude of hazards and geochemical cycling. Geologic studies of
exhumed subduction zone rocks are the only way to resolve fluid transport
networks at the scale of individual pathways, and they suggest that both veins
and shear zones can transport fluid through the slab. However, previous studies
have largely focused on single outcrops or subordinate lithologies, impeding a
cohesive view of slab-scale fluid transport and the relative importance of veins
versus shear zones. The proposed project will use the exceptionally well-exposed
eclogite-facies Monviso Ophiolite (W. Alps, Italy) to determine the dominant
pathways and mechanisms for transporting fluid at the scale of the subducting
slab. Detailed field mapping of veins and shear zones in the complete slab
cross-section of the Monviso Ophiolite will be used to constrain the structure
and abundance of fluid pathways in the eclogite-facies lower oceanic crust.
Integrated with this macro-scale mapping, micro-scale petrological-geochemical-
microstructural analysis of representative fluid pathways will reconstruct their
fluid-deformation-time histories. Major and trace element (EPMA and laser
ablation ICPMS), and in situ clinozoisite oxygen isotope geochemistry (SIMS)
will be used to track the source of fluids transported along fluid pathways.
These fluid sources will be linked to dehydration reactions throughout the slab
using thermodynamic modeling. Textural analysis and in situ measurements of
mineral zoning will constrain the relative timing of fluid transport along
different fluid pathways, and the temporal distribution of fluid sources within
a single pathway. Feedbacks between fluid transport and ductile deformation will
be constrained using co-located in situ microstructural (EBSD) and geochemical
measurements that will define deformation mechanisms and directly link them to
fluid infiltration. The final product will be a temporally-resolved map of slab
hydrology at eclogite facies that will inform conceptual models of fluid
transport through the subducting slab and its relationship to hazards and
geochemical cycling, and provide key inputs for interpreting geophysical
observations of modern subduction zones.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.