* 2317579
* SBIR Phase I: A Fully Autonomous Prognostic Digital Twin for Smart Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Daniel Ospina Acero, POINTPRO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 274,564.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to assist industries reduce their downtime for scheduled,
preventative maintenance. Industries with high-value assets like manufacturing
facilities, engines, satellites, reactors, etc., often incur significant expense
due to a lack of usable insights into productivity optimization. The forecasting
technology and the developments stemming from this project will have general
applicability and enable the use of prescriptive prognostics (when and what to
repair) in diverse markets. Additionally, the methods developed in the project
for training deep learning systems on limited data would have broad application
within the machine learning (ML) community. Frequently, projects are limited by
access to and availability of data. The methods developed in this project could
be applied to small sets of medical data or financial data, as they are entirely
defined on time series variables and dynamics.

This SBIR Phase I project has two main goals. First, to develop a technology
that will enable full autonomy in the extraction of meaningful feature sets from
raw sensor data. An autonomous feature selection procedure developed in this
project will exploit the combination of powerful control-theoretic results with
modern ML tools to discover non-obvious linear and nonlinear features. This
solution will provide a physics-informed architecture, allowing users to
incorporate available physics knowledge with that emerging from the data,
configuring a robust, flexible, and autonomous feature extraction mechanism.
Second, the team will construct a robust, multi-modal, sensor emulator to
address data insufficiency in order to train the ML components. This opportunity
is in response to the limited availability of data in manufacturing sector,
especially time-series sensor data in operational systems. The sensor emulator
will be formed via combinations of modern ML-based generative tools in a manner
that exploits their proven effectiveness while being able to work with high-
dimensional signals and small training datasets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.