* 2317835
* Collaborative Research: Can Human-Induced Turbidity Currents Enable Sustainability of Freshwater Reservoirs?
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Keith Gido, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 149,979.00

Water reservoirs provide many societal services in the United States and
worldwide including flood control and sources of hydroelectric power, drinking
water, and irrigation for agriculture and farming. Despite their vital roles,
reservoirs are gradually being filled with sediments as land use and climate
change exacerbate soil erosion and sediment transport and deposition in natural
and engineered surface water systems. Few suitable sites for new dam
construction exist in the United States thereby emphasizing the need for cost-
effective management of existing reservoirs. In 2024, the US Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) and the State of Kansas are scheduled pilot a novel water-
injection dredging (WID) process (an untested but potentially transformative
approach) in a federal reservoir in the State of Kansas with the aim of inducing
turbidity currents and exporting trapped reservoir sediments to downstream
waterways, which could prove crucial for addressing the global concern of
reservoir sedimentation and its impact on water security. However, key questions
remain regarding the ability of WID to restore reservoir sediment storage
capacity, its environmental implications to in-lake water quality, and its
downstream effects to channel morphology and aquatic ecosystems. To address
these knowledge gaps, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose
to leverage the USACE-Kansas WID field test to collect and analyze sediments,
nutrients, and aquatic species count data with the goal of generating
fundamental scientific and engineering knowledge on the transport efficacy,
mechanisms, and environmental responses following the implementation of WID
process in a water reservoir. If WID is shown to be viable, with minimal impact
on downstream river ecosystems, the successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the generation of new data and fundamental knowledge
that could be used in reservoirs around the globe, transforming sediment
management, and reducing costs associated with existing dredging techniques.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of one undergraduate and one graduate student
at the University of Kansas and two undergraduate students and one graduate
student at Kansas State University.

Existing reservoir sediment management techniques have limited effectiveness
because they (1) do not restore natural downstream sediment continuity, (2)
require transport, storage, and disposal of dredged materials, and (3) are
costly to implement. The basic premise of the water-injection dredging (WID)
process is to spray a jet of fluid into the bed of a reservoir, entrain
sediments into the overlying water, and initiate a density current (akin to an
underwater avalanche) to mobilize stored bed sediments toward the reservoir
outlet. While WID has successfully been applied to ports and rivers, it has yet
to be tested in a water reservoir thereby raising critical questions regarding
its potential efficacy and environmental impact. This project will address these
knowledge gaps. The specific objectives of the research are to 1) evaluate the
physical mechanisms by which human-induced turbidity currents propagate in
reservoirs, using high-frequency turbidity sensing data and computational fluid
dynamics modeling; 2) evaluate shifts in reservoir water quality by monitoring
thermal stratification and redox conditions using in-situ physicochemical
sensors and laboratory experiments before, during, and after the WID field test;
3) assess channel and floodplain accretion rates before, during, and after the
WID field test; and 4) continuously assess the response of fish and
macroinvertebrate communities to sediment releases and the induced biological,
chemical, and physical changes in water quality and habitats throughout the WID
demonstration project. The successful completion of this research could
transform how reservoirs are managed, potentially extending the usable lifetime
of large water storage infrastructure across the globe. To implement the
educational and training goals of this project, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) will collaborate with the University of Kansas (KU) Self Engineering
Leadership Fellows (SELF) program to develop and deliver a workshop for college
students to conduct hands-on research with large environmental datasets and
develop science communication skills, culminating in a presentation to the State
of Kansas and Army Corps of Engineers. In addition, the PIs plan to integrate
the findings from this research into relevant course modules and outreach
activities at KU and Kansas State University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.