* 2317609
* Thermoradiative Energy Conversion Devices Based on Narrow Bandgap Antimonide Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jamie Phillips, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2026
* USD 332,444.00

Energy conversion in thermoradiative (TR) cells will be explored as a new
approach for waste heat generation or energy harvesting from thermal sources. TR
cells can be directly coupled to the heat source and offer an attractive means
for thermal energy conversion with reduced size, weight, and complexity. Success
of high-performance TR cells would provide a transformative energy conversion
device technology that offers simplified systems for waste heat conversion for
industrial processes, space power systems, and thermal energy harvesting in
microsystems. While energy conversion projections have been optimistic for TR
cells (power density > 100 W/m2 and conversion efficiency > 20 % for cell
temperature of 500K), experimental demonstrations have been lacking. This work
aims to bridge the gap between theoretical predictions and experimental
demonstrations to prove the TR energy conversion concept through identification
and detailed studies of realistic TR energy conversion materials, design and
implementation of TR cell device architectures, and through strategies to
overcome loss mechanisms that limit power conversion efficiency. Research
activities on physics-based modeling and experimental materials and devices will
be integrated with educational and outreach activities connected to the theme of
energy conversion.

This project will explore the underlying physics of narrow bandgap semiconductor
materials that will determine practical TR cell power conversion efficiencies.
The fundamental radiative recombination properties and limiting non-radiative
loss mechanisms of Auger and Shockley-Read-Hall recombination will be studied in
detail at TR cell operating temperatures and charge carrier injection levels,
where there is currently a lack of experimental knowledge. The physical
properties will be used to inform the design and fabrication of optimal TR cell
device architectures, followed by subsequent experimental fabrication and
testing of TR cells based on InAsSb and InSb to provide critical feedback on
power conversion and limiting loss mechanisms. Strategies will be pursued to
overcome loss mechanisms, including suppression of Auger recombination in type-
II multiquantum wells or superlattices, barrier-integrated architectures such as
pBn to reduce Shockley-Read-Hall recombination, and photonic design to maximize
optical extraction efficiency. Public access online educational materials will
be developed based on the research activities of this work, such as a TR cell
calculator. Activities will include participation in local outreach activities
aimed at broadening participation from women and underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. Undergraduate summer research projects will be offered
in each year of the program for students from regional institutions with
primarily undergraduate programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.