* 2317001
* LEAPS-MPS: Cubulation and Property (T) in Random Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* MurphyKate Montee, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 08/31/2025
* USD 162,975.00

Groups are mathematical structures that describe the symmetry of a geometric
object. They are used throughout the sciences: in the study of crystalline
structures, molecular symmetry, the Standard Model of particle physics, public-
key encryption systems, and more. This project aims to understand groups in
their own right; instead of starting with an object and calculating its symmetry
group as a chemist or physicist might, a mathematician can start with an
abstract group and then study the space(s) whose symmetries it could describe. A
natural question to ask is: What properties does a `typical’ group satisfy? This
project will focus on understanding these `typical’ properties of groups by
introducing and investigating a new model of random groups. The project will
also support undergraduate projects and the PI’s ongoing leadership and
organizational efforts to promote inclusivity and connections for undergraduate
women and other under-represented groups within mathematics, such as the student
group Gender Minorities in Math/Stats (GeMMs), mentor/mentee programs, book
clubs and other community building activities at Carlton College.

Gromov random groups have been a rich source of examples in geometric group
theory. The first branch of this project introduces and explores properties of a
new model of random quotients of free products of groups, which is
combinatorially related to Gromov’s model. In collaboration with Einstein,
Krishna, Ng, and Steenbock the PI will investigate (relative) cubulation in this
setting. The PI will also explore Property (T) for these groups. In another
direction, the PI will work with undergraduates to further our understanding of
cubulation in Gromov random groups; in particular they will increase the known
bound for cocompact actions on CAT(0) cube complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.