* 2317983
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Developing Integrated Agroecological Renewable Energy Systems through Convergent Research
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2028
* USD 524,887.00

The deployment of renewable energy systems across landscapes in the U.S. -
expected to advance the transition from national reliance on fossil fuels to
renewable energy - brings with it questions of competing land uses, effects on
soil and water systems, and implications for local communities. This project
advances the frontiers of science by forging a convergent research paradigm that
not only deeply integrates disciplinary modes of thinking from otherwise siloed
fields, but also incorporates the values, knowledge, and priorities of
Indigenous communities, demonstrating the potential of communities
underrepresented in STEM to contribute to convergent research that can address
society’s most urgent problems. The project's convergent framework integrates
Indigenous knowledge and priorities into a promising but nascent field that
explores how wind and solar power can be embedded into agricultural systems.
Participating disciplines include engineering, Native American studies,
geography, and biology. This convergence research addresses food, energy and
other environmental planning priorities through deep engagement with Indigenous
communities in North America.

Positioned to contribute to the nascent body of research on the integration of
solar and wind energy into agricultural and other environmental systems, this
project focuses on the co-design of integrated agroecological renewable systems
(IARES) to emphasize the multifaceted goals that may be achieved beyond or in
synergy with crop and energy production. To this end, the project 1)
Demonstrates the potential of convergent research that involves significant
community participation in research to shape the technologies guiding a
renewable energy transition such to better serve groups underrepresented in
scientific research; 2) Highlights the interconnectedness of socio-cultural,
technical, and environmental systems; 3) Incorporates Indigenous communities as
co-producers of the knowledge necessary to create integrated food-energy-water
systems that build resilient soil systems and protect culturally significant
ecosystem services, while providing insight into the nascent fields of
agrivoltaics/agriwind, and 4) Advances an understanding of how convergent
research can blend Indigenous and scientific knowledge, to develop paths towards
environmentally and socially sustainable systems. The broader impacts include:
1) Transformative training opportunities for graduate students and PIs in
community-based convergent research; 2) Deep engagement with historically
marginalized groups that includes Indigenous community researchers in research
on the principles of integrated agroecological renewable systems and positions
their work to shape this emerging subfield; 3) Creation of communities of
practice emerging from convergent research that integrate Indigenous community
researchers and biophysical and social scientists; 4) Creation of “living labs,”
in which the public, including Indigenous community members and regional
leaders, can visit to learn about integrated agroecological renewable systems
and convergent research processes in real time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.