* 2317830
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Investigation of Naming Space Hijacking Threat and Its Defense
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xing Gao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 198,009.00

This project delves into the emerging security risks associated with naming
space hijacking attacks targeting Internet applications. In this type of attack,
an adversary exploits similarities and confusion in names of domains and
resources in cyber space (e.g., Amazon.com vs. Amazom.com) to target users and
even software developers, leading to financial loss, intellectual property
theft, reputation damage, and disruption of normal operations for unsuspecting
users. The projectâ€™s novelty is the assessment of the security risks of these
types of attacks systematically and quantitatively across vital platforms and
applications, including software supply chain ecosystems, the Metaverse, and
decentralized financial applications (Web3). This investigation also enables the
development of effective defense mechanisms and provides a strong safety
guarantee to Internet users. The project's broader significance and importance
lie in securing current and future Internet applications, thereby enhancing the
availability and reliability of Internet services. Additionally, educational
efforts are devoted to the curriculum design of new cybersecurity courses with a
focus on Web3 applications. Outreach activities are also conducted to promote
the involvement of underrepresented minorities in computing and to enhance
cybersecurity awareness and knowledge in the states of Virginia and Delaware (an
EPSCoR state).

This project develops multiple frameworks to continuously monitor and capture
any suspicious activities and pinpoint potential naming space hijacking issues.
The first task focuses on the identification and disclosure of vulnerabilities
within software supply chain ecosystems that can be exploited by adversaries to
hijack existing packages or distribute malicious code. The second task centers
on exploring potential threats within user-specific worlds in emerging Metaverse
platforms. The third task involves leveraging machine learning techniques to
detect and mitigate fraudulent online activities within decentralized blockchain
applications. Ultimately, the project aims to design and develop lightweight and
robust defense systems that can effectively mitigate the potential security
threats posed by naming space hijacking threats. The overall security risks are
evaluated through long-term observation and large-scale measurement studies on
real-world applications. The defense strategies are integrated in existing
systems and protocols, and thoroughly evaluated on real-world scenarios to
demonstrate their effectiveness.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.