* 2317208
* Conference: Theories and methods for conceptualizing facial emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Debbie Ma, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 44,922.00

Emotions are an important aspect of human life. They serve an adaptive function,
steering people toward resources that facilitate survival and away from
potential harms. Emotions also enable people to quickly communicate important
information to others and to motivate individual and collective action. These
complex internal representations are often communicated through facial
expressions. Whether or not they perfectly reflect emotional states, people
routinely draw inferences about others based on facial displays. Theoretical
accounts for these effects rest on the idea that emotional states correspond
with unique facial expressions. This perspective is still being developed, and
has spurred a number of very important theoretical debates. For example,
researchers argue whether emotions are truly discrete, whether cultures vary in
how and when emotion is displayed and perceived, and whether social categories
influence emotion display and perception. This conference series explores areas
of contention within the study of facial affect and emotion recognition and
offers a platform for developing novel, competing, and testable hypotheses aimed
at advancing scientific understanding. Significant training and networking
opportunities are provided to scholars across multiple disciplines.

Experts in the field of affective sciences meet for a two-part conference
focused on explicating and refining theoretical perspectives related to various
aspects of facial emotion expressions. The hybrid conferences are organized
around a fully-online meeting, followed by an in-person session scheduled
several months subsequent to the first meeting. The conferences provide a forum
for debating central theoretical questions related to facial affect and emotion
recognition. Outcomes include the development of novel, testable hypotheses
meant to resolve outstanding debates and to advance current theoretical
positions. The conferences are widely promoted and designed to encourage
participation, especially for early-career scholars. Results of the conference
are shared broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.