* 2317970
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Identifying Central and Peripheral Thermosensors in Eurythermal and Stenothermal Arctic Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2026
* Julia York, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/28/2026
* USD 358,622.00

The Arctic Ocean is warming at a rate up to seven times the global average,
endangering and shifting key subsistence and commercial fisheries. Fish
populations are stressed by warming and simultaneously by ocean acidification
and oxidation. This study aims to characterize the evolution of proteins that
integrate signals of warming, changing pH, and oxidation in the sensory systems
of three species of Arctic and sub-Arctic fish: the Arctic cod (Boreogadus
saida), saffron cod (Eleginus gracilis), and Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua).
Studying the evolution of these sensory mechanisms provides insight into the
sensitivity and responses of fish to climate change. This work also has
implications for understanding protein-induced pain, inflammation, and itch
responses in humans. During the course of this research, two undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in science will be mentored through a summer research
program. A K-12 lesson plan will be developed that combines the insights from
this project with Alaska Native science curricula and values and Next Generation
Science Standards.

A major goal of this work is to generate high-quality genomic and transcriptomic
data across stenothermal and eurythermal Arctic fish species, but also across
central thermosensory nervous tissue, peripheral thermosensory nervous tissue,
non-thermosensory nervous tissue, and non-nervous somatic tissue. These data
will be generated using a combination of 3rd (IsoSeq) and 2nd (RNASeq)
generation sequencing technologies and be used to characterize transient
receptor potential (TRP) channel sequences and expression patterns. TRP channel
profiles will be compared using in silico tests of regulatory and structural
evolution, including predicting protein structure using AlphaFold2. These
profiles will be compared between species, tissues, and to stenothermal
Antarctic fishes to investigate central and peripheral mechanisms of temperature
sensation in fishes and convergent adaptation to cold. This work is the first
investigation into the evolution of molecular thermosensor proteins in any
Arctic species and the first to target mechanisms of thermosensation in the
central nervous system of fishes. This project explores physiological mechanisms
of climate adaptation in key sentinel species and expands the sequencing
resources of the polar science community by generating the first long-read
genome for Arctic cod, Boreogadus saida.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.