* 2317110
* Center: Institute for Quantum Information and Matter: IQIM
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* John Preskill, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2029
* USD 2,300,000.00

Exploring the surprising phenomena that arise in complex quantum systems is one
of the most exciting frontiers of 21st-century science. Understanding and
harnessing highly entangled quantum systems will yield new materials, new
communication and computation methods, and new insights into the structure of
the universe. The Institute for Quantum Information and Matter (IQIM) will
advance this frontier through the collaborative efforts of theorists and
experimentalists investigating exotic collective phenomena which amplify the
weirdness of the quantum world to macroscopic scales. IQIM will establish new
paradigms for understanding nature and lay the foundations for potentially
revolutionary technologies, while training a new generation of leaders who will
define the future of quantum science and engineering. In addition, IQIM will
stoke the public's fascination with the mysteries of the quantum realm,
enhancing public engagement through the development of games and videos and
strategic use of social media.

IQIM research is organized into three Major Activities. MA-1 (Quantum
Information Physics) connects ideas drawn from computer science, information
theory, engineering, and mathematics to experimental quantum information
platforms such as superconducting circuits and trapped ultracold atoms. MA-2
(Next-Generation Quantum Metrology) emphasizes opportunities to enhance quantum
sensing using highly controllable quantum systems including atoms and spins
coupled to optical cavities, and strongly correlated materials. MA-3 (Building
and Driving Quantum Matter) builds on recent advances in quantum materials and
quantum simulation platforms to realize previously inaccessible phases of
matter, with emphasis on fractionalized phases, topological superconductivity,
defect-bound quantum wires, and dynamical Floquet phases. By combining quantum
computing, simulation, materials, and metrology into a unified center located on
a single campus, IQIM is building an interconnected community well suited to
take advantage of the synergy among these research thrusts. By focusing on the
potential for quantum technology to facilitate scientific discoveries, this
research can lay the foundations for future technologies not yet imagined.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.