* 2317013
* LEAPS-MPS: Unveiling the Interplay of Chiral Transport, Magnetism, and Topology in Weyl Magnets: A Magneto-Optical Investigation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* MyoungHwan Kim, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 235,369.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY In a solid, electrons exhibit many behaviors depending on
their crystal structure and constituent elements. For semiconductors, electrons
are heavy or light depending on a doping element. Massless electrons reside on
graphene, an atomically thin honeycomb lattice of carbon. Recently, a new type
of electron behavior has been discovered in a new class of materials called Weyl
semimetals. The new electrons are massless, and their spin is locked in the
direction of their motion. Particularly, the electrons have handedness or
chirality, determining whether the electrons move forward or backward. Such
chiral electrons offer the potential for new and high-speed electronics. This
LEAPS-MPS project studies how the magnetization of bulk materials can affect
chiral electron behavior measured by modulating the light polarization between
left-handed and right-handed. This project aims to increase awareness and
understanding of basic material science through hands-on research experience in
optics and polarimetry for young students in the South Plains of West Texas. The
monthly public outreach demonstrations in this project will engage and inspire
the next generation of scientists and researchers, particularly K-12 students,
by involving parents in their children’s education and creating a supportive
environment for under-served student populations to pursue science and research.
In addition, this project strengthens the physics curriculum for junior and
senior undergraduate students who want to pursue advanced-degree programs in
condensed matter physics.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Chiral fermions are quasiparticles that arise in materials
with two non-degenerate bands crossing – called Weyl points – at the Fermi level
in three-dimensional momentum space. Weyl points, acting as monopoles and anti-
monopoles of the magnetic field in momentum space, give rise to exotic
properties such as Fermi arc surface states, the chiral anomaly, and the
intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity. The discovery of magnetic Weyl semimetals
has generated considerable interest in the relationship between chiral fermions
and magnetism. However, the complex interplay between magnetic texture and
topological Weyl properties is not fully understood. This LEAPS-MPS award
supports experimental research utilizing advanced magneto-optical techniques to
investigate the intricate relationship between chiral transport, magnetic
texture, and topology in magnetic Weyl semimetals. The proposed time-resolved
magneto-optical measurement using nonlinear chiral pumping and broadband
infrared Hall probing enables the simultaneous examination of non-equilibrium
chiral states, local magnetic texture dynamics, and intrinsic anomalous Hall
conductivity in magnetic Weyl semimetals. This project provides new insights
into controlling topological functionalities through optical, electrical, and
magnetic means, providing a foundation for investigating Weyl semimetals’
electronic structure and their potential applications in non-dissipative
information control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.