* 2317464
* Heteromolecular Interface Design for Better Multiferroic Molecular Spintronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 563,690.00

Non-technical Description

There is a growing demand for computer memory across the U.S and elsewhere in
the world. Unfortunately, the energy cost associated with the fabrication and
use of computer memory is growing at a rate that is ultimately unsustainable. At
the current growth rates, in two decades the energy cost for memory will exceed
the world's energy production if there is no change in technology. What is
needed to avert a crisis are new technologies that support the growing need for
more computer memory, but use far less energy, occupies less space and is both
reliable and inexpensive. The main goal of this research is to develop a highly
stable memory device, with a size that is 10,000 smaller than the width of a
human hair, based on a class of molecules whose state can be electrically
controlled. These devices will be made from molecules that can be switched with
a small voltage. The advantage is that this will be high quality memory that is
fast, requires little power, and is inexpensive to make yet very robust. The
development of this memory technology will have a significant impact on various
applications, including helping computers run faster and more efficiently and
may address the growing problem of the increasing energy consumption posed by
data centers that are appearing across the U.S. New understanding must be
developed if these devices are to be competitive and easily implemented. The
research and education activities of this project are closely intertwined. The
research activities will provide valuable learning experiences for graduate
students, undergraduate students, and even K-12 students. Students from
underrepresented groups in STEM fields are also a key focus.

Technical Description

The focus of this research is on developing a better understanding of how to
design molecular based voltage-controlled devices whose performance competes or
even surpasses the performance of silicon semiconductor devices. By studying how
to use a local electric field to control the molecular magnetic properties and
further manipulate the conductance of the molecular system new insights in
molecular electronics are developed. Not only can the quantum states of the
molecule be characterized by a combination of spectroscopies, but a better
understanding of the key physics can be developed by characterizing prototype
molecular transistors. The interface between a molecular ferroelectric, a
material with a switchable electric dipole, and a spin crossover molecular film,
molecules which can switch from magnetic to non-magnetic seems key, but the
interactions in play at this interface need to be understood if better devices
are to be fabricated 'by design'. The combination of molecular systems will be
characterized by a variety of spectroscopic techniques and through the study of
test prototype devices to determine spin state, electric dipole, as well as to
investigate the relationship between magnetic moment and electric dipole.
Additionally, this research team believes that the creation of a molecular
phototransistor sensitive to light color and polarization is realizable. The key
goals are: (1) To determine why voltage-controlled switching is not simply
restricted to the interface. (2) To identify the energy barriers to spin state
switching and the origin of these energy barriers. (3) To ascertain the effects
of changing temperatures on the molecular spin state. (4) To make a
phototransistor and probe the characteristics of the photocarriers. (5) To
investigate the details of the molecular electronics for both the high and low
spin states. This last goal connects the quantum state of the molecule with the
transistor properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.