* 2317290
* SBIR Phase II:  Analog front end (AFE) platform for lightweight, long-term, cortical monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mark Myers, NEURODYNE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 963,459.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project provides next generation ambulatory seizure
data acquisition. The advent of mobile health advances during the COVID-19
health crisis have enabled new innovations to be considered. This effort
provides a framework for the next line of remote neurological data acquisition
capabilities for the implementation of military helmet designs that detect
battlefield traumatic brain injuries, football helmet designs that detect
sports-related brain injuries, caps for first responder teams that detect
trauma, at-home monitoring headsets for remote migraine assessment, etc. A
complete analogue front end (AFE) will be developed in order to provide
digitized electroencephalograph (EEG) signals to the downstream stages. The
project will have a major impact in several areas, namely, wearable bio-devices,
data fusion, and neurological data extraction and visualization of complex
biological systems. This device can be utilized for first responders at the
scene of neurological trauma such as emergency medical technicians, battle front
medical areas, and sports related events.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will provide a robust
mobile device that can be worn in an at-home setting for remote neurological
monitoring. The solution will remove noisy artifacts from the
electroencephalograph signal in order to perform neurological diagnoses and
provide neurological reporting to the neurologist as an aid to quantify the
patientâ€™s seizure instances. The analogue front end (AFE) provides the
foundation for a portable electroencephalograph (EEG) device for neurological
data acquisition for the clinical, academic, and research communities. The
ambulatory seizure monitoring device will enable an end-to-end system for
robust, lightweight, data transmission to a cloud service, which will generate
reports for the physician to analyze a patient neurological data for treatment.
This system will extend the current rise of health devices into the complex
environment of neurological states, as well as the eventual development of
neuro-analytics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.