* 2317628
* Conference: 20th International Meeting for the Cell and Molecular Biology of Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* James Umen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support the 20th International Meeting for the Cell and
Molecular Biology of Chlamydomonas, to be held June 4-9, 2023 at Princeton
University, NJ. Chlamydomonas is a fascinating single-celled swimming
photosynthetic organism that has been used to understand photosynthesis as well
as the formation and behavior of cilia, key structures that regulate
interactions with the environment in cells of all larger species, including
humans. Recent advances in the field, including new technological capabilities,
will be highlighted in this meeting. The meeting will bring together seasoned
investigators with early-career scientists in both formal talks and discussion
sessions to encourage informal discussion and sharing of latest research results
on the formation of structures in the cell, swimming behavior, and regulation of
photosynthesis during daily changes in light levels.

This meeting will be attended by undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, as well as senior researchers to discuss our understanding
of all aspects of the biology of the photosynthetic single-celled green alga
Chlamydomonas, which has long been used as a model for understanding
photosynthesis and structure of cilia. Talks will be presented on topics such as
cilia and basal bodies, organelle biogenesis, cell cycle and circadian rhythms,
environmental responses, and newly available methods for studying these
organisms. In addition to formal talks, engagement will be facilitated by two
poster sessions to stimulate interactions between researchers. NSF support will
be used to defray travel costs to allow attendance of participants from early
stages of their careers, especially for members of groups underrepresented in
this field.

This award is funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.