* 2317704
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Processes and Timescales of Basalt Petrogenesis and Oceanic Crustal Construction at Slow-Spreading Mid-Ocean Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kenneth Sims, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 325,841.00

Mid-ocean ridges represent regions of the planet where volcanic activity is
generating fresh oceanic crust and submarine mountain chains as two tectonic
plates spread apart. This project will measure the chemical characteristics of
volcanic rock produced along the planet’s largest extent of mid-ocean ridge,
known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The measurements will be used to understand
which components of the mantle are melting and whether volcanic activity happens
continuously or in pulses. This research will aid in understanding the larger
evolution of the planet, as mid-ocean ridges serve as the dominant source of new
crust on the Earth. Seventy-five percent of the Earth’s magmatic activity occurs
at mid-ocean ridges. This work will also help to develop an interactive exhibit
at the University of Wyoming’s Geological Museum titled “Earth’s Oceans: Now and
in the Past”. This exhibit will help to inform the public, from preschoolers to
senior citizens, of the importance of mid-ocean ridges in the formation and
continuous resurfacing of the Earth.

Mid-ocean ridges offer an opportunity to understand the isotopic and
lithological composition and evolution of the Earth’s mantle, the subsurface
melt processes which generate basaltic magmas, and the eruptive styles and
frequency which give rise to fresh oceanic crust. While the melt processes and
timescales of crustal construction are well-constrained at fast-spreading mid-
ocean ridges such as the East Pacific Rise, slow-spreading ridges such as the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge remain comparatively understudied. Furthermore, the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge has been shown to erupt isotopically and geochemically enriched
lavas, reflecting potentially lithologically heterogenous mantle source domains
in the sub-ridge melting regime and potential nearby influences from upwelling
mantle plumes. This research will constrain the mantle components which give
rise to isotopically diverse oceanic crust along the 45°N segment of the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge, the melting processes by which basaltic lavas are generated and
transported to the surface, and the timescales of oceanic crustal construction
that result in axial volcanic ridges. To achieve this, researchers will measure
major and trace element abundances, radiogenic isotopic compositions, and
U-decay series nuclides from a suite of basalt samples collected from the 45°N
segment of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. In addition, tomographic imaging from beneath
MAR will be constructed and coupled with the chemical and isotopic
interpretations. This multi-disciplinary data set will enhance the understanding
of the mantle lithologies which melt beneath the slow-spreading Mid-Atlantic
Ridge, the timescales and processes of how these melts are segregated,
aggregated, and transported to the surface, and the temporal progression of
fresh oceanic crustal construction along slow-spreading ridge segments. This
work will help to provide the scientific community with a more complete, global
understanding of the nature of the Earth’s mantle and how oceanic crust is
constructed. This grant will also enhance the general public’s understanding of
the Earth’s Mid-Ocean ridges by creating an exhibit at the University of
Wyoming’s Geological Museum titled- “Earth’s Oceans: Now and in the Past”.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.