* 2317401
* Travel: Third Workshop for Women in Computational Topology
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Erin Chambers, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,400.00

This award will support the participation of US-based participants at the Third
Workshop for Women in Computational Topology (WinCompTop 3) to be held at the
Bernoulli Center at the EPFL Lausanne in Switzerland from July 17â€“21, 2023.
WinCompTop 3 is a workshop that facilitates the formation of new and lasting
research collaborations between junior and senior women working in the field of
computational topology, a field that seeks to identify underlying patterns and
mathematical structure in data from areas ranging from medical imaging to
networks of sensor arrays. This workshop is designed to grow the network of
women active in this field by providing both research opportunities and a unique
environment for mentoring, collaboration, and cohort building. This type of
event is critical, since despite numerous initiatives and undeniable progress
over the past few decades, gender imbalance in mathematics and computer science
remains significant. In particular, mathematics and computer science are two of
three disciplines with the lowest percentage of women attaining PhDs, according
to recent data collected by the National Science Foundation. There is
considerable evidence that conferences and workshops, such as WinCompTop, geared
toward women can and do make a significant impact, and participants report that
they see strong benefits from these workshops, which support collaborations,
broaden contacts, and raise visibility in the greater mathematical community.

The WinCompTop 3 workshop fits under the broad umbrella of Research
Collaboration Conferences for Women, which the Association for Women in
Mathematics encourages and supports. The majority of the time at the workshop
will be spent tackling open problems in small working groups headed by
established leaders in the field. The schedule consists of long blocks of time
for the working groups to do research. At two or more points during the week,
all participants will convene and one member from each group will provide a
brief summary of their team's progress. In addition, there will be a poster
session for graduate students and early-career participants, as well as other
crucial networking and mentoring opportunities between women at different points
in their career as well as between peer colleagues. These relationships will
foster a supportive and community-oriented atmosphere that is ideal for
generating professional connections and collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.