* 2317745
* I-Corps: Developing A Blood-Based Biomarker for the Detection and Monitoring of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Madhur Srivastava, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a blood-based biomarker for the detection and monitoring of
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). The advent of new drugs for treating ALS
has resulted in increased demand for ALS detection. Currently, diagnosis times
may take up to 2 years and cost about $40K per diagnostic test. The proposed
technology may be used to develop a non-invasive, point-of-care diagnostic for
ALS, that may be priced at $200 per test, which is comparable to a human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) diagnostic test. This may allow accessibility for
the 80 million people in the at-risk population of the 50+ age-group as part of
an annual health examine. Other potential applications of the proposed
technology include vaccine quality assessment and detecting other neurological
disorders.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a signal processing
algorithm for utilizing Electron Spin Resonance (ESR) signals, a magnetic
resonance spectroscopic technique, to detect the structural changes between two
locations in proteins with biomarker precision. Determination of such structural
changes using existing data analysis techniques from low-resolution ESR signals
of blood samples containing the potential biomarker at critically low
concentration is virtually impossible. The proposed data analytics is highly
sensitive and selective in extracting the relevant structural parameters from
data collected under these conditions. It has been confirmed that a protein,
SOD1, in the blood is associated with ALS disease onset and progression.
Specifically, the distance between the copper (Cu) centers in SOD1 increases
from its standard value (healthy state) in the case of ALS patients. To measure
the distance between two Cu centers in SOD1, the proposed algorithm carries out
point-wise distance reconstruction, avoiding interference from neighboring
points yielding local information in a precise manner. In proof-of-concept
studies, structural changes were detected in SOD1 using the proposed data
analytics at blood concentration levels. This technology may enable the
development of a non-invasive and cost-effective diagnostic for ALS.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.