* 2317551
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of the Tristan-Gough-Walvis Ridge Hotspot System: Age and Composition of Expedition 391/397T Volcanic Basement
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Robert Duncan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 109,216.00

Hotspots are anomalously warm regions in the Earth’s mantle originating near the
core-mantle boundary. They play an important role in plate tectonics as one of
the primary drivers of continental break up and the subsequent formation of new
oceans. As continental fragments drift apart and new oceans form between the
land masses, the influential hotspot persists. This hotspot then creates a
series of smaller volcanic eruptions on the new seafloor. These eruptions sample
the deep hotspot and, in some cases, the shallow mantle. However, the shallow
mantle is not uniform in composition. Instead, it evolves as continents drift
apart and new seafloor is created. To better understand the role of hotspots in
the creation of new seafloor and how the shallow mantle changes as the ocean
basin matures, the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expeditions 391
and 397T drilled six different underwater volcanoes along the Walvis Ridge in
the southern Atlantic Ocean. The Walvis Ridge consists of a line of underwater
volcanoes formed by a hotspot during the separation of Africa from South
American and the formation of the Southern Atlantic Ocean. Using core samples
obtained at the six sites, this project will investigate three main questions.
First, how much the upper mantle contributes to Walvis Ridge volcanism? What
determines the proportion of upper mantle versus hotspot contribution to Walvis
Ridge volcanism? Finally, how does the upper mantle change as the continents
drift apart and the southern Atlantic Ocean expands. This project supports
collaborations between US and international scientists. It will also fund
undergraduate and graduate research by students traditionally underrepresented
in geosciences (Native American, Black, LGBTQ, etc.).

The overarching goal of this project seeks to better understand the magmatic
processes associated with continental rifting and ocean basin formation in the
South Atlantic, beginning in the early Cretaceous and continuing through today.
To do this, IODP Expeditions 391 and 397T drilled six sites spanning >1200km and
~620m of basaltic basement along the Tristan-Gough-Walvis Ridge (TGW) hotspot
track. The drill sites sample a significant spatial and temporal range along the
TGW: one site on the Frio Rise (adjacent the African continent), two sites on
the Valdivia Bank (cognate with the Rio Grande Rise and formed adjacent to the
early mid-Atlantic Ridge), and three guyots on the “trident” that leads to the
volcanic islands of Tristan da Cunha and Gough. In collaboration with other
members of the science party, this project will conduct a comprehensive
geochemical and geochronological study of recovered basaltic core to document
the changing geodynamic interactions of the hotspot with the overlying
lithosphere as rifting and seafloor spreading progressed. The team will collect
a wealth of data, including geochronology (Duncan & Heaton, OSU), whole rock
geochemistry (Nelson, TU; Potter & Shervais, USU), mineral and associated melt
inclusion chemistry (Potter & Shervais, USU), noble gas abundances and isotopic
signatures (Dygert & Scholpp, UTK), oxygen fugacity characterization of lavas
(Dygert & Scholpp, UTK), and whole rock Re-Os isotopic compositions (Nelson,
TU). The team will use these data to test three hypotheses based on preliminary
work: (1) Lava chemistry will evolve geochemically from the Etendeka Large
Igneous Province in the NE towards the intraplate oceanic islands of Gough and
Tristan de Cunha to the SW, consistent with decreasing magma flux through time
and changing melt sources; (2) Magmatic flux varies through time and is tied to
the proximity to other geologic features (e.g. spreading ridge, African
continent, etc.); and (3) Proximity to the spreading ridge will result in lavas
with a higher proportion of MORB-like magma (DMM source) relative to the hotspot
source. On a small scale, the high-quality core obtained at the various drilling
sites provides a unique window into timing and geochemical variations within an
individual seamount as it formed and how that may vary with proximity to the
spreading ridge. On a larger scale, this work will provide an unmatched look at
how plume-ridge interactions change over time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.