* 2317698
* CNS Core: Small: Intelligent Fault Injection to Expose and Reproduce Production-Grade Bugs in Cloud Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Peng Huang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 11/30/2024
* USD 446,537.00

Failures of production distributed systems are costly. Despite extensive efforts
on testing distributed systems, many bugs remain difficult to find in testing
even when a system is tested with appropriate input. This is because these bugs
are triggered by the unique faulty events in the production environment. Fault
injection has been proposed to simulate faults during testing with the goal of
catching such bugs. However, existing solutions treat the target systems as a
black box and only inject simple faults using random choices. Production
failures are often caused by bugs that require complex, system-specific faults
at careful timing to trigger.

This project takes a holistic approach to address the fundamental limitations in
current fault injection testing. The project develops special compiler support
to enable the injection of system-specific faults at a fine granularity with
precise control. To efficiently explore the large fault injection space and
expose bugs, this project designs new fault injection decision algorithms and
machine learning methods. A new adaptive method further analyzes production
execution traces to quickly reproduce fault-induced failures in offline
environment.

Bugs in production distributed systems have resulted in substantial financial
losses to society. The new fault injection techniques developed in this project
will help effectively catch a wide range of production-grade bugs in large
distributed systems and improve the availability of cloud services. This project
will closely engage with developers in the open-source community to improve the
distributed systems code quality and testing practice.

The software artifact this project develops will be open sourced and available
at https://github.com/OrderLab. The project results, including paper
publications, technical reports, and presentations will be made available for
free download and be maintained for at least five years beyond the completion of
the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.