* 2317148
* CCSS: Reference-free and Spatial-aware Deep Sensor Array Decoding towards High-fidelity Remote Health Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Qingxue Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Remote health monitoring is highly promising for big data-driven precision
medicine, through conveniently and obtrusively tracking health conditions of
people. However, when the sensing device is placed off-body for remote
monitoring, the captured human signal is usually very weak. This is because the
signal quickly decays when it propagates from the human body to the device.
Further, the signal of the target person may be interfered if there are more
than one person in the environment. Targeting these crucial challenges, this
project will advance the science of high-fidelity remote health monitoring,
through efforts on innovating the remote signal sensing and decoding system
architecture. This project will greatly advance the national health towards
pervasive, high-fidelity, and long-term big data establishment. More
specifically, this project will design a novel deep senor array decoding system,
which leverages the data-driven deep learning algorithm to decode the noisy and
weak signal, without needing a reference signal used for propagation-induced
distortion estimation. Besides, the multi-sensor spatial information will be
leveraged by deep learning to boost the signal fidelity and recover the signal-
of-interest from noise and interferences. The project will further contribute to
research-education integration through new course development, new pedagogy
practices, curriculum enhancement, and broad student training. The PI will
continue broadening the participation of undergraduate, women and minority
students, as well as K-12 students, with diverse background, thereby effectively
training the next-generation engineers and researchers.

This project will innovate a novel deep sensor array decoding system, which can
decode the signal-of-interest from the noisy and weak signal remotely captured,
towards promising remote health monitoring and precision medicine big data. The
multi-sensor signal captured by a sensor array, will be analyzed by the deep
learning algorithm to learn the noise patterns, suppress the noise, and decode
the high-fidelity signal. This data-driven approach does not need the reference
signal that is usually used for propagation-induced distortion estimation,
thereby enabling intelligent and convenient signal decoding. The spatial
dynamics captured by the sensor array encode complex information about the
signal-of-interest, can be effectively learned with the deep learning-empowered
signal decoding. Besides, the deep learning algorithm will learn to separate the
signal-of-interest if there are more than one person in the environment. The
specific signal patterns for the target user will be learned and used by the
deep learning algorithm to mine the target-relevant patterns in the multi-sensor
signal captured. The proposed system architecture will be further evaluated with
real-world experiments, to demonstrate the generalizable innovation and the
effectiveness of the system. The novel system architecture will broadly
contribute to various remote health monitoring applications, advance national
health with pervasive and convenient big health data establishment, and promote
the science on deep sensor array decoding for high-fidelity remote health
monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.