* 2317997
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Tracing Polar Sediments with Short-lived Radioisotopes in 75 years of Arctic and Antarctic Sediment Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2023,10/31/2025
* Molly Keogh, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 10/31/2025
* USD 300,642.00

Climate change is disproportionately affecting polar regions, with the Arctic
now warming nearly four times faster than the global average. Polar warming
drives coastal erosion and increases sediment delivery to the coastal ocean,
affecting ecosystem processes ranging from primary productivity to carbon
sequestration. Tracking changes in sedimentation rate is urgently needed to
determine current conditions and measure further change. In polar regions,
however, two of the most globally reliable sediment tracers, the radioisotopes
lead-210 (210Pb) and cesium-137 (137Cs), have yielded mixed results. To
understand the distribution and usefulness of these radioisotopes at high
latitudes, this research makes use of a wealth of polar sediment cores archived
at the Oregon State University Marine and Geology Repository combined with data
synthesized from the literature. Results provide the first systematic study of
Arctic and Antarctic sediment accretion. Improving the tools we use to track
changes in sedimentation will help coastal managers and decisionmakers
understand how climate change is impacting polar coastlines and marine
environments, and what local communities should expect in the future.

Sediment cores will be subsampled and analyzed for the activities of 210Pb
(half-life = 22.3 years) and 137Cs (half-life = 30.1 years) using alpha and
gamma spectroscopy, respectively. To provide context related to depositional
environment, select subsamples will also be analyzed for sediment bulk density,
grain size distribution, and organic content. A subset of samples with no
measurable 210Pb or 137Cs activity will be analyzed for 14C to determine whether
the lack of radioisotopes in a sample is because the core is simply too old, the
true surface layer is missing, or because the shorter-lived radioisotopes did
not accumulate. By undertaking comprehensive spatial analysis of the
distribution of 210Pb and 137Cs in Arctic and Antarctic sediments, this research
will achieve three goals: first, measure the activity of short-lived
radioisotopes in archived sediment cores, a service to the science community
that is urgently needed before the isotopes decay beyond detection; second,
produce a comprehensive pole-wide atlas of sediment accretion rates; and
finally, conduct a temporal analysis of sedimentation rate changes over the last
~60 to 125 years along the Beaufort Sea coast of northern Alaska, an
ecologically and economically important region experiencing environmental
transformation due to climate warming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.