* 2317263
* Microstructural Evolution during Superplastic Ice Creep
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrew Cross, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2026
* USD 144,189.00

The seaward motion of ice sheets and glaciers is primarily controlled by basal
sliding at the base of the ice sheet and internal viscous flow within the ice
mass. The latter of these — viscous flow — is dependent on various factors,
including temperature, stress, grain size, and the alignment of ice crystals
during flow to produce a "crystal orientation fabric" (COF). Historically, ice
flow has been modeled using an equation, termed “Glen’s law”, that describes
ice-flow rate as a function of temperature and stress. Glen’s law was
constrained under relatively high-stress conditions and is often attributed to
the motion of crystal defects within ice grains. More recently, however, grain
boundary sliding (GBS) has been invoked as the rate-controlling process under
low-stress, “superplastic” conditions. The grain boundary sliding hypothesis is
contentious because GBS is not thought to produce a COF, whereas geophysical
measurements and polar ice cores demonstrate strong COFs in polar ice masses.
However, very few COF measurements have been conducted on ice samples subjected
to superplastic flow conditions in the laboratory. This project would measure
the evolution of ice COF across the transition from superplastic to Glen-type
creep. Results will be used to interrogate the role of superplastic GBS creep
within polar ice masses, and thereby provide constraints on polar ice discharge
models.

Polycrystalline ice samples with grain sizes ranging from 5 µm to 1000 µm will
be fabricated and deformed in a laboratory, using a 1-atm cryogenic axial-
torsion apparatus. Experiments will be conducted at temperatures of -30°C to
-10°C, and at a constant uniaxial strain rate. Under these conditions, 5% to
99.99% of strain should be accommodated by superplastic, GBS-limited creep,
depending on the sample grain size. The deformed samples will then be imaged
using cryogenic electron backscatter diffraction (cryo-EBSD) and high-angular-
resolution electron backscatter diffraction (HR-EBSD) to quantify COF, grain
size, grain shape, and crystal defect (dislocation) densities, among other
microstructural properties. These measurements will be used to decipher the
rate-controlling mechanisms operating within different thermomechanical regimes,
and resolve a long-standing debate over whether superplastic creep can produce a
COF in ice. In addition to the polycrystal experiments, ice bicrystals will be
fabricated and deformed to investigate the micromechanical behavior of
individual grain boundaries under superplastic conditions. Ultimately, these
results will be used to provide a microstructural toolbox for identifying
superplastic creep using geophysical (e.g., seismic, radar) and glaciological
(e.g., ice core) observations. This project will support one graduate student,
one or more undergraduate summer students, and an early-career researcher. In
addition, this project will support a workshop aimed at bringing together
experimentalists, glaciologists, and ice modelers to facilitate cross-
disciplinary knowledge sharing and collaborative problem solving.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.