* 2317672
* Collaborative Research: How did Terrestrial Ecosystems Rebuild Following the Cretaceous/Paleogene Mass Extinction?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Stephen Chester, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2028
* USD 234,197.00

During the Cretaceous/Paleogene (K/Pg) mass extinction (ca. 66 million years
ago), ~75% of all species on Earth went extinct, notably including all non-avian
dinosaurs. This event completely changed the trajectory of the evolutionary tree
of life, leading ultimately to the formation of todayâ€™s mammal-dominated
communities. The aftermath of the K/Pg mass extinction represents a natural
laboratory in which ecosystem reorganization can be studied with high geologic
resolution. Some studies have been undertaken to examine how marine ecosystems
were rebuilt, but the response of terrestrial environments is poorly documented.
This project will examine ecological and environmental changes that occurred on
land across the K/Pg boundary in the Rocky Mountain region of the western United
States. The research will involve extensive paleontological and geochemical
analyses of existing fossil collections and introduce novel data that will
reveal the variability in the timing and pattern of terrestrial ecosystem
rebuilding after the mass extinction. This project will expand knowledge of a
major turning point in the history of life on Earth that will help determine how
the biodiversity of ecosystems recover at the continental scale and how modern
terrestrial biota evolved. The results may also provide data for conservation
biologists to predict the long-term consequences of current rapid changes in
biodiversity and help inform conservation priorities to alleviate ecosystem
disruptions. The project will use established programs in classrooms, museum
exhibits, and outreach at the participating institutions to reach audiences of
multiple ages and backgrounds.

The K/Pg mass extinction completely changed the trajectory of the evolutionary
tree of life and most research has focused on marine systems. Post-extinction
patterns of ecosystem restructuring on land, fundamental to understanding the
evolution of the modern taxa of mammals and plants, have received little
attention because fossil collections, data, and high-resolution
chronostratigraphic sections are relatively rare. This project will build on
extensive fossil collections from three primary study areas in the Western
Interior of North America, involve new fieldwork designed to augment collections
and data from critical intervals, and develop diverse inorganic and organic
geochemical records to characterize and identify biotic patterns, local
environments, and factors involved in terrestrial ecosystem restructuring
following the K/Pg extinction. To accomplish these goals, the research team
will: collect and interpret megafloral, palynological, invertebrate, and
vertebrate fossils and associated contextual data from three well-studied
stratigraphic sections; use fossil leaf physiognomic traits and geochemical data
from organic compounds to construct records of temperature, precipitation, and
fire frequency; integrate ecological proxies of community structure and
environmental conditions over time and space as they relate to the three study
areas, to determine if there are any climatic conditions, geographic locations,
or trophic interactions that enhance or impede ecosystem restructuring after the
K/Pg extinction. In addition, geochemical proxies for volcanic activity will be
examined to resolve the influence of the extensive basalt eruptions of the
Deccan Traps on the biota within the study areas.

This project is jointly funded by the Frontier Research in Earth Sciences (FRES)
program and the Division of Earth Sciences to support projects that increase
research capabilities, capacity, and infrastructure, at a wide variety of
institution types as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.