* 2317193
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Graph Mining and Network Science with Differential Privacy: Efficient Algorithms and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Anil Kumar Vullikanti, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 06/30/2027
* USD 179,055.00

Data privacy is a fundamental challenge across numerous applications that rely
on graphs and network data, including healthcare, social networks, finance, and
computational epidemiology. Adopting privacy-preserving solutions to practice in
such applications is often hindered by the loss in utility and lack of
scalability to large-scale problems with billions of nodes/edges. This project
aims to develop private algorithms for several fundamental problems in graph
mining and network science, that can scale to networks of the size that arise in
real-world applications and provide good accuracy bounds. The project’s broader
significance and importance are that private algorithms will become available to
a new community of researchers from public-health policy planning, cybersecurity
and social network analysis. Adopting graph differential privacy (DP) as the
notion of privacy, this project achieves the above goals through fundamental
contributions in privacy-preserving algorithm design for various fundamental
problems in graph mining and network science, such as subgraph detection, node
ranking, community detection, and studying properties of graph dynamical systems
such as epidemic spread on networks. The project leverages tools from
distributed computation, such as sampling and sketching, and develops innovative
tools for graph DP to yield highly-scalable private graph algorithms with
rigorous accuracy bounds (both in theory and practice). Finally, the project
will lead to the development of a private graph processing system, which will be
incorporated into a network science cyber-infrastructure. Accordingly, the tools
of graph DP will be made available to the broader community of network science
and computational epidemiology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.