* 2317209
* Collaborative Research: Spatial phylogenomics and diet evolution of the megadiverse plant bugs (Hemiptera: Miridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Christiane Weirauch, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,059,027.00

This collaborative research project aims to investigate the evolution of the
megadiverse plant bugs, the insect family Miridae. Plant bugs comprise over
11,350 described species and rank among the 20 most species-rich insect
families. They play significant roles as both crop pests and beneficial
predators in ecosystems. A massive biodiversity dataset has been compiled for
Miridae through previous NSF-funded initiatives. However, due to the absence of
comprehensive phylogenetic hypotheses, this dataset's potential to investigate
biogeographic history and host plant evolution remains untapped. The research
team will construct a phylogeny of plant bugs using ultraconserved element (UCE)
data. This will enable the reconstruction of robust tribal and subtribal-level
relationships, while investigating the temporal and dietary evolution of the
group. The project will also examine the biogeographic history and host plant
interactions of selected groups of plant bugs in Western North America, one of
the hotspots of plant bug diversity. Finally, the team will study the
phylogenetic diversity of plant bugs in the biodiversity hotspot California
Floristic Province (CA-FP), revealing if patterns are similar to those
documented for plants and vertebrates. As part of the broader impacts, the
research team will train a postdoctoral researcher and two female Ph.D.
students, contributing to the advancement of scientific knowledge and promoting
diversity in academia. Undergraduate students will be involved through summer
internships and independent research, focusing on insect biodiversity in
California. Additionally, a course on insect biodiversity and conservation,
specifically focusing on plant bugs and the CA-FP, will be developed, and an
existing course will be expanded to highlight California biodiversity.
Additional training opportunities include a short course on true bug
biodiversity and an International Miroid Workshop. The widely used Systematic
Catalog of Plant Bugs will be updated and migrated to Taxon Works, ensuring
access to accurate and up-to-date information.

Despite both economic importance and diversity, the few current phylogenetic
hypotheses of Miridae are taxon-poor, poorly resolved, and conflicting. This
project has three major aims. The team will estimate the first robust phylogeny
across the seven subfamilies and with subprojects focusing on the three largest
subfamilies Mirinae, Orthotylinae, and Phylinae, infer evolutionary timelines,
and investigate diet transitions. Though most plant bug species have small
endemic ranges and phytophagous lineages typically contain species that feed on
a single host plant species, some species’ repertoires comprise many plant
families. These attributes of plant bugs will allow us to test hypotheses on
host plant driven diversification and the biogeographic history of biota in the
Nearctic and the CA-FP. Plant bugs are an excellent system to investigate
patterns of phylogenetic diversity in the CA-FP, the only biodiversity hotspot
that resides entirely within the continental United States: 31% of the ~700
described species of Miridae in California are endemic, most have been treated
in taxonomic revisionary studies, and distribution ranges are well documented.
We will contrast phylogenetic diversity patterns in Miridae – the first insect
group to be studied in detail in the CA-FP – with those found in plants and
vertebrates to put insects on the map for conservation recommendations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.