* 2317442
* Collaborative Research: Biomechanical mechanisms conferring wound resilience in single-celled organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sindy KY Tang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 651,399.00

Wound resilience is a common trait in biological systems necessary for
homeostasis and survival. This project will identify wound resilience principles
in the free-living single-celled organism Stentor coeruleus, known to display
robust wound healing capacity from drastic mechanical wounds. This project has
the potential to lay the foundation for engineering new functions—wound
resilience—in synthetic cells and soft micro-robots, and will make the
technologies more robust for industrial applications. The collaboration between
the three investigators provides a unique opportunity for training and workforce
development at the interface of cell biology, engineering, and mathematical
modeling. Results from this work will be incorporated into graduate courses and
social media to raise public interest in non-model organisms. All investigators
will continue to recruit underrepresented minorities to STEM via outreach
targeted to K-12 students and participation in the Bay Area Science Festival and
the Maker Faire held yearly in San Francisco, CA.

The overall goal of this project is to investigate how Stentor coeruleus employs
biomechanical mechanisms both upstream of wounding for wound prevention, and
downstream of wounding for robust healing from mechanical wounds that cause an
opening in the plasma membrane. The rationales to focus on Stentor are: 1) It is
a free-living unicellular organism found in environments that can be subject to
high mechanical stresses due to natural flows or predation. In principle, these
cells must possess properties that prevent frequent wounding and allow healing
if wounding occurs. 2) Its wound healing capacity is more robust than most other
cells. It is capable of recovering robustly from drastic wounds and regenerating
from cell fragments as small as 1/27th of the original cell size in 24 hours.
This property allows the perturbation of the wounding conditions and the
measurement of their effect on the repair process without immediately causing
cell death, thereby providing a robust platform for probing the self-repair
mechanism. 3) High-throughput gene knockdown and wounding experiments have been
developed. Stentor’s genome has been sequenced, and tools for molecular
manipulation of Stentor gene expression have been developed to pave the way to a
molecular understanding of Stentor wound repair. This project will test the role
of the cytoskeleton in conferring wound resistance to the cell, and the role of
large-scale mechanical force generation in complementing biochemical healing
modes to close wounds of increasing severity. The project combines cell biology,
microfluidics, and mechanobiology modeling, involving the use of microfluidics
to generate precise flow conditions to inflict wounds on cells in a high
throughput manner, and the development of mathematical models integrating
biochemical and mechanical processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.