* 2317605
* Flux Mediated Synthesis of Cu(I)-Oxide Semiconductors for Clean Energy Application
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Maggard, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 379,833.00

Part 1. Non-Technical Summary

Many technologically relevant fields require increasingly complex materials that
pose severe challenges in their preparation and development. The limitations of
current synthetic approaches thus represent a major bottleneck to the extensive
tuning of physical properties and for the realization of potential commercial
applications. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in NSF's Division of Materials Research, addresses the challenges
inherent to the preparation of crystalline semiconductors for facilitating the
efficient capture of sunlight for the reduction of carbon dioxide. Results from
this work leading to the synthesis of new semiconductors, and, for example, the
efficient production of chemical fuels from them, are important to our nation's
progress toward clean and renewable energy production. The discovery of
compounds occurring at the limits of synthesizability is aimed at understanding
the impacts of new structural features on their properties and stability during
the capture and conversion of solar energy, and thus pushing the frontiers of
structure-property relationships. More broadly, the advancement of synthetic
approaches to prepare complex semiconductors helps to accelerate their
technological development for many related applications in the electronics
industry. The professional training of undergraduate and graduate students is
provided within these research activities, such as advanced characterization
techniques at national laboratories, with a focus on the recruitment of students
from underrepresented groups. Educational efforts include the development of an
undergraduate laboratory module as well as a professional training workshop at
North Carolina State University in advanced materials characterization.

Part 2. Technical Summary

Advancing capabilities to attain crystalline solids with technologically useful
properties can be bolstered by the development of synthetic approaches to target
new compositions and structures that are thermodynamically unstable, or
metastable. The discovery of the underlying factors leading to their kinetic
stabilization, including for those compounds not yet predicted computationally,
represents a central objective of the research project. Research plans for this
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in NSF's Division of Materials Research, specifically focus on the investigation
of metastable, Cu(I)-containing semiconductors that have promising applications
as p-type semiconductors for the absorption of solar energy and the catalytic
reduction of carbon dioxide at their surfaces. Synthetic aspects are aimed at
advancing the accessible range of crystalline structures and optimal
photoelectrochemical properties through the unlocking of relatively low
temperature pathways using flux-mediated reaction conditions. Structural
characterization by X-ray and neutron scattering is used to help answer key
questions regarding the mechanistic synthetic transformations and the resulting
kinetic stability. Fundamental insights into the optimal tuning of their
crystalline structures and chemical compositions to achieve the efficient
reduction of carbon dioxide under sunlight are probed in depth by
photoelectrochemical property measurements. The key relationships to their
thermodynamic instability and electronic structures are also established with
synergistic computational efforts using density functional theory. Educational
initiatives include professional training for students involved on this project,
a new undergraduate laboratory module in solid-state chemistry, and an annual
workshop in materials characterization using Rietveld methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.