* 2317395
* NUPACK: New Capabilities for Nucleic Acid Analysis and Design
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Niles Pierce, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 166,667.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Niles A. Pierce of the California
Institute of Technology (Caltech) will develop new algorithms for nucleic acid
analysis and design. Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) orchestrate life by interacting
within complex biological circuits to grow, regulate, and repair organisms. Over
the coming decades, engineering of DNA and RNA within the emerging fields of
molecular programming, nucleic acid nanotechnology, and synthetic biology are
poised to generate transformative programmable molecular and cellular
technologies addressing diverse challenges to science and society ranging from
environmental monitoring and biosphere engineering to diagnosis and treatment,
and from renewable energy to sustainable manufacturing. To support these
engineering efforts, the Pierce Lab at Caltech is engaged in a multi-decade
effort to develop NUPACK (Nucleic Acid Package), a growing software suite for
analyzing and designing nucleic acid structures, devices, and systems. Here,
they will expand NUPACKâ€™s capabilities by pursuing three major goals. First,
they aim to develop algorithms to enable simulation of functional nucleic acid
systems with moving parts. Second, they will develop analysis and design
algorithms that enable treatment of systems that contain mixed materials (e.g.,
both DNA and RNA, or both DNA and a synthetic nucleic acid analog such as LNA)
that are critical to modern applications whether in living organisms, on the
laboratory bench, or in the field. Third, they will endeavor to generalize the
NUPACK cloud web app to enable users to efficiently leverage these unique
computational tools for both research and education.

NUPACK is a growing software suite for the analysis and design of nucleic acid
structures, devices, and systems serving the needs of researchers in the
emerging disciplines of molecular programming, nucleic acid nanotechnology,
synthetic biology, and across the life sciences. NUPACK algorithms are unique in
treating complex and test tube ensembles containing arbitrary numbers of
interacting strand species, providing crucial tools for capturing concentration
effects essential to analyzing and designing the intermolecular interactions
that are a hallmark of these fields. Here, the Pierce Lab at Caltech proposes to
significantly expand NUPACK's capabilities by pursuing three major goals. First,
to enable simulation of functional nucleic acid systems with moving parts, they
will develop automated kinetic coarse-graining algorithms to enable kinetic
analysis of complex and test tube ensembles. Second, to enable engineering of
mixed-material systems (e.g., DNA/RNA or LNA/DNA) that are critical for modern
applications in vitro, in situ, and in vivo, they will develop mixed-material
models and algorithms for the analysis and design of complex and test tube
ensembles. Third, they will generalize the NUPACK cloud web app to encompass
these new capabilities, enabling researchers and students to efficiently
leverage these unique tools with parallel execution in the scalable NUPACK
hybrid cloud. These new analysis and design capabilities are expected to have
broad scientific impact, contributing to the development of new molecular and
cellular technologies that will ultimately have applications ranging from
environmental monitoring and biosphere engineering to the development of nucleic
acid therapeutics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.