* 2317267
* Conference: Graduate Student Support to Attend the 2023 Magnetics Summer School in Bari, Italy, June 11-16, 2023
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Sara Majetich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2024
* USD 12,185.00

The goal of the proposed Electrical and Electronics Engineers Magnetics Society
Summer School being organized in Bari, Italy, from June 11-16, 2023, is to bring
together an international group of graduate students doing research in magnetism
and related areas. It consists of lectures by experts, poster presentations by
participating graduate students, panel discussions about careers in magnetism,
and a field trip to visit local research facilities. The program covers
fundamentals and advanced topics in magnetism. It encourages a diverse group of
students into the magnetics community. The most significant impact for students
is the excitement of being able to interact with experts and discuss their
personal research project. The Summer School provides opportunities to network
and see how to interact professionally with people from a range of backgrounds.
Lecturers will have both formal and informal interactions with the students. It
is expected that 90-100 students will participate based on the selection from
competitive application.

The ability to prepare and understand magnetic materials and exploit their
properties in electromagnetic devices has revolutionized our lives. Current
technologies enabled by magnetic materials include magnetic recording heads and
media, non-volatile random-access memory, motors, energy-saving devices, and
biomedical applications. The use of electron spin, in addition to electron
charge, has led to the spintronics revolution. New materials and phenomena are
constantly emerging. Specific topics include history, fundamentals, simulations
and theory, measurements and challenging applications of magnetism ranging from
bio-to-computing. The grouping of lectures and discussions will address current
challenges in the field, with emerging new ideas on topological materials with
spin-momentum locking, magnon-photon coupling for qubits, strategies for low
power and environmentally friendly magnetic devices, etc. The boundaries between
these areas are constantly pushed to overcome challenges and identify new
possibilities. The latest results in these areas will be presented to the
students by leading experts. The students will develop their communication
skills and feel more empowered to suggest new ideas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.