* 2317317
* INCLUDES Initiative (Conference): Reimagining STEM Innovation and Entrepreneurship by Centering Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This conference award, funded by NSFâ€™s Eddie Bernice Johnson INCLUDES
Initiative, is creating an actionable vision for broadening participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) innovation &
entrepreneurship (I&E). Using iterative design and ideation during a conference
workshop, followed by working groups that center the perspectives and
experiences of individuals historically excluded from STEM, participants from
different backgrounds and identities will create a core vision and roadmap for a
reimagined, inclusive I&E ecosystem. This project is expected to meaningfully
advance the field by redefining approaches to STEM I&E, opening multiple new
pathways to advance inclusive innovation, and generating new definitions of
entrepreneurship, disruption, and success. The conference is also expected to
create economic opportunities and benefits to those across the I&E ecosystem who
have been denied these opportunities. The conference will bring together a
diverse core network of participating STEM I&E experts and expanded partnerships
that will help to carry the re-envisioning and systemic change work forward.

There is an urgent and critical need for STEM I&E to engage diverse populations
and create opportunity for the energy, creativity, and contributions of all
Americans. This conference award centers the lived experiences of marginalized
populations, helps the field learn where gaps and barriers are most persistent
and how they are experienced by people from underrepresented populations, and
creates opportunities to think differently about systemic constraints through
research. Questions that will be explored include: What values need to be
enacted within/outside of the ecosystem? What structural changes are needed?
What resources are needed to enact the vision? Small working groups will convene
in the months following the conference workshop to identify and further develop
five actionable recommendations for moving the vision forward. Anticipated
outcomes are an initial framework that identifies attributes of an inclusive
STEM I&E sector, development of a series of co-created strategic
recommendations, published action agendas describing a rationale and
implementation steps for each recommendation, and a workplan for further
exploration and implementation of additional strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.