* 2317361
* Long Term Coastal Adaptation and Ecological Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Amira Ainis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 268,585.00

This project conducts research examining long-term patterns of human-environment
interactions along the Pacific Coast. The study site is adjacent to a highly
productive hard coral reef, which is an important habitat for numerous marine
species and is at the intersection of major ocean currents. The archaeological
record provides a strong opportunity to understand the relationship between
environmental change, human use of natural resources, and ecosystem resiliency
over millennia-scale time periods. The ecological and paleoenvironmental data
from this project provides a long-term context for local and global fisheries,
including data on anthropogenic impacts, environmental change, and ecosystem
resilience. The results of this project provide important information about how
marine productivity affects the timing of population expansion. The project has
the potential to fill in important geographic and chronological gaps in our
understanding of hunter-gatherer along ocean coastlines. This research also
addresses the increased risk of archaeological site loss and destruction,
currently prevelant. The work conducted during this project includes close
collaboration with international archaeologists and includes engagement of the
local community through public lectures. It also include graduate student
training .

The research team conducts archaeological survey and limited excavation along
the Pacific coastline, along with radiocarbon dating and analyzing marine shells
and fish otoliths for stable isotopic measurements, to develop a chronology for
coastal human occupation and paleoenvironmental change. This project has four
primary objectives: 1) determine the geographic distribution and chronology of
occupation for coastal archaeological sites; 2) reconstruct patterns of mobility
and resource use in the context of long-term environmental change; 3) track
human adaptations in the local ecosystem related to natural and anthropogenic
changes in resource availability; and (4) reconstruct aspects of nearshore
paleoenvironments and ecology, including collecting fish demographic and
lifecycle data for comparisons with modern fisheries. This work generates
biological and ecological data about the distribution and abundance of fish,
shellfish, and other marine species along the Pacific Coast. Chronological,
season of harvest, and subsistence data addresses questions about settlement
chronology, marine resource use, and sea surface temperature change. Analysis of
shellfish and fish species after excavation provide critical insight into how
dietary shifts and environmental adaptations are linked to natural and
anthropogenic patterns. The research goals of this project speak to broader
contemporary concerns about coastal adaptation and marine resource
sustainability during the current time of global change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.