* 2317512
* EFRI ELiS: Engineered Living Biofilms (ELBs) for critical mineral biomining and bioremediation applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Claudia Schmidt-Dannert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,999,082.00

Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential components in electrical vehicles,
solar panels, low-energy light bulbs, batteries, and smart phones. More than 90%
of REEs are mined in Asia and Africa. A global demand for REEs is causing supply
shortages that are slowing down manufacturing in the US. This makes the US
economy vulnerable. Current REE mining processes also have major impacts on the
environment because they create massive amounts of harmful waste while consuming
vast amounts of energy and water. The goal of this project is to develop an
environmentally friendly biomining technology to extract REEs from US national
resources. To advance this goal, the investigators propose to develop a
bacterial system that can efficiently extract REEs from mining, industrial, and
electronic wastes at an industrial level. The project will engage the public to
address concerns about mining and biotechnology. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society by developing fundamental knowledge on
sustainable REE extraction. Additional benefits to society will be achieved
through education and training, including the mentoring of two postdoctoral
researchers and one graduate student at the University of Minnesota, one
postdoctoral researcher at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and one
graduate student at the Georgia Institute of Technology.

Transitioning to clean energy systems and technologies has resulted in a surge
in demand for rare earth elements (REEs), causing a significant supply shortage
that already negatively impacts US industries, especially the EV market.
Innovative extraction and recycling technologies that can access underutilized
resources are needed to establish a diversified supply chain that does not
solely rely on importing these critical elements. Today’s REE extraction and
processing practices are energy intensive and cause significant environmental
impacts through waste generation. This project aims to create a bio-based
platform for engineering of resilient biofilms to extract REEs from various
waste streams and mine-impacted waters for recovery, recycling, and
decontamination. Specifically, the project team proposes to (1) engineer robust,
artificial biofilm consortia that are environmentally safe and have controllable
properties for selective metal binding under industrially relevant operational
conditions, (2) design and model a bioreactor system to achieve economic
feasibility and future deployment, and (3) pair technology development with
public engagement to characterize values held by different stakeholders to
inform acceptance of new biotechnologies in mining impacted regions. The
successful completion of this project has the potential to have transformative
impact through the creation of a biofilm-based system that is environmentally
friendly and can sustainably extract/recycle/recover minerals and metals
critical for clean-energy economy. Additional benefits include the development
of a knowledge base and systems for the design of new living biofilms beyond
biomining applications, such as bioremediation and biomanufacturing. To
implement this project’s educational and training goals, the Principal
Investigators will leverage existing education and outreach programs and
resources (Market Science, CORE, Ambassador program, Biotechnology K-12 and
Community College Education Ecosystem) to increase STEM awareness and
participation with portable hands-on demonstration modules based on biomining.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.