* 2317530
* Collaborative Research: Artificial Coral
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Barbara Harthorn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2026
* USD 387,372.00

This collaborative project develops coral-inspired artificial cells and studies
the interactions between these artificial hosts and living algae. Coral reefs
are the accumulated mineral skeletons of living coral organisms. Their color
comes from symbiotic algae that live inside the corals and are important to
their survival. Coral bleaching is the loss of these internalized algae.
Improved basic understanding of coral-algae symbioses is needed to predict and
combat the effects of climate change on coral reefs and associated fisheries,
but the complexity of living symbiotic systems complicates study. This project
is developing artificial corals that serve as simple, nonliving model
"organisms" as a beginning point to dissect the biological chemistry of the
coral-algae relationship. The project also convenes public deliberations with
diverse groups to learn more about the American public’s perceptions of the
social and environmental benefits and risks posed by construction of such
artificial coral in a time of rapid climate change. These deliberations provide
an evidence base for reflection, among scientists and engineers, about the
implications of designer cell construction and for science in society education
of designer cell scientists-in-training, lay publics, K-12 students, and
policymakers.

Two types of artificial coral cells, designed to capture key functions of coral,
are being constructed by bottom-up assembly from nonliving molecular parts. The
first, inspired by coral's oral gastroderm cells, is designed to participate in
a symbiotic relationship with living dinoflagellate algae. The second is
designed to deposit mineral skeletons, as do the coral calicobastic cells. The
project has four objectives: 1) Capture and maintenance of living algal cells
within artificial symbiosome vacuoles; 2) Construct a mineralization-capable
artificial calicoblastic compartment; 3) Combine the artificial cells of
objectives 1 and 2 to obtain live algal symbiosis that combines photosynthesis
and calcification; 4) Convene public deliberative groups that concurrently
explore perceptions of artificial coral, comparative synthetic cells, bottom-up
synthetic biology, and the US innovation system. These nonliving artificial
coral cells provide a new platform for probing crucial aspects of the coral-
algae mutualism responsible for coral reefs by greatly simplifying host
biochemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.