* 2317012
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Functional signals of upper limb use in the collarbone
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Hannah Farrell, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 30,671.00

One of the defining milestones in human evolutionary history is the transition
to walking on two legs – bipedalism – although it is difficult to reconstruct
the degree to which fossil species might have simultaneously still been active
in the trees. This doctoral dissertation research project analyzes the
distribution of different types of bone in the collarbone of several species who
get around in different ways, to better reconstruct and understand the use of
upper limbs in fossil human relatives. Shifting to a predominantly bipedal mode
of locomotion is associated with several other key developments in human
history, including stone tool production and use, long range hunting and
associated meat preparation and consumption. Gaps have remained in approaches
and have impeded the refinement of ways to identify the transition away from use
of upper limbs in locomotion in human evolution; the results of this research
contribute to the reconstruction of patterns of locomotion during human
evolution with greater resolution. This project provides training relevant to
both STEM education and clinical practice for underserved students.

This project quantifies different aspects of the morphology of the primate
clavicle, and the results contribute to longstanding key debates regarding upper
limb use in early hominins. This study quantifies and compares variation in
external clavicular shape, and the distribution of cortical and trabecular bone
in the primate clavicle, throughout ontogeny and across groups with diverse
locomotor adaptation. It further models how morphological variation affects the
loading of the clavicle during locomotion, and finally applies these results to
building context to document and interpret variation the early hominin fossil
record with respect to assessing locomotor adaptation. This study further
enhances the ability of researchers in biological anthropology and related
fields to glean information about the degree of arboreal behavior in fossil
hominins, ultimately allowing a clearer understanding of the associations
between anatomy and ecology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.