* 2317250
* The Infrastructure and Labor Dynamics of Digital Media Piracy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Laura-Zoe Humphreys, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2026
* USD 88,870.00

Media piracy, or the unauthorized use, reproduction, or circulation of
copyrighted material, has long been the dominant means through which most
populations gain access to media. Despite the critical role that women are known
to play in the dynamics of this informal sector, the relationship between gender
and media piracy has not been substantively examined. This study addresses this
gap through an ethnographic study of media piracy. In addition to providing
training for undergraduate and graduate students in methods of anthropological
data collection and analysis, this project broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in scientific research. Findings are being disseminated
broadly to stakeholders and organizations who explore the ethical, legal, and
social implications of digital piracy, intellectual property rights, and media
use and circulation. This project is jointly funded by Cultural Anthropology and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This project asks how gender shapes the infrastructure and labor of media piracy
and how media piracy is shaping the livelihoods and economic activities of
women, who are the most significant clients of media piracy, during periods of
socioeconomic stress. Research combines participant observation and semi-
structured interviews with pirate media distributors, vendors, and consumers, as
well as state and copyright collections agency officials, and focuses on how
gender shapes: 1) media piracy infrastructure and labor; 2) the acquisition of
media technologies and their management in the home; and 3) the reception of
transnational entertainment genres. This project provides the first study of the
role that gender plays in shaping media piracy and what impact media
distribution has in social and economic transformation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.