* 2317748
* HSI Planning Project: Undergraduate Institutions Developing Opportunities in STEM (UNIDOS)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kelly Trujillo, Santa Fe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,727.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to broaden the
participation of historically underrepresented populations centered around two
proximate Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs), Santa Fe Community College and
Northern New Mexico College. The Undergraduate Institutions Developing
Opportunities in STEM (UNIDOS) project will build upon relationships with
regional partners, from both the public and private sectors, to provide
educational training opportunities for local youth in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). These activities are designed to embrace
cultural values and traditions and honors the wealth of knowledge from
Indigenous and Hispanic populations. Based upon an active and collaborative
exploration of community needs and anticipated vocational gaps in the regional
STEM workforce, partners will develop and modify STEM degree and certificate
programs and address the holistic needs of matriculating students to promote
student academic success and STEM career readiness.

The UNIDOS model predicts that the significant challenges underrepresented
students face are best addressed when entities that share common goals work
together. To this end, the project will establish a STEM Advisory Council,
composed of representatives from both the public and private STEM workforce,
STEM education advocate groups, professionals, educators, and college
administrators. Generating a collaborative relationship with valued community
partners is expected to generate vocational opportunities for students,
including internship experiences that will enhance the job readiness for
underrepresented individuals entering the STEM workforce. Additionally, UNIDOS
will provide educational training opportunities in STEM for local youth to
stimulate interest in STEM education/careers, facilitate student matriculation
into college, and promote STEM degree program participation/completion.
Partnering institutions will engage with private entities to develop curricula
for participating youth that introduces them to culturally relevant
careers/research in science and enables students to develop a STEM identity that
does not conflict with their cultural values and traditions. STEM faculty will
play a major role in delivering the curricula, and together with professional
development opportunities designed to identify and rectify inequitable teaching
practices and mitigate language barriers, will generate a STEM learning
atmosphere that is inclusive and celebrates students’ wealth of cultural
knowledge. Through these efforts, enhanced diversity in STEM education will
generate a workforce with a broad knowledge base, which can function to
stimulate innovation fueled by collective experiences and an inclusive spirit of
collaboration over competition. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.