* 2317747
* Strength Across Schools Partnership to Teach Empowering Computational Thinking and Computer Science in Middle School English Language Arts Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tinukwa Boulder, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2026
* USD 621,776.00

The Strength Across Schools Research-to-Practice Partnership (RPP), expanding an
existing CS for All Research-Practice Partnership (RPP) team of University of
Pittsburgh, school districts, and regional educational organizations, is
creating innovative curricula, instructional practices, and related teacher
professional development for integrating computational thinking (CT) and
computer science (CS) instruction into middle school English Language Arts
(ELA). Middle school is a critical time for CT/CS development because students,
particularly girls and Black and Latinx students, begin to opt out of STEM
experiences by grade five, especially in CS education. Also, lack of funding,
teacher shortages, and access to teacher professional development create
challenges to schools for offering CT/CS instruction. Integrating CT/CS into
other subject areas provides one solution to expanding CS instruction in under-
resourced middle schools. Although ELA may not be viewed as the most likely
subject for CS integration, literacy scholars have increasingly called for
integrating CT/CS into ELA instruction in various ways. This project builds upon
this research to collaboratively develop and iteratively refine a justice-
focused (Smythe, 2011) curriculum that empowers students and integrates CT/CS
and ELA learning goals within meaningful contexts. The project instructional
materials will be developed with two objectives: (a) to build on and value
students' diverse perspectives, interests, and identities and (b) to examine the
social, cultural, and ethical aspects of CT/CS. The partnership also focuses on
developing multiple forms of ELA teacher support for the classroom
implementation of the CT/CS curriculum, including a regional Professional
Learning Network of districts and teachers in Western Pennsylvania to provide
ongoing professional development and classroom-based teacher supports. The
project will investigate how the Professional Learning Network and classroom
supports help ELA teachers enact the CT/CS curriculum successfully and how the
curriculum shapes the CT/CS knowledge, computational identities, and digital
empowerment of students historically underrepresented in CS.

This project investigates how CT and CS can be integrated into middle school
ELA, the supports ELA teachers need to enact this instruction, and how this
instruction shapes the CT/CS knowledge, computational identities, and digital
empowerment of students historically underrepresented in CS. As an RPP, the
investigation is conducted collaboratively with participating teachers and
school districts. Both qualitative and quantitative data measure the impact of
the CT/CS professional development on ELA teachers' integration of CT/CS in
their classrooms and how justice-focused CT/CS curriculum shapes female, Black
and Latinx students' CT/CS knowledge, computational identities and digital
empowerment. Data analysis formatively contributes to iterative professional
development and curriculum revisions and also contributes to scholarship in
several ways. First, it investigates how various teacher instructional supports
enhance the implementation of justice-focused CT/CS in middle school ELA
classrooms. Second, the project informs culturally responsive approaches to
CT/CS instruction, aiming to increase female, Black, and Latinx students' CS
identity, engagement, and knowledge/skills. Third, it contributes to knowledge
on making CS more inviting and accessible to underrepresented students. Finally,
the project advances knowledge of strategies for forming regional and diverse
research-practice partnerships, particularly in terms of substantial scaling.
The project's ultimate goal is to provide research-based strategies for
supporting literacy educators and curriculum developers across the US to
integrate CT/CS into preK-12 ELA classes.

This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.