* 2317990
* CRISP 2.0 Type 2: Collaborative Research: Integrated Socio-Technical Modeling Framework to Evaluate and Enhance Resiliency in Islanded Communities (ERIC)
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jorge Gonzalez, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 230,909.00

Recent catastrophic events in the coastal tropics and sub-tropics highlight the
impact of the interdependencies of critical infrastructure systems and how those
interdependencies cause failures of physical assets, leading to adverse impacts
on the health and socio-economic wellbeing of the communities in those regions.
Islanded communities, defined as remote, self-contained regions, with low or
intermittent physical (or cyber) connectivity, are especially vulnerable to
natural disasters. A recent example is the extraordinary case of the island of
Puerto Rico (PR), in the direct path of Hurricane Maria, and the near total
failure of lifeline infrastructures. This event also exemplifies how extreme
events compound endemic physical, social and economic vulnerabilities often
present in remote or isolated communities. The associated cascading impacts,
prior to and after Hurricane Maria, are clear evidence of our limited knowledge
and readiness to anticipate risks in these complex engineered, physical and
human systems. This reveals the urgent need to develop scientific and social
frameworks and methodologies by which islanded communities can assess their
existing preparedness to extreme climatic events, and through a multi-
stakeholder engagement process and engineering analysis, evaluate and implement
alternative measures to enhance the resiliency of such communities. Using PR as
the case study, this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
and Processes (CRISP) project will develop a data-driven modeling framework for
understanding the complex physical and social vulnerabilities, and
interdependencies that can and have resulted in near total failure of
infrastructure systems.

The research questions that will be addressed include: a) How do socio-economic
stability, governance and baseline conditions of infrastructure impact
performance and resiliency of critical interdependent infrastructure systems in
extreme weather conditions? b) What knowledge and methods are needed to guide
strategies for enhancing system resiliency and restoration in islanded
communities? c) How can experts and stakeholders be engaged and informed about
enhancing resiliency and effective failure mitigation strategies? The plan to
achieve these objectives is by first implementing a data-driven process of
gathering human narratives as social data and a source of information to
recreate the timeline and experience of Hurricane Maria, before, during and
after the event. Next, the project team will develop an integrated modeling and
simulation framework, based on multi-layer distribution network theory. This
framework will include structural-based assessment results in the modeling of
infrastructure behavior during and after a disaster. The focus of study will be
on the interdependencies of the electrical power, water distribution and
communications systems. An objective is to recreate, via simulation, the event
using a combination of system network models, geophysical data, and community
data, to capture the sequence of the cascading failures and the corresponding
societal impact as the event unfolded and during post-event recovery efforts.
The project team seeks to arrive at a level of understanding of this system of
systems that will lead to informed solutions and recommendations that will
minimize adverse impact, disruption, loss of life and suffering, in the face of
future extreme events. The research builds on a wealth of expertise in weather
and climate processes in the Caribbean, understanding of local critical
infrastructure, experience in mining community narrative, and from proven
methodologies for rebuilding resilient communities in post-Hurricane Sandy in
the New York and New Jersey Metro Area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.