* 2317753
* Collaborative Research: HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Studying Equitable and Inclusive Strategies for Mentoring in CUREs
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Robin Cotter, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2027
* USD 62,795.00

Collaborative Research: HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Studying
Equitable and Inclusive Strategies for Mentoring in CUREs

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project aims to rigorously examine
mentoring relationships and structures as they are enacted in the context of
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) in the biological
sciences. Further, this project seeks to identify the associations that exist
between the aforementioned facets of the CURE learning environment, CURE
students’ attitudes and professional dispositions (e.g., their development as
scientists), and their persistence in research. These analyses will be leveraged
to establish working groups tasked with developing and evaluating instructional
materials and professional development opportunities that foster equitable and
inclusive mentoring strategies in CUREs. Collectively, the findings and products
generated from this work are poised to make a substantial contribution to the
field and to educational practices by revealing key mentoring behaviors,
institutional-/course-level policies, and learning supports that drive success
in the CUREs space.

Specifically, this project will: (1) use quantitative approaches to characterize
the relationship between instructor/student demographic attributes and students’
perceptions of mentoring in CUREs as well as students’ perceptions of mentoring
and their affective/psychosocial development; (2) employ qualitative methods
(principally ethnographic case studies) to investigate the role of social
structure and power dynamics on mentoring in the CUREs context; and (3) leverage
research findings to organize and convene working groups focused on the sharing
of ideas and resources necessary to build a culture of effective, equitable, and
inclusive mentorship in CUREs. Thus, the proposed project will not only
contribute new theoretical and practical knowledge to the field, but also
cultivate the human and social capital needed to ensure that mentoring in CUREs
becomes an explicit focus of the CURE teaching and learning environment. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.