* 2317832
* Deepening Computational Thinking for English Learners by Integrating Community-Based Environmental Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Clare Baek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 09/30/2027
* USD 394,030.00

This project addresses two issues of critical importance to the nation's future:
computational thinking, which is foundational to all areas of STEM, and
environmental literacy, a set of knowledge, skills, and practices vital to
supporting ecologically sound, economically prosperous, and equitable
communities for present and future generations. In doing so, it focuses on
reaching Hispanics and English learners, two of the fastest growing segments of
the K-12 student population, but ones that are not yet fully represented in
STEM. In this research project, UC Irvine and three local education agencies
serving 95%+ Hispanic learners formed a Research-Practice-Partnership (RPP) to
promote computational thinking among Hispanics and English learners. The
partnership will develop and implement a two-year elementary school curriculum
that integrates computational thinking with language and literacy instruction
and culturally sustaining pedagogy. The curriculum leverages the unique cultural
and linguistic assets of Hispanic learners to simultaneously develop computing
and language skills. The project will develop, implement, and evaluate a third
year of the computational thinking curriculum integrated with environmental
literacy. This will allow students to deepen their understanding of local
environmental phenomena, come to understand the value of computer science in
addressing challenges affecting their local communities, and enhance their
language and literacy skills through scientific collaboration and communication.

The project will address the following research questions: (1) What are the
challenges faced in expanding an equity-oriented RPP to additional school
districts and grade levels and to integration of new content, and how are those
challenges best addressed; (2) What are the best practices for integrating
computer science and community-based environmental literacy among fifth grade
students with a high percentage of Hispanic English learners; and (3) How does
engagement with the curriculum affect the learning processes and outcomes of the
students in environmental literacy knowledge, science knowledge, computational
thinking, computer science identity, and academic language proficiency? It will
address these questions through design-based implementation research centered on
teacher instruction, student learning, and problems of teaching practice as
identified by practitioners, students, and researchers. The project team will
collect and analyze a wide range of data, including field notes from curriculum
design meetings and classroom observations; teacher and student interviews and
surveys; and assessments of students' learning outcomes in computer science,
environmental literacy, science knowledge, and language and literacy. The
project will generate important new knowledge disseminated to educational
researchers and practitioners about how computational thinking can best be
integrated with other STEM content for diverse learners at the elementary level,
especially in the area of environmental literacy. It will also produce and
disseminate an open access curriculum, instructional resources for teachers and
students, and professional development content that can be used and adapted by
other school districts and educators across the country. This project is funded
through the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.