* 2317168
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Accountable Open Source Infrastructure
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* James Herbsleb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,995.00

Corporations, governments, and society as a whole have developed an
extraordinary reliance on open-source libraries and frameworks, which comprise a
sort of “open-source digital infrastructure.” As such, the utility and security
of a great many important applications depends on maintaining this
infrastructure to a high standard. However, open-source licenses typically
completely eschew any form of accountability, providing no warranties of any
kind. Moreover, maintainers of open-source projects are typically free to walk
away at any time, rather than expected to comply with external demands. This
research will investigate to what extent maintainers of open-source software are
accountable to different types of users, as well as when and how this
accountability emerges and varies in response to evolving user needs or
regulatory moves. The results of this research will highlight the scenarios
under which the current open-source governance mechanisms contribute to or fail
to address the external accountability that is sought for durable
infrastructure, as well as any trade-offs involved. Ultimately, this research
will help inform how a range of effective interventions can be designed to move
open-source projects and ecosystems in the direction of greater accountability,
resulting in more sustainable open-source infrastructure.

This project will shed light on accountability in open-source ecosystems through
an orchestrated set of mixed-methods empirical studies across two research
thrusts. First, qualitative interviews and a survey will reveal how maintainers
and users think about accountability, the extent to which it becomes embedded in
project and ecosystem culture, and the alignment of expectations of the two
sides, across a dozen ecosystems and a spectrum of arrangements that involve
commercial firms, government institutions, and research labs with open-source
communities. Second, additional interviews will reveal how successful open-
source communities mount effective collective responses to specific episodes
that starkly challenge accountability (e.g., the introduction of regulation),
and statistical and econometric models will estimate how the effects of such
shocks on project outcomes vary across governance models and other project
context factors. This project is expected to yield a framework, with different
contingencies and trade-offs grounded in empirical data, that explains the
emergence (or lack thereof) of a system of accountability in open-source
communities. More generally, this work will bring together perspectives of
accountability from the software engineering, information systems, and
management research communities that are interested in open-source ecosystems,
stimulating new research in these disciplines grounded in current challenges in
open-source practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.