* 2317423
* LOCK-AND-KEY INTERACTIONS BETWEEN CHIRAL NANOPARTICLES AND PROTEINS
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2026
* USD 430,722.00

Ultrasmall particles with nanoscale dimensions, often referred to as
nanoparticles, are potent new agents for treatment of cancers, preservation of
vaccines and inhibition of harmful otherwise untreatable bacterial infections.
The geometric shape of the nanoparticles plays a significant role in their
medical efficacy but understanding how to make particles with complex shapes,
which serve the patients well, is also critical. This project will extend the
concept of lock-and-key interactions between biomolecules to the interactions
between nanoparticles and proteins. Essential for this study is the common
geometric property of nanoparticles and proteins known as chirality. This
property defines whether the geometrical objects of complex shapes can fit each
other. The importance of chirality for geometrical matches between complex
shapes can be exemplified by the helices wrapping around each other, which is
foundational for biomolecules. This project will establish a general methodology
to design nanoparticles with complex shapes based on mathematical measures of
chirality and machine learning. The overarching goal of this project is to
provide medical researchers with ready-to-use algorithms predicting the shape of
nanoparticles forming lock-and-key complexes with proteins and chemical methods
for their synthesis. Considering the universal importance of the lock-and-key
interactions in biology, the toolbox based on chirality will be adapted and
universally applicable for biotechnology, biocatalysis, and bioremediation. The
educational mission of the project will include training a broad range of young
scientists from high school students to postdoctoral researchers in the
applications of nanoparticles for medical needs. This will increase the
competitiveness of the United States in the development of innovative medical
technologies. The principal investigator will also mentor young colleagues from
groups traditionally under-represented in STEM fields within the Detroit area,
communicating the importance of chirality in biology and nanotechnology. The
University of Michigan team will develop a set of unifying descriptors for
nanoparticles and proteins using highly biocompatible nanoparticles from
graphene, amorphous carbon, and cerium oxide. Project goals are to establish
comprehensive machine learning models for the prediction of nanoparticle-protein
complexes; evaluate molecular and nanoscale chirality as a significant geometric
parameter for the formation of nanoparticle-protein complexes; and develop
methodologies for designing viable nanoparticle candidates for biological and
biomedical applications. Diverse types of nanoparticles will be used to
introduce chirality at molecular, nanoscale, and sub-nanoscale levels, which
will be quantified using the newly developed approach of multiscale chirality
vectors. The chirality vectors will serve as a general engineering principle for
designing nanoparticles with complex shapes depending on the synthetic approach.
The machine learning algorithms and state-of-the-art neural networks will be
evaluated for the predictive synthesis of chiral nanoparticles starting from the
twisted graphene nanoplatelets. The generality of the design methodology will be
evaluated for amorphous carbon and cerium oxide nanoparticles. The predictive
power of chiral measures will be demonstrated for lock-and-key complexes between
nanoparticles and amyloid proteins of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. The
practical significance of this project will be evaluated by the efficacy of
inhibition of bacterial infections utilizing amyloid fibrils as nanoscale armor
for their biofilms. The broader impact of the project will include a strong
outreach program, supported by the extensive history of the PI in collaborating
with young scientists from all backgrounds. Specifically, the PI will
incorporate African American students from underprivileged backgrounds from the
Detroit area in this project. Outreach activities will be focused on promoting
teaching and training of high school students as well as on mentoring young
colleagues from universities with limited research capabilities in the Detroit
area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.