* 2317969
* The Inquiry-Based Learning Regional Communities Project
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Patrick Rault, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 98,926.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this Exploration and Design project
aims to serve the national interest by developing regional communities to
support inquiry-based learning (IBL) in mathematics. It also aims to recruit and
help new faculty from diverse institutions implement IBL in undergraduate
mathematics courses. The project will bring together faculty representatives
from four regional IBL communities: the Maryland-DC-Virginia IBL Consortium,
Michigan IBL Consortium, Midwest Regional IBL Community, and the New England IBL
in Mathematics Consortium. These faculty representatives will work together to
investigate the potential for regional communities of IBL practitioners to
support faculty in adopting, sustaining, and promoting the use of IBL in
undergraduate mathematics education. This IBL Communities model will provide the
ongoing support that instructors need to successfully adopt and sustain IBL
strategies in the classroom. Furthermore, regional IBL communities have the
potential to broadly impact mathematics education by creating synergy among
diverse groups of IBL practitioners who will in turn garner support for IBL
among other faculty, administrators, policy makers, and funders across each
region.

The overarching goal of the project is to provide targeted support to nurture
the growth of the four regional IBL communities represented on the project team
and to investigate the impact of these communities in each region. The
expectation is that the project's investigations will elucidate which community-
building strategies are most effective in supporting faculty to adopt, sustain,
and promote the use of IBL in undergraduate mathematics education. In support of
this goal, the project team will collaborate with leaders in each of the four
regions to pursue the following objectives: 1) establish and coordinate a
Network of IBL Communities; 2) plan and implement regional IBL Communities
workshops; 3) facilitate the planning and implementation of peer-collaboration
activities in the regional IBL communities; 4) broaden participation in the
regional IBL communities among faculty from groups that are underrepresented in
STEM as well as among faculty from institution types that are underrepresented
in the national IBL community; and 5) investigate the ability of regional IBL
communities to provide faculty with the professional support they need to adopt,
sustain, and promote IBL. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.