* 2317124
* Foundations of Social Metamemory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ian Dobbins, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 08/31/2026
* USD 574,000.00

The ability to effectively communicate memories through language is uniquely
human. It is also critical to our social lives, affecting how couples jointly
remember their lives together, sports fans remember a season, or how jurors
determine the credibility of witnesses during trials. This project help us
understand the remarkable ability to share memories along with the information
that those memories may, or may not, be reliable descriptions of the past. Self-
reflection about the accuracy of your own memory is referred to as metamemory.
Although cognitive scientists have studied this extensively, little is known
about how people use language to communicate the quality of their memories or
how others use this language to decide whether those memories are reliable.
Because people are not only sensitive to what others say, but also how they say
it, this project specifically examines how evaluating someone else’s memory
depends upon characteristics of their speech beyond the words they are saying.
Finally, because individuals often encounter others with accents different from
their own, the project examines how accent differences may limit or bias the
ability of individuals to determine if the memory reports of others are accurate
or not.

To effectively share memories for collective action or decision-making,
witnesses must convey not only the content of memories, but also signal their
reliability. In turn, evaluators or judges of these memory justifications should
rely upon them only to the extent they are deemed accurate. The current project
examines how the content and manner of speaking operate during such
communication. More specifically, it tests the hypothesis that judges process
both content and prosody information when evaluating witnesses’ memories, that
they may do so relatively independently, and that the ability to effectively
communicate and evaluate these information streams may be differentially
impacted by important individual differences in recognition memory ability,
self-evaluation of one’s own memories (metamemory), Verbal IQ, and working
memory capacity (WMC). To objectively score the content communicated by
witnesses, the project uses machine learning algorithms trained to discriminate
the natural language accompanying accurate versus inaccurate memory
justifications comparing their performance to human evaluators of the same
statements. It also trains these machine learners to determine the words and
phrases that human evaluators find particularly important and manipulates the
format of communication, contrasting transcribed memory justifications (text
only), the original audio recordings, and modifications of those recordings that
greatly reduce either the content or the prosodic information that is available.
This reflects the first memory research to examine how judges integrate these
two streams of information when evaluating others’ memory. Finally, this
approach is extended to social metamemory communication between speakers with
different language backgrounds by comparing native English speakers’ ability to
effectively evaluate the memory justifications of people who speak English as a
first versus a second language. Because most English speakers world-wide have
acquired English as a second language, this extension of the research has
significant societal importance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.