* 2317252
* CMMI-EPSRC: Damage Tolerant 3D Micro-Architectured Brittle Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Miladin Radovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The search for lightweight materials that can withstand extreme service
conditions has been one of the major driving forces in material development in
recent decades. Ceramic materials are often the preferred choice for such
conditions due to their stability at high temperatures and in harsh
environments. However, their inherent brittleness and low damage tolerance
compared to metallic materials limit their structural applications. An emerging
class of materials known as micro-architectured materials holds great potential
for overcoming these limitations. Therefore, the overarching goal of this US-UK
collaborative project is to develop a deeper understanding of fracture and
damage tolerance in a wide variety of micro-architectured materials made from
purely brittle parent materials which are ceramic/ceramic-like. These materials
not only have potential structural applications but are also sought after for
other contemporary technologies such as energy, biomedical devices, and
micromechanical devices. This project will facilitate damage tolerance and
structural integrity analysis for the reliable use of micro-architectured
materials in these technologies. The project’s education and outreach plans are
also closely integrated with the research plan, with a shared focus on the
mechanics of micro-architectured materials. This includes developing interactive
and open-access instructional materials on the subject, providing training to
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and increasing awareness of
mechanics and micro-architectured materials through museum exhibits aimed at
K-12 students. Furthermore, this bi-national collaborative project will
contribute to the development of a diverse and globally engaged technical
workforce in both experimental and computational mechanics and materials
science.

The specific objectives of this project are twofold. Firstly, to determine the
mechanisms of crack growth and damage tolerance in large-scale 3D periodic
micro-architectures composed of linear elastic brittle parent materials.
Secondly, to extend the understanding of fracture mechanisms to stochastic
micro-architectures made of brittle ceramic parent materials. This project will
go beyond the traditional understanding of classical fracture mechanics and
associated testing protocols by developing a comprehensive understanding of
damage tolerance and devising a novel methodology to characterize the fracture
response of a wide variety of 3D micro-architectured materials made from purely
brittle materials. Furthermore, by achieving these objectives, the project aims
to test hypotheses, address fundamental questions with technological relevance,
and develop structure-property-performance maps that will facilitate goal-
oriented design and selection of optimal micro-architectures.

This research is a collaborative effort under the NSF Directorate for
Engineering - UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead
Agency Opportunity (ENG-EPSRC), NSF 20-510.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.