* 2317606
* Collaborative research: Developing cancer-specific targeting near-IR photosensitizers for in vitro theranostic photodynamic therapy and photothermal therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Wenfang Sun, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2024
* USD 317,451.00

Non-Technical Summary

Phototherapy involves the use of light to treat disease. Photodynamic therapy
(PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT) are specialized forms of phototherapy that
employ a light-responsive molecule to create reactive oxygen species (ROS) or
heat, respectively, to treat cancer. In contrast to traditional chemotherapy,
PDT/PTT is highly selective because light can be delivered specifically at the
tumor and thus confines the toxicity to the tumor. The widespread use of PDT for
cancer treatment has been limited, in part, by the drawbacks associated with the
photosensitizing molecules approved for this therapy. They tend to require
shorter wavelengths of light that do not penetrate tissue as well as near-
infrared light, cannot treat oxygen-deprived tumors, cause prolonged cutaneous
sensitivity to sunlight, and are poorly soluble in aqueous solutions. PDT could
become more widely available as an adjuvant cancer therapy if better
photosensitizers can be developed. This project will address some of these
challenges with novel photosensitizers based on the transition metal iridium
(Ir). These new molecules will be activatable with near-infrared light and able
to generate ROS even when tumors oxygenation is low. The proposed Ir molecules
are unique in that they are equipped with special functional groups designed to
shift the activation wavelength of the molecules into the near-infrared while
maintaining good ROS generation efficiency. Meanwhile, these near-infrared
absorbing Ir molecules will also produce heat that will further maintain
phototoxic effects in the absence of oxygen through PTT. The combination of PDT
with PTT could significantly enhance the cancer treatment efficiency, especially
toward oxygen-deficient tumors. In addition, folic acid will be attached to the
Ir molecules for added discrimination for certain types of tumors, such as
triple negative breast cancer.

The proposed research and educational and outreach activities will boost
biomaterials research at North Dakota State University (NDSU) and the University
of Texas at Arlington (UTA), and will have broader impacts on the biomedical
field in general. The scientific community will benefit from a deeper
understanding of heavy transition-metal complexes and their application as near-
infrared photosensitizers in the field of phototherapy. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project will provide the involved graduate and undergraduate
students with training opportunities in synthesis, spectroscopy, and
photobiology, which will prepare these students for the future biomaterials
workforce. The proposed outreach activities involve/expose tribal college
students, high school students, and underrepresented African American/Hispanic
students in/to modern biomaterial research and technology transfer, which will
increase the diversity of the future workforce in biomaterials field. The two
female PIs can serve as role models for female students and encourage more
female students to pursue scientific careers.

Technical Summary

This project aims to develop dual-action novel Ir(III) complex photosensitizers
(PSs) for combined photodynamic therapy (PDT) and photothermal therapy (PTT) of
cancers. The proposed PSs are bis-terpyridine Ir(III) complexes equipped with a
chalcogenophene-substituted diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) unit and folic acid.
These PSs will be NIR (700-850 nm) activatable, exhibit cancer-specific
targeting, and generate efficient ROS and/or hyperthermia for treating hypoxic
solid tumors such as triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). The PIs posit that
attaching a chalcogenophene-substituted DPP motif to one of the terpyridine
ligands will shift the absorption of the PSs to the NIR regions while
maintaining the long-lived DPP localized 3pi,pi* state as the lowest-energy
triplet excited state. It is anticipated that the long-lived triplet state will
provide sufficient time for bimolecular interactions with oxygen for efficient
ROS generation even under hypoxia. In addition, the strong NIR absorbing PSs are
expected to generate hyperthermia effects for PTT as an alternate relaxation
pathway due to the much lower-energy triplet states associated with NIR PSs. The
combination of PDT with PTT could significantly enhance the cancer treatment
efficiency, especially toward hypoxic tumors. Folic acid will be introduced to
the other terpyridine ligand for specific targeting of cancers with
overexpressed folic acid receptors. The photophysics of these new and improved
Ir(III) PSs will be systematically investigated according to their absorption
and emission profiles and triplet excited state lifetimes. The effectiveness of
the proposed PSs as in vitro PDT/PTT agents and the photosensitization
mechanism(s) and subcellular targets will be explored using the TNBC MDA-MB-231
cell line. The proposal addresses the major challenges to current PS
development, i.e. high dark toxicity, inability to be activated by tissue
penetrating NIR light, low ROS generation efficiency in hypoxic solid tumors,
low cancer selectivity, and water insolubility. The success of this study could
benefit the biomedical field of phototherapy by providing a deeper understanding
of heavy transition-metal complexes and their application as NIR PSs, which
would eventually enable PDT/PTT to be applied to deep-seated, high-volume
tumors, leading to more effective cancer therapies for some hard-to-treat solid
tumors, such as TNBC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.