* 2317070
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Michigan: Center for Digital Twins for Consolidated Manufacturing Intelligence (DTCMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Dawn Tilbury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Digital Twins are purpose-driven software entities that collect run-time data
from an operating manufacturing system, and bring that data together with models
(representing both historical and theoretical behaviors) to create outputs and
metrics that can be used to improve the overall performance of the manufacturing
system. The development of Digital Twins requires significant subject matter
expertise, where operators and engineers help determine the appropriate data to
collect, modeling frameworks, and the most useful output metrics. This planning
grant will build industry partnerships and develop a set of research directions
in the area of Digital Twins for Consolidated Manufacturing Intelligence.
Through a two-day workshop and multiple smaller conversations including the
development of an industrial advisory board, industry partners will be engaged
with university partners to develop a plan for a full IUCRC proposal. The
resulting research directions have the potential to improve overall
manufacturing operations, increasing productivity, leading to more profitability
for manufacturers as well as lower costs and higher quality for consumers. The
proposed center will engage both undergraduate and graduate students in the
research projects, giving them experience in working on relevant industrial
research projects.

The research that will be proposed in the full IUCRC will relate to the
development of methodologies and solutions for Digital Twins in the
manufacturing industries. Given the primary site at the University of Michigan,
automotive manufacturers and tier suppliers will be engaged as partners. As the
system-level challenges are quite common across industries (even with very
different processes), semiconductor fabrication and chemical process companies
will also be engaged. A common framework for Digital Twins will be used to
extend and reuse manufacturing intelligence and provide practical solutions to
support evolution from reactive to predictive, proactive and prescriptive
solutions envisioned in smart manufacturing and industry 4.0/5.0. Contributions
will be in defining research directions that allow the framework and its
elements to be re-useable, interoperable, extensible, and maintainable, but also
in defining the state-of-the-art and deriving a research and development roadmap
for key Digital Twin enabled solutions such as predictive maintenance and
virtual commissioning. The planning activities will make use of the SMART 4.0
testbed in the Ford Robotics Building at the University of Michigan, that
includes both additive and subtractive manufacturing processes, mobile and
fixed-base collaborative robots, and an integrated data and control platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.