* 2317931
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Assessing the Contribution of Permafrost-derived Trace Gases in Greenhouse Warming since the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Samuel Mark, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2025
* USD 325,875.00

Permanently frozen ground (permafrost) in the northern regions of the world
holds about twice as much carbon as what currently exists in Earth’s atmosphere.
As climate warms, this carbon may be released as greenhouse gases. Rapid warming
events, which occurred during the end of the last Ice Age, provide useful
“natural experiments” for understanding how much permafrost-derived greenhouse
gases will exacerbate ongoing warming. Paleoclimate proxy records provide
insight on the timing, intensity, and location of past warming events in
permafrost-laden regions and valuable context for past episodes of permafrost
thaw. Evidence of past permafrost thaw is preserved in several different forms,
i.e., in cave deposits, lakes that formed from thawing permafrost, and in
erosional patterns. This climate and landscape history can be compared to data
derived from ice cores, which detail the sources and concentrations of
atmospheric greenhouse gases. This project combines data from permafrost thaw
records, paleoclimate evidence, and ice core-based greenhouse gas concentrations
to better understand the effects of warming and permafrost thaw on the deglacial
carbon cycle.

This project synthesizes existing records of permafrost thaw and evaluates them
alongside paleoclimate records in the NSF-funded Rapid Arctic Warming
(OPP-1947981, OPP-1948005) database to better understand how warming and
permafrost instability influence the global carbon cycle. Previous research has
largely focused on “bottom-up” records of permafrost thaw or on “top-down” ice
core-based greenhouse gas reconstructions. Here, these disparate approaches are
integrated and evaluated alongside the climatic context of deglacial warming and
greenhouse gas increases. Records from the Rapid Arctic Warming database provide
quantitative constraints on climatic conditions which the PI will use in
permafrost modelling experiments. This work advances understanding of threats to
permafrost stability and resulting impacts on atmospheric greenhouse gases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.