* 2317588
* Knowledge is Survival: A New History of American Exploration
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2024,06/30/2025
* Cameron Strang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 96,228.00

This project rethinks the performers, goals, and geopolitical consequences of
American exploration. It investigates how and why diverse women and men pursued,
interpreted, and reported knowledge amid exploratory travel and how they applied
what they learned to help their communities endure a world shaped by colonial
violence. The history of exploration is already a topic of immense interest
among the American public; indeed, for many Americans, the exploration and
peopling of the continent remains the central story of national science and
society. The field thus offers a unique opportunity in the history of science, a
chance to introduce the public to a far richer cast of knowledge producers
through fascinating stories that eschew the triumphant Eurocentrism embedded in
popular conceptions of science and exploration. By demonstrating that one of
America’s most iconic scientific pursuits was thoroughly diverse from the
beginning, this project can help more Americans envision themselves as
researchers and, potentially, advance representation in the sciences today.

The overarching goal of this project is to address the following research
question: What does American exploration look like when we include all of the
peoples who engaged in it? Based on interdisciplinary research, Knowledge is
Survival argues that diverse individuals explored North America as an
intellectual strategy for resisting domination and destruction. Despite
centuries—and, for Indigenous people, millennia—of investigating the continent,
non-white explorers have been almost entirely absent from histories of
exploration. This neglect has not merely led to an incomplete story but has
distorted some of the field’s core premises. Scholars have long emphasized
connections between knowledge and power, particularly how ambitions to control
lands and peoples engendered exploration and how the knowledge developed through
exploration encouraged conquest. However, these connections were only half the
story of knowledge, power, and exploration. Far from seeking to rule over
others, many American explorers pursued discoveries that promised to help their
own people overcome subjection or survive elimination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.