* 2317314
* Summer Institute of Museum Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joshua Bell, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 486,851.00

Anthropology collections housed by museums have been assembled to document world
cultures, present the evidential basis of research conclusions, and support
future anthropological inquiry. The Summer Institute in Museum Anthropology at
the Smithsonian Institution is an intensive four-week program to train graduate
students and faculty to use museum objects in research in cultural anthropology.
During SIMA, participants learn to analyze museum collections in the context of
current research interests in anthropology using a range of qualitative and
quantitative methods and approaches. SIMA takes advantage of the Smithsonian
Institutionâ€™s vast anthropological collections and related resources in
constituent museums, allowing participants hands-on experience working with
museum specimens on individual projects that lead to dissertation and research
projects as well as new teaching curricula. SIMA treats the museum as an
ethnographic field site and focuses on experiential learning, combining elements
of a field school with formal classroom lessons. This program trains numerous
graduate students and faculty in scientific cultural anthropology and generates
resources that support anthropological research for a broad range of scholars.

Current trends in cultural anthropology have stimulated a revitalized interest
in anthropological objects (artifacts, audio recordings, drawings, still and
moving images) and museum collections are increasingly being recognized as a
source of rich cultural data. However, many potential researchers cannot
effectively use museum collections because they lack the skills and methods to
approach or evaluate this type of data. While theoretical trends shift in
anthropology, these collections are critical data sets that can address new
research questions and answers. Training in museum-based research is rare and
seldom can offer the hands-on learning that is essential for object study. SIMA
is designed to increase productive use of museum collections and allow cultural
anthropology to capitalize on the investment made by former generations. In
addition, it seeks to promote and engage in research of interest and value to
the communities where this material originated, and thus demonstrate the value
of cultural anthropology methodologies to a wide range of scientific, social
science and humanistic disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.