* 2317159
* Insolation Gradients and Eastern Mediterranean Aridity:  Impacts on Winter Storms and Implications for Climate Projections
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2026
* USD 831,032.00

Simulations of the climatic effect of greenhouse gas increases are in remarkable
agreement that the Mediterranean Basin will dry out substantially over the 21st
century. The projected future drying is consistent with precipitation declines
since the mid-20th century, which have already caused hardship in the region. A
prime example is the 2007-2010 Syrian drought, which was a contributing factor
in the civil war and refugee crisis that began the following year. The multiple
lines of evidence pointing to future drying, together with its potential for
severe societal disruptions, motivate a concerted effort to understand the
dynamics of Mediterranean rainfall change. An overarching question in this
effort is how radiative forcing acting on the planetary scale, in this case from
greenhouse gas increases, produces such a strong precipitation response over
this particular region.

Work performed here considers the insights to be gained from the Mediterranean
precipitation response to another kind of planetary-scale forcing: the change in
sunlight received by the earth over the orbital cycles that produce the ice
ages. The project takes advantage of sediment cores and speleothems from the
Eastern Mediterranean (EM) that record wet and dry periods during the Last
Interglacial (LIG, also called the Eemian), from 135 to 110 thousand years ago
(kya), and the Holocene, from 15kya to the present. The changes in aridity
during these periods are thought to be due to changes in the seasonality of
insolation, with wetter conditions when summer insolation is at its peak and dry
periods when fall insolation peaks. The Principal Investigators (PIs) argue that
stronger fall insolation leads to a stronger latitudinal surface temperature
contrast over the North Atlantic during winter, which leads to a northward shift
of the Atlantic jet stream and the paths of winter weather systems that move
along it. The northward shift in weather systems causes substantial annual
rainfall reductions as the Mediterranean Basin receives most of its rainfall in
winter. The insolation changes due to orbital cycles are of course quite
distinct from greenhouse warming, but the PIs note that greenhouse gas increases
cause a similar latitudinal temperature contrast since the West African landmass
heats up more than the adjacent Atlantic Ocean, and the northern North Atlantic
features a "warming hole" which further enhances the north-south temperature
contrast.

The work involves a combination of analysis of the present-day observational
record, paleoclimate proxy data, and model simulations of past, present, and
projected future climate. One issue to be addressed is the conflation in the
proxy record between the effects of the temperature contrast, which are relevant
to current climate change, and incursions of the North African monsoon, which
are not. A further issue is the abruptness of the aridity changes in the
paleoclimate record compared to the orbital forcing, which suggests a role for
the dynamics of oceans and ice sheets. These issues are examined using
specialized simulations performed with the Community Atmosphere Model, the
atmospheric component of the Community Earth System Model (CESM).

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest given the profound
impacts of aridification in the EM as noted above. The PIs enhance the real-
world impact of their work through organizations in the region including the
Columbia University Global Center in Amman, Jordan, the Eco-Peace Middle East
non-governmental organization, the Weizmann Institute, and Hebrew University.
The PIs also participate in outreach activities at their home institution,
including the Lamont Open House and visits to local high schools. The project
also provides support and training to a postdoc, thereby providing for the
future workforce in this research area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.