* 2317618
* Novel Thermal Transport Phenomena in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Lu Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 11/30/2026
* USD 326,494.00

Non-technical Abstract: Electrons carry not only electricity but also energy.
This property of electrons is a powerful probe for quantum materials. Moving the
electrons with heat generates electrical voltages or reveals thermal conductions
in the solids. These mobile electrons may change the moving directions under a
magnetic field, leading to transverse electrical voltages and thermal
conductions. These novel thermal transport properties are essential to detect
and probe the ground state of strongly correlated quantum materials. The
research brings the potential to open the door to studying the interplay between
strong-correlation effects and topology in the search for new quantum phases,
novel topological phases, and new multi-functionalities for future electronics.
The project also provides opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate
students in the science and technology of this quantum world. By involving
undergraduates in research, creating opportunities to promote the integration of
women and minorities in careers in science and engineering, bringing local
school students to laboratories, and communicating research to the broader
public, the team brings the general public the advancements in strongly
correlated materials and develops excitement, awareness, and interest in the
field of quantum science and condensed matter physics.

Technical Abstract: The research project aims to investigate strongly correlated
materials using novel thermal transport properties. Bridging the research fields
of strongly correlated materials and topological quantum materials, the research
team will use the thermoelectric effect and thermal Hall effect to reveal the
physical origin of recently observed novel phenomena of strongly correlated
materials: (1) quantum oscillations in Kondo insulators; (2) large thermal Hall
effects in undoped and doped Mott insulators; (3) exotic thermal transport in
quantum spin liquid; and (4) flat-bland phenomena of Kagome metals. These
directions are exciting new developments in long-standing puzzles in condensed
matter physics. They share the same debate about the role of the charge-neutral
quasiparticles in the strongly interacted states: what carries these interesting
phenomena: magnon, phonon, Bogoliubov quasiparticles, or even Majorana
excitations. The research tasks will answer these questions: (1) What is the
nature of the magnetic-field-driven insulator-metal-transition in Kondo
insulators? (2) What causes strong Hall signals of the heat current in Mott
insulating undoped cuprates? (3) Are the fundamental excitations fermionic or
bosonic in Kagome quantum spin liquid? (4) What are the experimental signatures
of the flat band in Kagome metals? Answers to these questions will eventually
provide the big picture of the electronic and magnetic ground states of strongly
correlated materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.