* 2317115
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Empirically Evaluating Data Fiduciary Privacy Laws
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Eleanor Birrell, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 249,527.00

Over 160 countries have data privacy laws, yet threats to digital privacy remain
a major concern. Research on computers, psychology, society, and the law
validates this concern, finding that most of these laws take the same approach
of offering people transparency and some measure of control over the use of
their personal data. Unfortunately, research finds that this approach fails to
protect privacy for many reasons, including people's lack of time and expertise
to manage privacy across a vast number of online services and the ways that
services undermine privacy rules as they implement them. Legal scholars have
proposed alternate approaches to privacy law, but none of them have yet been
tested or enacted by legislatures. In this project, therefore, the project team
is studying these proposed alternative types of privacy laws in order to predict
how online services would change and, thus, how they would affect privacy,
especially for those most at risk of privacy violations. By doing so, the team
hopes to provide the information needed to make laws that can uphold our
societal values of privacy.

The project team is evaluating the idea of data fiduciaries as a case study of
how it is possible to empirically assess new paradigms of privacy law prior to
their being enacted in law. The evaluation takes place in two phases: (1)
qualitative methods to evoke expert predictions of how companies would implement
data fiduciary laws in specific contexts, and (2) user interviews and
speculative design workshops to evaluate whether those predicted implementations
would meet the in-context best interests of privacy-vulnerable users. These
methods will be validated by applying them to both new and existing laws and
comparing results to ground-truth observations of the effects of those laws in
the wild across jurisdictions and time, thus resulting in project outcomes that
include both new methods for evaluating prospective privacy law paradigms and
the evaluation data fiduciaries as a case study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.