* 2317347
* Conference: Interior of the Earth Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Maureen Long, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,800.00

This award will partially support the 2023 Interior of the Earth Gordon Research
Conference (GRC). This GRC will be the 13th in a series of Interior of the Earth
conferences that focus on the structure, dynamics, and evolution of the Earth’s
interior. This meeting will bring together scientists from a wide range of
subdisciplines within Earth sciences, including geochemistry, geodynamics,
mineral physics, rock deformation, seismology, and petrology. We have requested
funds to help support travel costs of early-career conference participants
(graduate students, postdoctoral scientists, and early-career faculty). The GRC
will take place at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts from
June 18-23, 2023 and will be held in conjunction with a Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) from June 17-18 at the same venue. The GRS is aimed at an audience of
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars and provides a unique environment
for these early-career scientists to present and exchange state of the art ideas
and results. The travel support provided by this award will help to fund
conference attendance for early-career scientists to attend the GRS and/or the
GRC.

The theme of the 2023 GRC is “Material Properties of the Mantle and Core and
their Constraints, Causes and Consequences for Earth Evolution.” This theme will
engage scientists who work on a range of depths within the Earth, from the
lithospheric mantle to the core, and will enable discussion on the structure and
dynamics of the Earth’s interior through the prism of the properties of the
materials that make up its mantle and core. Understanding these properties – for
example, rheology, composition, elasticity, and thermal behavior – is key for
understanding the inner workings of our planet. The conference will encompass
keynote talks that emphasize new (unpublished results) as well as poster
presentations, which will provide the opportunity for participants (particularly
early-career scientists) to present their work in poster format. Networking by
younger scientists will be greatly facilitated by the preceding GRS, which has
the theme “Evolution of the Interior Structure of Earth from the Magma Ocean
Stage to the Present.” In constructing the program and in advertising for the
meeting, we have been conscious of diversity along a number of dimensions. We
have placed particular emphasis on giving speaking opportunities to early-career
scientists; having a significant proportion of early-career researchers and
first-time attendees as Keynote Speakers and Discussion Leaders will encourage
greater participation across the global community of deep Earth researchers. The
preceding GRS meeting will include a mentorship session that focuses on
communication and careers in Earth Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.