* 2317995
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Epigenetic Potential as a Driver of Local Adaptation in Gentoo Penguins (Pygoscelis Papua) along the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Rachael Herman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 324,787.00

Gentoo penguins (Pygoscelis papua) inhabit one of the fastest warming regions on
Earth, the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP), where environmental shifts are
measured in years, not decades. Despite this, the species is flourishing,
growing in numbers and colonizing new habitats while sister species, such as
Adélie penguins (P. adeliae), are declining in the region. This project will
investigate to what extent epigenetics contributes to the success of gentoo
penguins. Epigenetic variation is controlled by modifications to DNA or
chromatin structure that affect the expression of genes, rather than changes to
the underlying DNA sequence. This project will improve the understanding of
gentoo penguin adaptation to climate change, and whether it is a result of
increased flexibility in behavior and physiology driven by a greater capacity
for epigenetic changes (i.e., epigenetic potential).

The most studied form of epigenetic variation is the profiling of DNA
methylation patterns. Environmental effects can trigger changes in DNA
methylation that target specific tissues, allowing for localized gene expression
shifts that result in modifications to the phenotype of an organism without any
alteration to the underlying genotype. Given that epigenetic variation between
populations often exceeds genetic variation, fine-scale genetic differentiation
observed amongst gentoo penguin colonies suggests the possibility for local
adaptation via even more divergent epigenetic changes and provides a framework
for examining epigenetic variation across the gentoo penguin breeding range
along multiple ecological axes. The researchers will test this by
comprehensively characterizing the epigenomic profiles via patterns of DNA
methylation in wild gentoo and Adélie penguins using cutting-edge high-
resolution genomics techniques. Specifically, they will investigate whether
gentoo penguins exhibit a greater degree of differences in DNA-methylation than
underlying genetic differences, suggesting such epigenetic variation is driven
by external environmental variables, potentially leading to improved capacity
for local adaptation. This project will explore whether epigenetic potential may
be selected for in individuals who disperse to new colony locations by comparing
older, established colonies to new colonies at the range-edge. By implementing
cutting-edge epigenetic methods in wild populations of gentoo penguins, this
project will help address ecological questions on environmental plasticity that
will impact conservation efforts and decisions on Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)
on the Antarctic Peninsula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.