* 2317780
* Track 2: Does the Diversity Perspective of R1 Institutions Matter for the Workplace Inclusion of Their Black and Hispanic Engineering Faculty?
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Henry Tran, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 06/30/2026
* USD 399,997.00

This research "Does the diversity perspective of R1 institutions matter for the
workplace inclusion of their Black and Hispanic engineering faculty?" will
examine the relationship between the organizational diversity perspective
(diversity strategy and approach) of inclusive research-intensive (R1)
universities and perceptions of workplace inclusion by Black and Hispanic
Engineering Faculty (BHEF). This work is vital because the perennial problem of
the underrepresentation of Black and Hispanic faculty in engineering has
remained unabated for decades. The scarcity of BHEF faculty often results in a
lack of racially congruent faculty-student mentorship relationships for those
from underrepresented backgrounds, which is vital for STEM identity affirmation.
The project aligns with the Broadening Participation in Engineering Program’s
focus on strengthening the current and future engineering workforce by
encouraging the creation and sustenance of work environments that promote the
participation of all citizens in engineering by "building capacity through
inclusivity and equity within the engineering academic experience." In doing so,
we will examine how universities espouse and enact their diversity perspectives
through their actions at different levels of the institution (i.e., university,
college, department) to support their diversity values, respond to diversity
resistance, and achieve success as identified through various performance
metrics. This study will examine the black box of how institutions maintain an
environment that is comparatively more inclusive than others and what they do
that facilitates this success.

The objective of this research is to test the theory that institutions that
espouse particular diversity perspectives (i.e., a learning and effective
paradigm) will see better organizational inclusion outcomes (e.g., more
inclusive work climates) for their BHEF than their counterparts. While most
research in the field focuses on understanding the experiences of and problems
identified BHEF, the proposed project extends that work to focus on the employer
perspective to understand how organizational responses matter for those
identified problems in institutions that are rated as inclusive for BHEF. The
overarching research question for this proposed study is the following: What is
the relationship between institutions’ (i.e., at the university, college, and
department level respectively) diversity perspective and workplace inclusion for
BHEF at inclusive R1 universities? To address this, we will conduct a
quantitative-qualitative (QUANT-QUAL) mixed method study. Overall, the purpose
is to assess empirical support for the diversity perspective theory to better
understand how to improve institutional diversity, especially for BHEF. A two-
phase study will be conducted comprised of a national diversity perspective
survey to administrators at R1 institutions and a qualitative multi-site case
study to identify and understand the diversity perspectives of our purposive
sample of six “R1” higher education institutions that have been ranked as highly
inclusive. Based on prior research and the diversity perspective theory, we
hypothesize that BHEF’s feelings of workplace inclusion will be affected by
their institution’s diversity perspective. Practically speaking, the potential
impacts of the research include providing guidance to institutions of higher
education and colleges of engineering concerning the value of emphasizing and
promoting particular diversity perspectives for diversity outcomes to facilitate
inclusive work environments for BHEF and other underrepresented faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.