* 2317533
* Conference: ICSA 2023 China Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Yichuan Zhao, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

The ICSA 2023 China Conference: Data Science with Applications to Big Data
Analysis and AI will be held in Chengdu, China, on June 30 – July 3, 2023. This
award is used to provide travel support to the USA participants of this
conference, who will deliver invited talks or give poster presentations. This
conference is the annual conference of the International Chinese Statistical
Association (ICSA), which provides statisticians and data scientists with an
excellent opportunity to meet, interact, network and collaborations in the
research. The main goal of the conference is to promote education, research in
statistics and biostatistics, and provide a forum for leading experts, junior
researchers, and practitioners to discuss big data analysis, machine learning,
AI, and the integration with data science. The conference also provides a unique
opportunity for the exchange of statistical research activities and development
of data science between different countries. The financial support to graduate
students, early-career researchers, and underrepresented researchers from the
USA can help them to exchange ideas about new frontiers in statistics research
with numerous outstanding researchers all over the world during the conference.

The conference maintains a very strong and comprehensive program, which includes
two keynote speeches, over 160 invited talk sessions, junior researcher award
session, and contributed poster presentations. The conference organizers strive
to enhance the diversity of speakers and maintain the high quality of
presentations. Moreover, the conference features a panel discussion on "New
Generation of Statisticians in Drug Development", which is about the career
development for junior statisticians. For students and junior researchers, the
conference will provide other great opportunities such as junior researcher
awards and poster sessions. The details about the conference can be found on the
website https://maths.swjtu.edu.cn/english/ICSA_2023_China_Conference.htm.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.