* 2317235
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Connecting coastal communities with continuous, sensor-based monitoring of water quality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Christopher Neill, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,974,185.00

Coastal communities face large challenges monitoring water quality in multiple
places and frequently enough to identify water quality problems and to document
improvements following investments in programs or infrastructure that improve
water quality. Traditional water quality monitoring is conducted by periodic
collection of physical water quality samples. However, conditions that lead to
large water quality and biological impacts (such as periods of low oxygen during
heat waves or following periods of high river discharge) occur infrequently and
are not well captured by existing monitoring programs that sample only
periodically. This makes it hard for citizens to document problems and for
managers to identify appropriate water quality actions. New continuously-
recording water quality sensors now have the potential be deployed across
multiple locations to provide time-series and information to better identify
water quality impacts and potential solutions. Dissolved oxygen is a key water
quality parameter that can now be measured with reliable, low-cost sensors.
However, the transition to continuous sensor-based monitoring is complex and
will require concurrent changes to the institutions that conduct monitoring,
their norms and social practices, and the way the public and regulatory agencies
use this new form of water quality data.

This project will determine how volunteer citizen scientists respond to use of
in situ recording sensors rather than grab samples, and test how volunteers
respond to different procedures for deploying and interacting with sensors. The
project will also test low-cost mobile platforms for deploying sensors in
coastal waters. It will focus on three communities connected to water quality in
the watershed of Buzzards Bay, Massachusetts: (1) local residents who live
within coastal watersheds, including many who volunteer to collect water
samples; (2) town officials responsible for water quality planning and
regulation; and (3) state officials responsible for setting and enforcing water
quality regulations. It will determine which combinations and scales for sensor
deployment produce data most likely to be used and acted upon by residents, town
officials, and government regulators. It will also provide knowledge on how
different communities interpret and make sense of more detailed water quality
data derived from sensors compared with data from traditional grab samples.
Understanding this transition—both technologically and socially—will help
advance the use of water and environmental sensors by the many organizations
across the U.S. that conduct environmental monitoring and that might in the
future deploy automated continuous environmental sensors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.