* 2317024
* Collaborative Research: GLOW: Iron Redox Reactions in Magma Oceans and Differentiation of Rocky Planets
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jie Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 355,775.00

Earth’s mantle is far more oxidized than its building blocks. The oxidation of
the mantle has a large effect on our planet’s habitability. Because of the
oxidation, our atmosphere contains enough oxygen to support life. One theory
suggests that mantle oxidation occurred during the “magma ocean” stage of
Earth’s history. When early Earth was still molten and forming, it was covered
by a hot and deep ocean of magma. Studying the oxidation process is important
for understanding the role of the magma ocean in making Earth habitable.
Scientists also want to know how this process applies to other planets and
exoplanets. This research project will bring together geoscientists and
astronomers to study how planets become habitable through mantle oxidation. The
project will also create educational materials and answer questions about the
relationship between geology and life.

This Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds (GLOW) award will enable
researchers to conduct experiments at pressures, temperatures, and compositions
directly relevant to silicate-metal reactions in magma oceans of Earth and
Earth-like planets. The experiments will use peridotite glass starting materials
synthesized in a levitation furnace. The samples will be subjected to pressures
and temperatures up to 140 GPa and 6000 K in laser-heated diamond anvil cells.
The products will be analyzed for their ferric and ferrous iron ratio using
synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy. The experimental results will be
incorporated into a thermodynamic model that will allow prediction of the
oxidation of a planetary mantle and its habitability, depending on the size of
the planet and the conditions of formation of its core.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.