* 2317556
* CSR: Small: Accelerating Data Intensive Scientific Workflows with Consistency Contracts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Douglas Thain, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,687.00

Advanced discovery in scientific computing increasingly depends upon the
successful execution of complex workflows that combine multiple applications
together to run in concert on a large high performance cluster. A widespread
challenge in this setting is the performance of the shared parallel filesystem.
Because each file system interaction has very different needs in terms of
performance and consistency, the filesystem is obliged to follow the most
conservative approach to handle the worst case. As a result, peak performance is
rarely achieved. We propose "consistency contracts" as the solution to this
problem. This novel approach requires the workflow as a whole to declare its
intended uses of the file system at the start of each execution, allowing the
runtime system to perform a variety of optimizations. This project will evaluate
the concept of consistency contracts by constructing an experimental system
(Pledge) that enables and enforces contracts on existing data intensive
workflows, with minimal disruption to current practice. We hypothesize that this
approach will significantly improve performance for data intensive scientific
applications running on high performance clusters,and has the potential to be
more widely applied.

Our focus on consistency results from our observation that today's shared
parallel filesystem is asked to fill multiple roles: moving large files,
delivering complex software trees, providing buffers between tasks, and
providing synchronization between tasks. Current filesystems provide the most
conservative sequential consistency to handle the worst case. Rather than depend
upon the shared filesystem to perform last-minute runtime arbitration of every
individual filesystem operation, we argue that the workflow as a whole should
declare its intentions for the duration of the execution, indicating the paths,
access modes, and consistency requirements needed for the entire workflow run.
With a contract in hand, the runtime system can then perform a variety of
optimizations that exploit the internal storage and I/O capacity of the cluster
as a whole, for example utilizing a streamlined approach for read-only access.
We hypothesize that workflow-level consistency management will yield higher
effective I/O bandwidth and transaction rates than strict global consistency
management for data intensive scientific applications running on high
performance clusters. These improved I/O rates will translate into faster end-
to-end runtimes and fewer unexpected performance failures for end users and
system administrators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.