* 2317080
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the ACM Computer-Human Interaction (CHI 2023) Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,473.00

This is funding to support seven promising doctoral students from the United
States as part of a total cohort of 20 graduate students, along with seven
distinguished researchers from both academia and industry, to participate in a
1.5-day Doctoral Consortium at the 2023 ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI 2023). The Consortium will be organized in two
versions: a virtual-only version to be held April 17-18 and an in-person-only
version to be held on April 25-26. The annual CHI conference, sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery’s Special Interest Group on Computer-Human
Interaction (ACM SIGCHI), has for years been the leading international forum for
the presentation and discussion of research and practice related to human-
computer interaction. CHI 2023 will take place April 23-28 in Hamburg, Germany,
and the theme of this year's conference is "reCHInnecting". The doctoral
consortium has taken place annually at the CHI conference since 1986 and has
helped launch the careers of many outstanding HCI researchers. Following 2022’s
lead, this year there will be both a virtual-only version (for participants not
at the in-person event) and an in-person event (for participants not at the
virtual event). The CHI Doctoral Consortium is a research-focused workshop in
which career guidance to a group of selected highly promising PhD students is
provided by peers and distinguished senior researchers. The consortium has taken
place annually at the CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the
careers of many outstanding HCI researchers. The event is always held at the
annual CHI conference.

The 2023 Doctoral Consortium will continue to influence and improve the quality
of Ph.D. research in the field of HCI by building a cohort group of new
researchers and providing guidance from senior members of the field. Students
selected to attend the CHI Doctoral Consortium will have a chance to discuss
their dissertation research with a panel of distinguished researchers from
academia and industry; they will also have the opportunity to participate in the
CHI 2023 conference and to interact with some of the best as well as emerging
scholars in the CHI field. Participation in the conference will illustrate to
attendees the diversity and interrelationship of HCI research. The CHI 2023
Doctoral Consortium will adopt the successful schedule implemented in CHI 2018,
2019 and 2022. To build a cohort of future scholars and provide high-quality
feedback to students, the workshop has traditionally consisted of two days of
student presentations followed by feedback from a panel of experts. During two
special sessions, student participants will be present at their posters at
certain times to discuss their work with interested attendees. The posters will
also be available for viewing during the entire technical program. The work of
these consortium participants is thus showcased to the entire CHI conference,
and the students have an opportunity to receive feedback from a large audience.
In addition, an extended abstract of each participant’s dissertation research
will be published in the CHI 2023 Extended Abstracts, which is distributed to
all conference registrants and included in the ACM Digital Library, allowing the
students participants’ work to be shared with a far larger audience than the CHI
conference attendee

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.