* 2317843
* GCR: Rational Design of Topological Insulators using Atomically-Precise DNA Self-Assembly
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Antia Botana, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,199,950.00

In many ways the history of humanity is the history of materials; from the
Bronze and Iron Ages to the modern Silicon Age, humans have taken advantage of
the properties of the materials around them to foster the advancement of
civilization. From this viewpoint, the pinnacle of improvement would be to
design materials with desired properties a priori. The vision of this convergent
project is to address this grand challenge. This project aims to take advantage
of the unique characteristics of DNA self-assembly, along with its chemical and
structural properties to create synthetic materials with precisely-controllable
electronic and magnetic properties with the ultimate goal of developing magnetic
Topological Insulators (TIs). The introduction of robust magnetism into TIs will
allow unique quantum phenomena to be realized in the solid state that could be
exploited for applications including quantum computing, electronics,
spintronics, optoelectronics, and renewable energy. Accomplishing this vision
will require a convergence between chemistry, biology, materials science,
engineering, nanotechnology, computational modeling, and condensed matter
physics. To achieve convergence, this project brings together a diverse team of
experts spanning these disciplines that will work collaboratively to co-design
and co-develop these systems. Developing the ability to precisely control the
electronic band structure and magnetic properties of materials will have broad
impacts across society in the coming decades. In addition, this project includes
a framework for nucleating a new scientific community focused on utilizing the
unique spatial and topological properties of soft matter to create topological
insulators with precisely tailored electronic and magnetic properties. This
community will represent a convergence of thoughts, language, and ideals from a
broad spectrum of the science and engineering community.

This project aims to develop a framework that enables precision topological
control over the electronic and magnetic properties of materials. Achieving this
vision requires a convergence between complementary disciplines to ultimately
fuse the realms of soft matter, real-space topology with momentum-space
(k-space) topology. Specifically, the aim is to utilize the unique
programmability and unparalleled spatial, structural, and self-assembly
capabilities afforded by DNA nanotechnology to precisely tailor the topology of
metal ions to ultimately create magnetic topological insulators through
iterative, rational design. The introduction of magnetism into topological
insulators is currently a major unresolved challenge in the condensed matter
physics community; and real-space, DNA-based topological control provides a
unique path toward solving this challenge. The development of atomically
precise, metalated DNA motifs will allow control over electronic properties, and
the design of purpose-specific, self-assembled band structure. To achieve this
goal, this project will focus on: i) advancing chemical design and synthesis of
metalated base pairs at the atomic and molecular levels; ii) developing
approaches for the structural and topological design of DNA assemblies at the
supramolecular scale; iii) extracting and quantifying the electronic properties
of small-scale DNA-based assemblies; iv) modeling the electronic structure and
transport properties of hybrid bio/condensed matter at the molecular levels; v)
developing a design language for understanding how to map the unique spatial
topological control afforded by DNA nanotechnology into the desired momentum-
space topological control of electrons in topological insulators. Through these
steps, this project will design and implement initial proof-of-principle TI
designs and plant the seeds of a new community that will sustain this nascent
field in the decades to come.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.