* 2317112
* The role of eIF3 and 4E-BP in non-canonical translation of a subset of human mRNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2026
* USD 949,953.00

Climate change, nutritional deficiencies, and viral infections all produce
stress on plant and animal cells. Under stress, many cells reprogram their
proteome to proliferate and adapt to the new conditions. Regulation of protein
synthesis is altered, and not only can the quantity of proteins change, but also
which proteins are produced. Understanding how mRNAs are translated through non-
canonical protein synthesis mechanisms is critical for determining how gene
expression is controlled, especially under stress, development or disease
conditions. Our understanding of non-canonical translation mechanisms has
derived largely from global analysis, looking at whole cell outputs. These
global studies do not provide detailed mechanistic insights on a molecular
level, which are necessary to identify intermediates, rate limiting steps and
mechanisms of regulation for possible therapeutic intervention. This project
will identify molecular interactions using single molecule fluorescence, steady-
state fluorescence, kinetics and molecular biology to build a detailed model of
translational regulation. In addition, this project will provide excellent
training opportunities for a diverse group of post-doctoral, graduate and
undergraduate scientists.

For most cellular mRNAs, initiation involves recognition of the
N7-methylguanosine-triphosphate ‘cap’ at the 5’ end of mRNA by eIF4E, the cap-
binding protein, resulting in recruitment of additional proteins, including
eIF4G, and, ultimately, a ribosomal pre-initiation complex (PIC) to initiate
translation. Under cellular stress conditions, when the ability of eIF4E to
recruit eIF4G and, consequently, cap-dependent initiation is compromised, a
subset of mRNAs containing highly structured 5’ UTRs (untranslated regions) and
encoding genes that aid cell survival can still be translated efficiently.
Previous studies of mRNAs (HIF-1α, FGF-9, VEGF-A and p53) that switch from cap-
dependent to cap-independent initiation have shown that switching correlates
with increased levels of eIF4G or its homolog, DAP5 (eIF4G/DAP5) and eIF4E
binding protein, 4E-BP. Guided by preliminary data and using ensemble and
single-molecule fluorescence methods with complementary cellular and molecular
biology approaches, three critical aspects of regulating expression of these
mRNAs will be investigated: 1) the role of other eIFs in specificity and
selection of mRNAs; 2) the mechanism of eIF3 cap-binding and recruitment of
DAP5, and 3) the role of 4E-BP in selectively enhancing or repressing the
translation of mRNA. The outcomes are expected to yield new mechanistic insights
into cap-independent translation initiation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.