* 2317706
* EFRI BRAID: Efficient Learning of Spatiotemporal Regularities in Humans and Machines through Temporal Scaffolding
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Dhireesha Kudithipudi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Operating on a minimal energy budget, the human brain is able to efficiently
process vast amounts of temporal information at different timescales as it
quickly learns to act in new environments. By contrast, current AI models do not
learn temporal information efficiently, struggle with lifelong learning - the
ability to keep learning new tasks continuously throughout life - and also do
not perform well in resource-constrained environments. This project aims to
create new AI models that overcome these limitations by leveraging mechanisms
inspired by theories for how the brain is able to efficiently learn temporal
information. Particularly, the project is based on a recent theory, 'temporal
scaffolding', which postulates that during sleep, the brain reactivates wake
experiences in an accelerated manner to allow detecting important temporal
patterns embedded in those experiences. The goal of this project is to develop
autonomous machines, informed by the temporal scaffolding hypothesis, which can
rapidly adapt, operate under uncertainty, and evolve throughout their lifespan
despite resource constraints. This transformative approach has the potential to
address major AI challenges and find applications in healthcare, energy, and
national security. The team aims to promote broad access to the computational
strategies through initiatives at multiple educational institutions, emphasizing
cross-disciplinary training and outreach to underrepresented populations. The
team will conduct value-sensitive workshops and regular ethics consultations
throughout the project. Alongside the technical goals, the team aims to offer
opportunities for underrepresented students in AI fields, fostering a
competitive AI workforce to maintain US technological leadership in STEM. By
emulating how the human brain learns, the team seeks to create efficient,
lifelong learning AI systems capable of revolutionizing various industries and
benefiting society as a whole.

The Temporal Scaffolding Hypothesis provides a novel explanation for the brain’s
superior ability to efficiently learn temporal information. According to this
hypothesis, time-compressed memory replay during offline periods serves to
extract temporal regularities within encoded experiences. Building on the
temporal scaffolding hypothesis, in the present project the PIs propose a set of
mechanisms underlying resource-efficient lifelong learning of spatiotemporal
regularities employing online (“wake”) and offline (“sleep”) periods, which they
intend to both verify in new human experiments and incorporate in machine
learning algorithms. Advances in theory, models, and systems stemming from this
grant will have applications in multiple domains. The two specific aims for this
project are to: i) develop new AI algorithms and architectures, inspired by the
temporal scaffolding hypothesis, for efficient learning of spatiotemporal
patterns and ii) extend the temporal scaffolding hypothesis to include
hierarchical representations that support lifelong learning and verify the
predictions of the model through human experiments and computational
investigations. Through these aims the PIs will develop optimization frameworks
that support deployment in resource constrained environments. Moreover, this
project will yield scalable deep neural network and spiking neural network
models that incorporate temporally compressed replay mechanisms. This approach
is expected to limit the catastrophic interference effects that hinder most
current network models of memory and improve the system’s capacity for lifelong
learning. Training and access to these transformative computational strategies
will be broadened via multiple initiatives at the University of Texas at San
Antonio, the University of Rochester, and the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, including successful K-12 partnerships and targeted experiential
outreach strategies. The team will also engage in ethical design through value-
sensitive workshops and regular ethics consultations. The project design efforts
will also provide significant opportunities to underrepresented students in
cross-cutting AI fields and promote a robust and competitive AI workforce that
maintains US technological leadership in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.