* 2317559
* "She must not know much about that": Children's inferences based on others' listener design
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Shaw, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 08/31/2026
* USD 378,185.00

In the classroom, concerns with appearing incompetent can pose a significant
barrier to learning effectively. While we know students worry about appearing
incompetent when making mistakes, this project explores a subtle yet pervasive
behavior that may also act as such a barrier: how others treat and talk to the
child. Two children could ask the exact same thing, but be seen very differently
based on how others (e.g., teachers) explain things to them. If a teacher
explains something in a highly simple manner in response to a student’s
question, then children may assume that student does not know much. This could
make that student reluctant to ask questions in the first place for fear of
appearing ignorant. Even worse, it is likely that stereotyped groups will be
disproportionately impacted. If stereotypes indicate that a group lacks ability
or knowledge (e.g., girls are not good at math) and a speaker holds this belief,
then they are more likely to speak to members of that group as though they lack
knowledge (explaining math concepts more simply to girls than boys). In this
way, these behaviors may inadvertently reinforce harmful stereotypes and cause
people from these stereotyped groups to disengage in the classroom. These
studies investigate children’s ability to pick up on these cues and provide
insights about how to prevent these concerns from stifling children’s learning.

Using laboratory studies that probe children’s evaluations and behavior, these
studies addresses new questions about children’s emerging reputational thinking.
When in development can children understand others’ mental states by using
subtle cues and how nuanced are these impressions? Do children understand that
how someone is spoken to may not be reflective of that person’s actual
knowledge, but only the speaker’s assumptions? When someone does underestimate
children’s own knowledge, how do they attempt to correct this miscalibration and
does it make them reluctant to ask questions? These questions underly the series
of studies in this proposal, which will advance understanding of the mental
representations that underlie children’s reputational inferences based on how
people are spoken to.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.