* 2317149
* Center: JILA-PFC: Comprehension and Control of Emerging Complexity at the Quantum Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2029
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2029
* USD 4,200,000.00

The Physics Frontiers Centers (PFC) award to the JILA-PFC will develop and
enhance control over light-matter interactions to advance investigations of an
array of quantum systems of increasing size and complexity, ranging from
assemblies of ultracold atoms and molecules to real materials and biological
systems. In pursuit of these advances, the center will develop and apply a broad
range of state-of-the-art light sources, including sources of highly non-
classical light, vacuum ultraviolet lasers and single-photon sources, while
simultaneously striving to improve cooling and measurement techniques. These new
tools will permit researchers to shed light on open questions in many-body
physics relevant to disciplines ranging from atomic, molecular, and optical
(AMO) physics, to condensed matter physics, chemistry, and biology, and to
advance frontier precision measurements targeting issues in fundamental physics.
The center program will also provide graduate students and postdoctoral scholars
with cutting-edge expertise in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical (AMO) related
physics, and it will develop tools and techniques to enhance the Nation's
technological infrastructure. The JILA-PFC will contribute to connecting
scientific communities by hosting workshops and schools and through the JILA
visitor program and will continue its highly successful education and outreach
efforts to attract the next generation of all students into science.

The JILA-PFC research is organized around four interconnected major activities
that are in turn built upon closely intertwined aspects of AMO physics. The
first will focus on the understanding and manipulation of interactions between
quantum particles, from pristine arrays of ultracold atoms and molecules
manipulated at the level of individual constituent particles, to complex
materials studied via ultrafast probes. The second will broadly advance the
frontier of light-science and light-matter interactions via the development of
novel light sources. The third will seek to control quantum states of
increasingly complex molecules for practical and fundamental applications
including searches for new physics beyond the standard model. The fourth area
seeks opportunities to exchange ideas and technologies that could lead to
projects outside of the central focus of the JILA-PFC, but which would benefit
either the core work of the PFC or other areas of science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.