* 2317010
* Dendrochronology for Extended Examination of Cultural Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Christopher Caseldine, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 291,713.00

In a variably arid region beginning in the eighth century AD a culture developed
that was ultimately transformed four hundred years later by climate challenges
and migration. The timing, rate, and tempo of historical transitions in this
particular region are relevant to larger questions about socioecological
sustainability and the evolution of human institutions in the face of rapid
environmental and population change. A group of researchers are conducting a
tree-ring dating (dendrochronology) project on relevant large wood and charcoal
collections. The aim of the project is to provide a new objective timeline for
past events in this region. The work is coordinated with the relevant descendent
communities. Results of the study are incorporated into a planned redesign of a
Monument’s visitor’s center. Another important aspect of this project is that it
leverages collections amassed during a large public archaeology works. By
continuing to produce new knowledge from archival material, this prior US public
investment in preservation continues to create value for multiple stakeholders.
The project serves as a springboard for graduate and undergraduate training in
the sciences, and the research helps accelerate the development of tree-ring
chronologies for arid regions, a critical data gap in earth and environmental
sciences.

The project provides a new high resolution, independent, chronology for the
archaeological record of the region based on new tree-ring dates. It represents
a major improvement compared to the existing chronology that is currently based
only on the time ranges for the manufacture of ceramic vessels and imprecise
radiocarbon dates. This study is possible due to the recent development of a new
dendrochronology technique involving the precise calibration of sequential
radiocarbon dates from individual rings. This method makes it possible to
dendrochronologically date wood and charcoal in regions where it has never
before been practical. The study produces new insights for the arrival of the
first farmers in the area, demographic and social transformations, the
historical context of public architecture, and the long term sustainability of
settlements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.