* 2317822
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Convergence on Phosphorus Sensing for Understanding Global Biogeochemistry and Enabling Pollution Management and Mitigation
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Jason Azoulay, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2028
* USD 313,727.00

Phosphorus (P) is an essential element that forms the basis for all life on
earth. Phosphorus plays a central role in biogeochemical cycles that broadly
impact global biological productivity, food resources, energy generation, and
climate. Understanding the complex interrelationships between critical food,
energy, and water resources and addressing phosphorus demand, pollution, and
recovery are some of the greatest scientific challenges for a sustainable
future. At the root of these problems is the inability to measure phosphorus
directly when and where one would like and to do so in a cost-effective manner.
This technology gap precludes the ability to close the “phosphorus cycle” at
regional, national, and global scales. This Growing Convergence Research project
will overcome fundamental science, engineering, and prototyping challenges to
enable portable, low-cost, robust, and selective sensors for phosphorus that
address these critical and unmet needs. This project brings together researchers
with expertise spanning supramolecular and inorganic chemistry, polymer science,
soft-matter electronics, electrical engineering, and environmental and marine
science. Convergent scientific, technological, and engineering advances will
coalesce to realize new paradigms for control at the chemical, supramolecular,
transduction, and device levels that will ultimately serve as the basis for
ushering in a completely new generation of sensors for phosphorus. These sensors
will satisfy the functional and economic requirements needed to provide
pragmatic solutions for capturing the complexity of how phosphorus exists in
space and time within agricultural landscapes, waterways, and ecosystems.
Engagements with stakeholders, industrial partners, and government agencies will
guide efforts towards additional applications, commercialization, and other
societally relevant sensing challenges.

This convergent research program will integrate basic science and engineering
approaches together and combine significant intellectual and technical overlap
between traditionally disparate disciplines to address long-standing challenges
that have limited the development of phosphorus sensing technologies. Specific
objectives of the program are to: (1) design, develop and understand how
molecular recognition elements (“receptors”) selectively bind phosphorus in the
form of inorganic and organic phosphate compounds, (2) tailor receptor-analyte-
semiconductor interactions and investigate how they specifically transduce the
phosphate-binding events into a sensitive signal; (3) integrate these
chemistries within low-cost electronic devices; (4) engineer sensors that enable
sensitive quantification in complex environments for managing the phosphorus
cycle including agricultural runoff, wastewater, and fresh, brackish, estuarine,
and marine environments; (5) communicate chemical phosphate detection to
electronic platforms to digitize and relay this data; and (6) develop prototypes
for field use and demonstrations. This holistic approach will produce field-
deployable technologies for phosphorus that are low-cost, operate in real-time,
and directly interface with commercial platforms broadly utilized within
agricultural, environmental, and marine monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.