* 2317510
* I-Corps: Meso-indentation System for Ultra-soft Biomaterials
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Lihua Lou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a system to
characterize soft materials mechanically. Mechanical characterization of ultra-
soft materials on the meso-scale is critical for tissue engineering scaffolds,
structural and packaging materials, foams and adhesives, detergents and
cosmetics, paints, food additives, lubricants, and fuel additives. However, the
current mechanical characterization technique for soft and ultra-soft materials
relies heavily on tensile testing. The main limitations are 1) high standard
deviation due to difficulty preparing uniform samples, 2) sample damage after
testing, and 3) inability to measure viscous liquid materials. The unique
advantage of this meso-indentation methodology is the ability to capture
mechanical properties during indentation pull-on and pull-off events of ultra-
soft materials. Another novelty of the presented testbed is the in-situ
visualization of adhesion events through a light sensor. Therefore, this tool
can improve processing time in manufacturing biomimetic cardiac patches, control
the quality, and improve the functional safety for implantation by documenting
successful tissue scaffolds in manufacturing. Beyond that, this tool also has
potential applications in food production, automotive oil production, and
aerospace industries.

This I-Corps project is based on developing a system capable of accurate
mechanical performance characterizations for soft and ultra-soft materials on
the centimeter scale. It comprises an adaptor attached to the mechanical load
frame actuator, an indenter probe holder, a polymer-based indenter probe, a
sample holder disposed below the indenter probe and configured to hold the soft
and ultra-soft material, and a light sensor. The unique advantages of this
system include 1) the ability to capture adhesion forces and in-situ adhesion
events, 2) the elastic modulus range that concerns this testing methodology
ranges from 0.5 kPa to 40 MPa, and 3) adaptability to conventional tabletop
mechanical frames. Beyond that, this proprietary method works for a wide range
of biomimetic materials, such as solids, semi-solid, and liquid forms, with
anisotropic and heterogeneous properties. For tissue engineering, the acquired
data will provide critical benchmarking values and evaluate the feasibility of
biomaterials or bio-constructs for tissue therapies. For example, it can
effectively improve the quality of cardiac patches by guiding the compatibility
of mechanical properties between native and artificial materials. It also limits
complications, enhancing functional performances, improving maturation, and
reducing cardiac patients' hospitalization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.