* 2317387
* Research Team Seminars in Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Paul Ryer, School for American Research
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 75,612.00

The School for Advanced Research (SAR), celebrating its 115th anniversary this
year, has a longstanding commitment to support research that advances knowledge
about anthropology and related disciplines that includes human culture,
evolution, and history. NSF/SAR research team seminars benefit the field of
anthropology by providing important opportunities for in-person collaborative
interdisciplinary research, given the lack of resources to bring busy scholars
together for an extended time that is free of everyday professional
responsibilities. Supporting both existing and new research teams of scholars
with in-person focused, uninterrupted time to discuss, synthesize, and analyze
results of their collaborative research, this project facilitates plans for
successful completion, expansion, and development of new projects that benefit
and enrich the field of anthropology. This project also supports the NSFâ€™s goals
of building scientific infrastructure through collaboration and increasing
understanding of the causes, consequences, and complexities of human social and
cultural variability.

This project addresses the advancement of collaborative, interdisciplinary, and
international research in anthropology by an in-person team of scholars. The
project also increases discovery and understanding, as well as the quality and
importance of the products resulting from this type of research framework. With
NSF funding, the School for Advanced Research (SAR), an advanced research center
for anthropology and allied disciplines located in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
implements two research team seminars in cultural anthropology over the course
of the award. Eligible research teams have a primary focus on a question of
anthropological importance that is timely and addresses a specific need.
Seminars are selected by an expert panel of SAR staff and external scholars
through an annual competition. For each seminar, NSF funding covers all travel,
lodging, meals, and other related costs to meet at SAR. Organizers of the
research team seminars are expected to develop a meeting schedule in advance and
provide SAR with a report after the seminar concludes that describes activities
and results, including plans for new research, publications in peer-reviewed
journals and edited volumes, and conference presentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.