* 2317935
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO/NERC: After the cataclysm: cryptic degassing and delayed recovery in the wake of Large Igneous Province volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Benjamin Black, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,006,501.00

Large Igneous Province volcanism is associated with extraordinary mantle melting
and voluminous eruptive episodes, which have been linked to major mass
extinctions through the past half-billion years of Earth’s history. Significant
research over the last three decades has brought the extreme nature of these
events into focus. But controls on the nature and tempo of recovery after these
catastrophic events remain unknown, despite implications for potential climate
system tipping points. In particular, unexpectedly protracted periods of warm
climate and delayed environmental and biological recovery following some Large
Igneous Provinces underscore a fundamental lack of understanding of the gases
released during the waning stages of these events and/or controls on global
climate. This project will carry out a multi-disciplinary effort combining field
observations; high-resolution records of volcanism, climate, weathering, and
life; and numerical modeling to understand co-evolution of solid and surface
Earth during perturbation and recovery. This is a project jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation’s Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the
National Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the
NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK
proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has
the largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an
award recommendation, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget that
supports scientists at institutions in their respective countries. This project
is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in
the geosciences.

This project addresses a fundamental unanswered question: what processes shape
climate and biotic recovery from major Large Igneous Province-driven carbon
cycle perturbations? The project aims to test the new overarching hypothesis
that a large-scale transition in crustal rheology shuts down Large Igneous
Province volcanism, but continued mantle melting drives cryptic Carbon Dioxide
release and delays climate and biotic recovery. If correct, this hypothesis
implies that cryptic degassing—Carbon Dioxide release through the crust
decoupled from eruption rates—is a key, and previously unaccounted for, control
on the climatic conditions and tempo characterizing recovery. To test this
hypothesis, this project pursues four key scientific objectives: 1) development
of high-resolution, multi-disciplinary records of volcanism and weathering, 2)
coupling of models of mantle geodynamics, magma transport, and outgassing, 3)
assimilation of records of past climate and weathering into climate-
biogeochemical modeling to invert for outgassing fluxes and place top-down
constraints on interior evolution, 4) integration of paleobiological databases
with records and modeling of volcanism, climate and weathering to test factors
shaping which types of organisms thrive beyond recovery. The project leverages
three powerful natural laboratory Large Igneous Provinces and climate events,
building from the youngest and best-resolved, the Columbia River Basalts and
Mid-Miocene Climatic Optimum; to the more voluminous North Atlantic Igneous
Province, Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, and Early Eocene Climatic Optimum;
and finally to the Siberian Traps, catastrophic end-Permian mass extinction, and
early Triassic hothouse. The project will carry out a sustained outreach/inreach
effort in northeastern Oregon, the epicenter of Columbia River Basalt volcanism
and site of project field work. Activities aim to humanize science and enhance
education through engagement of rural communities. Project PIs and students will
engage school-age children in Oregon and New Jersey, and global Large Igneous
Province researchers through: a data portal and set of virtual field trips;
Large Igneous Provinces for Kids programming in the form of visits to Wallowa
county schools and ‘Write a Scientist’ correspondences with project scientists;
and a field forum at the mid-point of the project that will welcome the Large
Igneous Province community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.