* 2317971
* PFI (MCA):  Embodied Carbon Emission and Environmental Impact from Built Environment
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2026
* Ming Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2026
* USD 348,722.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Mid Career Advancement (PFI-MCA) project addresses societal and educational
aspects related to the Environmental Impact and Carbon Footprint of Buildings.
At the societal level, the proposed integrated framework addresses the need for
built environment embodied carbon and environmental impact assessments. By
integrating different models to assess mitigation effectiveness of embodied
carbon / environmental impact reduction, the approach enables the engineering
analysis of public policies and socio-economic impacts. At the educational
level, the project will support both underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
team members. The knowledge generated in the project will be translated into
experiential education modules that will be integrated into the core courses
offered at The Keough School of Global Affairs Integration Lab at the University
of Notre Dame. The modules aim to teach, train, and inspire the next
generation’s design leaders who are engaged in sustainable design and
construction.

The proposed project is to develop an integrated ecological-technological
framework and create a dashboard (BUILT4CLIMATE) to visualize the embodied
carbon emission and related environmental impact from the building stock in the
United States at the zip code level. By linking two detailed
assessments—building information modeling (BIM) and life cycle assessment
(LCA)—at the individual building level, we can scale up the results to model the
dynamic of the entire building stock. In the United States, the lack of
knowledge regarding a building’s embodied carbon impact exists at the whole-
building level due to the lack of methodology, building-level data and
benchmarks. To address this knowledge gap, our project offers several
intellectual merits. Firstly, the proposed integrated framework will provide a
comprehensive, quantitative approach to focus on embodied carbon and its
associated environmental impacts. Secondly, the creation of a national building
stock database will significantly enhance the quality and quantity of empirical
data available. Thirdly, mapping carbon emissions from the national building
stock at a more granular county level will offer policymakers and regulators
reliable insights into hot spots and aid in comparing different development
strategies. Additionally, this project will establish benchmarks for life cycle
embodied performance across various building types at a national scale. Lastly,
automating the BIM and LCA processes will improve the accuracy and speed of
benchmarking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.