* 2317664
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Understanding the Role of Specific Iron-binding Organic Ligands in Governing Iron Biogeochemistry in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2026
* Laura Moore, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 02/28/2026
* USD 302,388.00

Iron is an essential nutrient in the global ocean, required by phytoplankton to
perform several essential cellular functions. In the Southern Ocean, iron is
especially scarce and exerts a primary control on primary production and
resulting CO2 uptake by the surface ocean. Most dissolved iron in the Southern
Ocean is bound to a complex mixture of organic iron-binding compounds, called
ligands. The concentrations and identities of these ligands control iron
bioavailability, reactivity, and transport. Exopolysaccharides (EPS) are a
particularly important group of ligands that are produced in high concentrations
by local microbial communities for a variety of functions, including as
cryoprotectants. Despite the known importance of EPS, most iron-binding ligand
studies focus on total ligand concentrations or siderophore identification.
Siderophores, small iron-binding molecules produced as a microbial iron
acquisition strategy, are thought to play a disproportionate role in iron
cycling due to their unusually high iron-binding affinities. This project adds
essential EPS concentration measurements to a subset of samples from the 2023
U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-ANT expedition to the Amundsen Sea. This project integrates
EPS, siderophores and bulk ligand measurements for the first time, thereby
offering unprecedented insights into how the composition of organic ligands
governs the supply and fate of iron to the Southern Ocean.

The research plan involves a combination of field and experimental approaches.
Field samples for electrochemical EPS analysis will be collected on a GP17-ANT
transect spanning from the ice edge to open water. Previously funded paired
samples of bulk ligand concentrations and siderophore identification will also
be taken along the same transect. Results from the three analyses will be
combined to assess the relative contributions of EPS and siderophores to the
total ligand pool and interpret their impact on iron biogeochemical cycling in
the region. Lab experiments will be performed to evaluate whether EPS alters the
size fractionation of siderophores and iron in seawater, shuttling both species
into the particulate phase. Experimental results will then be used to interpret
the integrated field data and improve understanding of the impact of ligands on
iron transport and bioavailability in the Amundsen Sea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.