* 2317702
* The Ethics of Deliberate Extinction
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James Collins, Hastings Center
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 567,813.00

Genome editing provides new tools for controlling wild organisms--maybe by
suppressing or eradicating populations, and even in principle by driving entire
species extinct. Candidate species include the new world screw worm, which eats
the living flesh of animals including human beings; mosquitos that transmit
infectious diseases such as malaria; and rats, which pose public health and
environmental threats to threatened and endangered species in many places.
Nonetheless, the prospect of using genome editing to extinguish a wild species
is inherently troubling for many people. This project aims to bring attention to
this possible use and propose recommendations for how decisions about it should
be made. The project will thereby support regulatory oversight and promote broad
public deliberation about genome editing. The work will be shared through an
open-access report and publications for professional and nonprofessional
audiences. The project will also build scholarship on these issues, by enlisting
a group of scholars in the development of the report and by providing training
in values-oriented research to a graduate student in ecology or conservation
biology.

The scholarly focus of the project is on philosophical and ethical questions
raised by the idea of extinction via genome editing. Why, exactly, might that
idea be troubling? Some of these questions are about the value of species,
biodiversity, and the human relationship to nature generally, whether humans
ought to reduce the suffering of wild animals, and how trade-offs should be made
between public health, agricultural, animal welfare, conservation, values, and
other goals. Other questions are about the nature of genome editing and how it
differs from other ways of controlling species. Yet other questions have to do
with how the public should be engaged. The work will contribute to environmental
ethics, conservation biology, science and technology studies, and political
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.