* 2317875
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Convergent Anthropocene Systems (Anthems) - A System-of-Systems Paradigm
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Claire Welty, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2028
* USD 30,000.00

Convergent Anthropocene Systems (Anthems) will develop a systems-of-systems
(SoS) convergence paradigm that includes an SoS computational framework, an SoS
decision-support system, and an SoS pedagogy, enabling diverse stakeholders to
integratively address the suite of societal challenges of the Anthropocene
(e.g., climate change and impacts, renewable energy, adaptive infrastructure,
disasters, pandemics, food insecurity, biodiversity loss) and catalyzing a major
transformation in national and global approaches to the science and engineering
relevant to these challenges. This paradigm will be developed, implemented, and
validated in close collaboration with the Chesapeake Bay Program (CBP), focusing
on the Chesapeake Bay Watershed (CBW) region. The CBW is home to over 17 million
people and the CBP stakeholder community will benefit from integrated modeling
tools to examine synergies (e.g., nutrient reduction and flood risk mitigation)
and tradeoffs (e.g., nutrient reduction and fish productivity) across multiple
systems. Together, the CBW and the CBP provide a real-world testbed for the SoS
convergence paradigm, enabling the project to bring together intellectually-
diverse researchers to address multiple interdependent societal challenges
(eutrophication, food and agriculture, and economic growth) by integrating
across multiple systems (watershed, land use, economic, estuary and governance)
and multiple disciplines (environmental engineering, city and regional planning,
planning policy and design, civil engineering, geography, industrial and systems
engineering, political economy and public policy).

Anthems will develop, implement, and validate the SoS convergence paradigm for a
set of interdependent societal challenges in the CBW region. In Phase 1, Anthems
will integrate regional models of land use, watershed, and economics using the
SoS computational framework, engage with stakeholders to evaluate regional
scenarios, and begin the development and evaluation of the SoS decision-support
system and SoS pedagogy. Phase 2 will extend the SoS computational framework by
including estuary and governance models, while zooming in to Baltimore at the
urban scale. One outcome of this project will be the capability to scale up the
SoS paradigm to a larger family of societal challenges in the future,
generalizing the approach to other regions and their associated urban areas. The
SoS computational framework advances the existing systems engineering
literature, addressing Anthropocene challenges. The SoS decision-support system
provides a structured approach for translating SoS scenarios and computational
results into real-world insights for a diverse set of stakeholders. The SoS
pedagogy will begin to train a new generation of Anthropocene System Integrators
(including students, academics, practitioners and stakeholders) to conceptualize
Anthropocene challenges holistically, think coherently in terms of common
ontological constructs, produce and simulate SoS computational models,
facilitate decision-support conversations filled with coherent, data-driven,
real-world insights, and use these insights to once again conceptualize societal
problems. The effectiveness of the SoS pedagogy will be studied using the
science-of-team-science-based antecedent-process-output evaluation model,
thereby advancing the study of convergence processes and outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.