* 2317864
* Travel Grant: The 2023 International Society for Atmospheric Research using Remotely piloted Aircraft (ISARRA) Meeting; Bergen, Norway; August 1-4, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Gijs de Boer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,102.00

The International Society for Atmospheric Research using Remotely piloted
Aircraft (ISARRA) is going to hold its 2023 conference in Bergen, Norway from 1-
4 August 2023. This meeting provides a unique opportunity for the presentation,
discussion, and advancement of scientific outcomes stemming from the use of
uncrewed aircraft systems, or drones, in support of understanding the Earth’s
atmosphere. Such understanding is very important for advancing abilities to
predict and understand weather and climate, and the associated potential
societal implications. Additionally, ISARRA serves as a community forum for
advancing sensor and aircraft technologies, measurement strategies, integration
of drones into the airspace, and general knowledge on the use of drones to
understand the atmosphere. The meeting will feature several days of science
talks, poster sessions, industry events and, perhaps most importantly, ample
time for discussion of current frontiers in this rapidly evolving field. In
addition, there will be opportunities for flight demonstrations that allow
researchers of all career stages to share and observe different aircraft and
sensor systems in action. This project will support the participation of early
career researchers, including students and postdocs from a variety of different
backgrounds, in the ISARRA 2023 meeting.

Uncrewed aircraft systems offer revolutionary perspectives on a variety of
different elements of the Earth system, including the atmosphere and surface. To
advance the scientific community’s ability to effectively harness the
information that can be produced by these systems, the ISARRA was established
over a decade ago. Through annual meetings, this society has offered a
significant boost to drone-based research and has supported the career
development of a significant number of scientists and engineers. Work discussed
at these meetings and through the society includes scientific progress on
understanding key atmospheric phenomena, including aerosol-cloud interactions,
severe weather, atmospheric boundary layer processes and development, high-
latitude boundary layers, aerosol and trace gas properties, turbulence, fire
weather, the effects of sources of renewable energy (e.g., wind turbines), and
more. Additionally, there have been significant discussions on sensors and
aircraft systems, including the development of autopilot systems, new
miniaturized sensors for aerosol, gas, and cloud measurements, aircraft design,
wind sensing and more. Importantly, all these discussions have involved academic
researchers, national laboratory researchers and industry participants. Engaging
early-career and under-represented scientists in the ISARRA conference and
associated activities is a critical step towards continuing and expanding the
use of uncrewed aircraft systems in the atmospheric sciences, and towards our
collective ability to support the advancement of weather and climate prediction
and understanding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.