* 2317388
* Conference: Proposed Workshop on CPS Rising Stars
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Lu Feng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 40,070.00

This project provides a workshop “Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) Rising Stars” to
be held at the University of Virginia. The purpose of the workshop is to
identify and mentor outstanding Ph.D. students and postdocs who are interested
in pursuing academic careers in CPS areas. This workshop gives participants a
chance to gain insights about navigating the early stages of careers in
academia, as well as provide networking opportunities with faculty and peers,
opening the door for on-going collaboration and professional support for years
to come. The workshop includes a program committee comprised of faculty with
extensive background in CPS who will select students for the workshop. One
workshop aims to increase representation and diversity in CPS, by encouraging
applications from women,underrepresented minorities (URM), and persons with
disabilities. A specific effort is also being made to recruit workshop
participants who may be at non-R1 schools.

This will be the second CPS Rising Stars Workshop. This workshop will be modeled
after the first including a variety of sessions designed to build a cadre of
researchers in CPS and foster future collaborations amongst the students in the
field. The first Rising Star workshop was successful in recruiting a high
percentage of URM students. This workshop will retain this recruiting focus in
addition to paying special attention to selection of non-R1 candidates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.