* 2317077
* SBIR Phase I:  An inclusive machine learning-based digital platform to credential soft skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2024,06/30/2024
* Geeta Verma, LIVEDX INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,993.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to enable people who aspire to higher education and/or career
opportunities to create a demonstrable portfolio of soft skills based on their
lived experiences. Soft skills (e.g., problem-solving, teamwork, leadership,
etc.) are as important as hard skills for individual success. However, current
soft-skill assessment tools are subjective, inefficient, and inconsistent. This
is especially painful for marginalized populations such as minorities and women,
who often possess valuable soft skills such as stress management and conflict
resolution, but do not have the tools to demonstrate it. The proposed solution
will change how people’s lived experiences and the soft skills associated to
those experiences are valorized. This technology may open the door to better
educational and professional opportunities in the U.S., to increased economic
competitiveness (since higher education plays an increasingly critical role in
the economic competitiveness of a nation), to advanced health and welfare of the
American public (since adults with higher education often live healthier and
longer lives, and enjoy better financial situations), and to a more developed
and diverse STEM workforce (by focusing on valorizing the social and cultural
capital of minoritized students).

This project proposes a digital platform that provides soft-skill credentialing
guided by lived experiences. The main innovation behind the proposed solution is
a proprietary system that combines Machine Learning (ML) and Natural Language
Processing to analyze the candidate’s experiences and apply different evidence-
based social-emotional assessment frameworks to accredit the soft skills
embedded in each experience. This solution may be the first time a proprietary
ML technology will be integrated with a large language model to provide soft-
skill credentialing upon lived experiences. The main technical challenge is
avoiding bias in the assignation of soft-skill credentials. Other technical
challenges are: 1) the potential scarcity of training data; 2) the correct
definition of credential categories; and 3) the ability to explain the ML
models. This project is intended to address these challenges by 1) developing a
proof-of-concept prototype of the accreditation model; 2) conducting a
preliminary analysis of its fairness when assessing marginalized groups; 3)
reformulating the accreditation algorithm in case any bias is detected; and 4)
evaluating, with real datasets, the performance of the credential classifier,
the bias mitigation strategies, and the explanations generated for each
assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.