* 2317191
* EAGER: Cracking the histone code with engineered histone readers
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Grey Monroe, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,986.00

Histones are central to genome and organism biology in all eukaryotes. Histone
post-translational chemical modifications underlie a â€œcode" translated by
proteins with histone reader domains, which provide the critical link between
the information maintained in the distribution of histone post-translational
modifications and higher-order biological processes (e.g. gene expression, DNA
repair). To understand this histone code, we aim to accelerate the discovery of
specific interactions between genomes and histone reader domains. New
technologies have revolutionized our ability to study genomes at the sequence
level. Yet, our understanding of genome biology lags behind due to a more
limited toolkit when it comes to measuring the proteins that interact with
genomes. This work aims to develop a new method that, if successful, would serve
as a broadly applicable tool for measuring the activity of different reader
domains across the genome, under different environments, and across development.
We envision the deployment of this tool as a potentially transformative
framework for studying chromatin biology in diverse organisms. Our lab is also
committed to promoting diversity and inclusion in STEM. The preliminary work
discussed and proposed work will continue to provide opportunities to
undergraduate researchers through the NSF California Alliance for Minority
Participation (CAMP) Scholars program.

We will attempt a new but untested method to measure genome-wide targeting by
histone readers. We will test the approach through the study of histone
modifications and readers involved in DNA repair and organism development. This
work aims to advance a unified understanding of how histone modifications are
translated into higher-order biological information via proteins that bind them
by histone readers. If successful, this work will yield a broadly useful system
to help decipher how histones orchestrate genome and organism biology. The
proposed method could eventually underlie more reliable epigenome diagnostic
tools from agriculture to human health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.