* 2317406
* Understanding Mixed-Mode Fracture Mechanics in Additively Manufacturable Functionally Graded Microcellular Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* mirmilad mirsayar, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,627.00

The use of materials having cellular structures is rapidly growing in various
engineering applications ranging from biomedical to aerospace, civil, and
automotive industries. If designed accurately, cellular structures can be both
high strength and light weight. In contrast to a traditional uniform pattern of
cells across a structure, optimal designs usually require a non-uniform grading
of cells, called a functionally graded structure. Recent advances in additive
manufacturing and computational techniques have enabled researchers to precisely
build functionally graded cellular structures with complex patterns. However,
most available designs for optimized cell pattern configurations ignore the
notches or cracks that can be formed in the printed components either during the
fabrication process or due to excessive loads. The main goal of this research is
to understand fracture mechanics near such critical areas in additively
manufactured functionally graded cellular structures exposed to complex loading
conditions. This fundamental understanding can then be integrated into next-
generation design of engineered cellular structures with enhanced fracture
resistance. The mathematical models and mechanics developed in this research
will advance the fields of fracture mechanics, theoretical and computational
mechanics, composite structures, and additive manufacturing. Additionally,
through this project, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students will engage in
several professional, educational, and outreach activities.

This project aims to provide a greater understanding of fracture behavior in
additively manufacturable functionally graded microcellular structures. The
scientific objectives of this work are to i) demonstrate that different
microcellular structures with different pattern functions can be successfully
produced by additive manufacturing, ii) experimentally and computationally
characterize their constitutive response, iii) develop a novel computationally
efficient multiscale approach for prediction of their mixed mode fracture
behavior, and iv) provide detailed information regarding how patterns and
distributions of cells (i.e., topology and morphology) should be configured near
the stress concentrations. To achieve these goals, different spatially pattered
microcellular structures will be built by additive manufacturing to
experimentally investigate their constitutive response, mixed-mode fracture
toughness, and the crack propagation mechanism. A synergistic
experimental/computational framework will be developed to predict and optimize
fracture behavior by considering the material anisotropy induced from both the
microcellular patterns and the printing orientation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.