* 2317547
* Student and Early Career Support:  23rd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid 2023)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Daniel Katz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 24,974.00

This project provides travel support for US-based students and early career
researchers to attend the CCGrid 2023 conference in Bangalore, India in May
2023. The supported participants will attend special mentoring sessions, present
a poster, and learn from the leaders in the Cluster, Cloud, and Internet
Computing areas of Computer Science. The participants will submit a proposal for
travel support and an extended abstract of their work that will be published in
the workshop proceedings of the conference. This provides a unique opportunity
for students and early career researchers in the US to the CCGrid 2023
conference.

Cluster, Cloud, and Internet computing is fundamental to computer science and is
the driving engine for future computing and the science and engineering research
and education that now depends on it. The 23rd IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid 2023) is a leading forum to
disseminate and discuss research activities and results on a broad range of
topics in distributed systems, ranging from computing clusters to widely
distributed Clouds and emerging Internet computing paradigms such as Fog and
Edge Computing that support Internet of Things (IoT) and Big Data applications.
The conference features keynotes, technical presentations, posters, seven
workshops, as well as the SCALE challenge featuring live demonstrations and the
ICFEC 2023 conference. The conference places special emphasis on all aspects of
equity, diversity, and inclusion in systems research. The conference will be
held as an in-person event in Bangalore, India. Overall, the conference provides
a forum for engineers and scientists in academia, industry, and government to
present their latest research findings in all aspects of cluster, cloud and
Internet computing. It is also an important event for PhD students and early
career researchers to connect to the world of parallel computing in research
institutions, scientific laboratories, and industry. This project provides
travel support for US-based students and early-career researchers and creates a
cohort who will attend the conference (by supporting a portion of their travel
expenses), participate in the early career and students' showcase as well as the
rest of the conference, discuss their work with each other and with colleagues,
and build long-lasting supportive relationships for their careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.