* 2317679
* Conference: NSF Student Travel Grant for CPS-IoT Week 2023
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Dakai Zhu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This project will provide funding for students from U.S. institutions of higher
learning to attend the 2023 Cyber-Physical Systems and Internet-of-Things Week
(CPS-IoT Week 2023) in San Antonio, Texas during May 9-12, 2023. This is the
first in-person CPS IoTT week since the pandemic in 2020. CPS-IoT Week
(previously known as CPSWeek) is the premier conference for Cyber-Physical
Systems research, and is comprised of five flagship conferences in CPS, namely
ICCPS (International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems), RTAS (Real-Time and
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium), IPSN (Information Processing in
Sensor Networks), HSCC (Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control) and IoTDI
(Internet of Things Design and Implementation). In addition to these 5
conferences, there are multiple workshops and demonstrations that permit papers
to be submitted and presented by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are engineered systems that are built from, and
depend upon, the seamless integration of computation and physical components.
Advances in CPS will enable capability, adaptability, scalability, resiliency,
safety, security, and usability that will expand the horizons of these critical
systems. CPS technologies are transforming the way people interact with
engineered systems, just as the Internet has transformed the way people interact
with information. Travel support to this conference for today's graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers enables broad participation by tomorrow's
researchers in this interdisciplinary field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.