* 2317660
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigating the Liquefaction Susceptibility of Calcareous Sand in Hawaii with an Enhanced NHERI@UTexas Large Mobile Shaker
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Kenneth Stokoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 114,385.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award supports investigation of
the liquefaction hazard of calcareous sands during earthquake shaking.
Liquefaction of calcareous sands remains an ongoing challenge, not only in
Hawaii where the 2006 Kiholo Bay earthquake caused liquefaction of both dredged
and naturally-deposited calcareous soils at the Kawaihae Harbor, but also
globally in equatorial regions. The seismic resiliency of infrastructure,
including ports, maritime terminals and naval facilities, is a critical
component to the economy, emergency response, and security of Hawaii and the US
mainland. Calcareous sands differ from quartz sands in several aspects,
including intraparticle porosity, abrasive surfaces, crushability, and variable
cementation. These unique properties mean that established relationships for
evaluating the liquefaction hazard of quartz sands cannot be reliably used for
calcareous sands without modifications based on fundamental studies. This
research will improve earthquake preparedness of Hawaii and contribute more
broadly to a fundamental understanding of this locally abundant material.

The specific objectives of this project are: (1) characterize the strain-based
liquefaction susceptibility relationship for Hawaii calcareous sand and compare
it to established relationships for quartz sands, (2) examine the dependency of
the strain-based liquefaction susceptibility relationship on initial soil state
and effective stress, and (3) collect site-specific cone penetration tip
resistance and shear wave velocity to relate to laboratory-derived cyclic
strength. In situ cyclic testing will be performed with the NHERI@UTexas T-Rex
mobile shaker to investigate relationships between cyclic shear strain and
excess porewater pressure generation below a depth of 2 m. The enhanced shaking
at depth will be obtained by applying T-Rex to a helical soil anchor that is
installed along with a special array of particle velocity and pore-water-
pressure transducers to various depths of interest. Cyclic laboratory testing on
site-sampled soil will be used to characterize cyclic behavior of the calcareous
sand under an expanded set of conditions and initial states from the in situ
testing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.