* 2317251
* CSR: Small: Multi-FPGA System for Real-time Fraud Detection with Large-scale Dynamic Graphs
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Cong Hao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 12/31/2026
* USD 554,699.00

The rise of international financial and cybercrime, such as fraud and money
laundering, has led to billions of dollars in losses annually in the United
States. To address this urgent issue, there is a need for real-time fraud
detection algorithms and systems with extremely low latency. Graph-based machine
learning algorithms, specifically Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), have emerged as
a promising solution. Financial activity graphs possess two crucial
characteristics: they are extremely large, comprising vast amounts of
transactions, financial institutions, and customers, and they evolve dynamically
over time as new transactions occur. These characteristics present significant
challenges for real-time, low-latency fraud detection, as it requires a scalable
and parallelizable distributed system. Additionally, the dynamic nature of the
graphs poses challenges for system control and optimization, as the partitioning
of the problem on a distributed system may quickly become suboptimal due to
graph updates. To tackle these challenges, this project proposes a distributed
FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate Array) system for real-time fraud detection on
large-scale dynamic graphs. The project aims to achieve microsecond-level
latency, which has not been explored in real-time distributed dynamic GNNs. The
research involves three main tasks: system construction, dynamic optimization,
and uncertainty analysis and optimization. The impacts of this project are
significant. Successful implementation will enhance the effectiveness of
fraudulent transaction alerts for millions of people globally and help
businesses reduce fraud losses and increase revenue. The project's outcomes can
have applications in various domains, such as cybercrime detection, insurance
fraud, national security infrastructure protection, and identifying anomalies
and terrorist attacks. The constructed system will be made publicly accessible,
and all codes will be open-sourced to benefit the community. Furthermore, the
project presents an opportunity to involve students, including those from
underrepresented groups, in research and education through collaborations and
engaging competitions.

The project aims to address the rising challenges of international financial
and cybercrime by developing a distributed FPGA system for real-time fraud
detection on large-scale dynamic graphs. Current fraud detection systems lack
low-latency capabilities, making real-time detection difficult. To overcome
this, the project proposes the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and
introduces three key tasks: system construction, dynamic optimization, and
uncertainty analysis and optimization. The financial graphs involved in fraud
detection are characterized by their immense size and dynamic nature. These
attributes pose significant obstacles to real-time detection and system
optimization. To tackle these challenges, we plan to utilize a distributed FPGA
system that can handle large-scale dynamic graphs efficiently. By leveraging
Smart Network Interface Cards (SmartNICs) and multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL), the system will dynamically repartition evolving graphs across FPGAs for
optimal performance. Additionally, we propose to use Bayesian Neural Networks
(BNNs) to model and analyze system predictability and uncertainty. This
information is crucial for real-time systems. The BNN will guide active learning
strategies, allowing the system to make informed decisions when faced with high
uncertainty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.