* 2317972
* Eclipse Ambassadors:  Preparing Scientists and Educators to Facilitate Engagement in the 2024 Total Solar Eclipse
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Linda Shore, Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 11/30/2024
* USD 529,514.00

This project from the Astronomical Society of the Pacific (ASP) is centered on
the 2024 Total Solar Eclipse, which will traverse the US from southwest to the
northeast, passing over several urban areas. The ASP’s Eclipse Ambassadors
Project will train 300 teachers and astronomers to facilitate activities in a
solar eclipse kit to be developed as a part of this project. This project
includes professional development for elementary and middle school teachers and
scientists. This project provides opportunities for students from groups
underrepresented in STEM. This award is jointly supported by the Solar
Terrestrial Research, the Discovery Research in K-12 (DRK-12), the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL), and the Astronomical Sciences Education and
Special Programs.

Approximately 200 Grade K-9 science teachers and 100 astronomers are estimated
to engage with a minimum of 20,000 members of the public and an additional
10,000 school students. Upon acceptance to participate in workshops,
approximately 200 Grade K-9 science teachers and 100 astronomers will receive
the eclipse kits and 3 hours of online professional development. They will also
receive permanent access to the Learn@ASP portal, which provides access to
materials and other ambassadors, facilitating professional development beyond
the eclipse.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.