* 2317116
* CAESAR: Characterization of Boundary-Layer Convective Precipitation in Arctic Cold Air Outbreaks
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yonggang Wang, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 234,022.00

Arctic climate is changing at a faster pace than anywhere on Earth. Climate
projections indicate that the Arctic will continue to warm, but uncertainties
arise due to questions about the future behavior of Arctic clouds. An area of
primary uncertainty is the properties of clouds that form during cold-air
outbreaks, where very cold airmasses over the Arctic ice move southward over the
relatively warm open ocean. This award will help to analyze observational data
of these clouds (and precipitation) and the exchange of energy between the ocean
and atmosphere during the Cold-Air outbreak Experiment in the Sub-Arctic Region
(CAESAR), which will be conducted in Spring 2024 out of northern Scandinavia.
The observations collected during CAESAR will be used to better understand the
characteristics of the cold-air outbreak system, and the Arctic climate system
more broadly, to inform climate models and projections. The project will also
help to improve forecasting of weather hazards with significant relevance to
naval operations, commercial shipping, and coastal communities. The broader
field effort includes significant opportunities for students and early-career
scientists, international collaboration, and public outreach. This award will
provide opportunities for undergraduate students to be involved in the project.
Additionally, materials will be adapted for classroom activities and public
outreach activities are planned.

The focus of this individual project is on the shallow precipitation systems
that form during Arctic cold air outbreaks (CAOs). The researcher will use data
collected during CAESAR to document the characteristics of boundary-layer
convective (BLC) precipitation. BLC precipitation in the Arctic is inadequately
documented and characterized, and poorly predicted. The primary objectives of
the project are to document the vertical structure of BLC precipitation systems
and to explore the role of BLC precipitation on transitions in mesoscale
organization. A large subset of CAESAR observational data will be used alongside
high-resolution mesoscale modeling. Specifically, the project tasks are to: 1)
Conduct a CAO case study to characterize BLC cloud and precipitation systems, 2)
Conduct a composite study to describe the diversity of BLC clouds and
precipitation, 3) Perform non-Large Eddy Simulation (LES) runs for selected CAO
cases, 4) Perform LES simulations and sensitivity studies to test the
hypotheses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.