* 2317185
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Assessing the Relationship Between Privacy Regulations and Software Development to Improve Rulemaking and Compliance
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

The advent of the surveillance economy in the modern Internet has significantly
transformed understandings of privacy. Governments worldwide have proposed
various legislative solutions to encourage responsible behavior by companies
handling personally identifiable information. However, the relationship between
regulation and software design, and the ultimate efficacy of enforcement
paradigms at promoting widespread compliance with data protection standards, are
difficult to measure. This research leverages a combined team of legal and
engineering experts to provide the first tool to systematically evaluate how
privacy laws impact approaches to personally identifiable information in
software development, laying the foundation for a new regulatory paradigm based
on proactive, rather than reactive, models of enforcement, which rely on mass
automated notifications rather than labor-intensive individual enforcement
actions.

The research begins with a comprehensive study of privacy legislation, including
contrasting approaches to enforcement. The investigators will then develop an
automatic framework based on machine learning and program analysis to assess the
impact of privacy regulations on real-world software. Lastly, the investigators
will utilize the data from the previous two activities to develop conclusions on
how regulatory and enforcement paradigms can be improved to develop more
effective models of compliance among software developers. In addition to
generating concrete lessons for improving the efficiency and efficacy of privacy
legislation, the research will advance program analysis and natural language
processing techniques for extracting complex software information and verifying
compliance with privacy regulations

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.