* 2317687
* Seismic Investigation of Mauna Loa Volcano, Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Guoqing Lin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 405,563.00

Mauna Loa volcano on the Island of Hawaii is the world’s largest volcano.
Compared with its southeastern neighbor Kilauea, Mauna Loa has not been
extensively investigated due to its steep slopes, high elevation, and relative
lack of activity. On November 27, 2022, an eruption began in the summit crater
of Mauna Loa and extended to the Northeast Rift Zone, a crack on the northeast
flank of the volcano. Past eruptions at Mauna Loa have occurred on both the
Northeast and Southwest Rift Zones, and the population has grown around the
latter. It is therefore imperative for researchers to understand the magmatic
“plumbing system” before the next eruption takes place. In this project, the PI
team will deploy 54 seismometers on and around the volcano for three months to
obtain records of shaking from local and distant earthquakes. They will analyze
data from these and other seismometers to map local earthquakes, and make a
detailed 3D image of the subsurface (similar to a CT scan at a hospital) using
data from all of the recorded quakes. The new images and the pattern of local
earthquakes will show magma chambers and possible routes for magma to ascend to
the surface, and comparisons with results from future studies will show how
magma is migrating below the volcano over time. The new findings will help the
PI team, their collaborators at the USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, and other
scientists better understand seismic and volcanic hazards associated with Mauna
Loa. This project will also provide training in volcano seismology for a
postdoctoral scholar and two undergraduate students.

In this three-year project, the team will apply the state-of-the-art seismic
techniques to the digital data recorded by the permanent seismic stations at the
USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and a nodal array during a three-month
experiment to assess the high-resolution velocity structure and seismic
characteristics of Mauna Loa volcano. The data will be used to generate an
automatic earthquake catalog, to image the magmatic system, to estimate in-situ
Poisson’s ratio in the near earthquake source regions, and to examine temporal
variations in seismic velocity. The newly developed velocity models are
invaluable in resolving conduits and magma chambers and improving absolute
earthquake locations. In situ Poisson’s ratios with high-resolution are of great
help to tracking magma movement and estimating the fraction of partial melt. The
following questions will be addressed in this project: 1. What will the
simultaneous inversions of the high-resolution Vp, Vs, and Vp/Vs models reveal
about the magmatic system and possible magma bodies? (What role did these magma
bodies play in the 2022 eruption and why did the 2022 eruption produce such a
small eruptive volume after over 38 years of repose?) 2. What will the absolute
earthquake location constraints from 3D velocity models tell us about the fault
zones in Mauna Loa? 3. What will the high-resolution in situ Vp/Vs ratios
estimated from waveform cross-correlation data reveal about the spatial and
temporal characteristics in the near-source region? 4. How do the long-lasting
seismic velocity variations in Mauna Loa compare to those in other parts of
Hawaii and at other volcanoes?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.