* 2317067
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: MPS-Ascend: Moire Engineering in van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Tara Pena, Pena, Tara
* Fellowship Award
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Description

Semiconductors made from a single atomic layer profoundly differ from bulk
crystals. For example, two-dimensional (2D) materials combine high mechanical
strength and an assortment of tunable electrical properties. One can also make
heterostructures with unique functionality by stacking different crystals
together. A promising way to control material properties is to vary the relative
orientation of two atomically thin layers to create a nanoscale moiré pattern.
Such moiré structures have the potential to enable new classes of devices for
energy efficient computing and other applications. Currently, the only way to
make and control moiré interference patterns is by physically stacking and
rotating individual layers. This project will explore the control of moiré
lattices by applying mechanical force (strain). Strain engineering is compatible
with any type of 2D heterostructure, and thus could enable a wide range of novel
devices. Given the enormous amount of energy required for artificial
intelligence and data centers, this work could impact everyday technology across
the globe. The PI will amplify impact of this work through by mentoring
undergraduate students and involving them in research. She will also involve
local high school students with hands on experimental work, inspiring a new
generation of scientists and engineers.

Technical Description

The goal of this MPS-Ascend research project is to obtain a comprehensive
understanding of correlated electronic states available in twisted bilayer
graphene with respect to both heterostrain (magnitude and direction) and twist
angle biases. This systematic study will provide the community a template on how
to reliably access and control correlated electron phenomena such as
superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene heterostructures. In addition, we
will investigate how to create and control moiré interference patterns in
heterostrained non-twisted bilayer graphene structures, then again
systematically examine correlated electronic properties with respect to
heterostrain application alone. Upon successfully obtaining a moiré interference
through heterostrained non-twisted bilayers, this will allow moiré
heterostructures to be obtained in a scalable, controllable fashion that can be
integrated with industrial nanofabrication processes. As this method is scalable
and compatible with any van der Waals based heterostructure, the work can be
extended to control more properties dictated by moiré interference patterns and
enable device structures that leverage the exotic properties hosted by moiré
superlattices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.