* 2317674
* Fundamentals of Heterogeneous Nucleation with Application to the Optimization of Horizontal Ribbon Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Brian Helenbrook, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 10/31/2026
* USD 130,847.00

This award supports research into new models of solidification kinetics and
employs them to optimize the horizontal ribbon growth (HRG) process. HRG is a
technique for producing thin wafers of single-crystal silicon for use in solar
cells, which has the potential to significantly lower production costs (possibly
75% lower) compared to currently used techniques. Commercialization has not yet
been successful mainly because of a lack of understanding of the solidification
dynamics. New models enable the prediction of currently unexplained phenomena
observed in HRG experiments. The models have the potential to impact crystal
growth processes beyond HRG, leading to new applications with materials other
than silicon such as sapphire or germanium. This work will provide deeper
insights into the fundamentals of crystal growth and accelerate the development
of new growth techniques, which will in turn help the US to achieve energy
independence using renewable resources and grow advanced manufacturing in the
US.

Current theories for 2D Nucleation are derived assuming the nucleation occurs in
a uniform environment with an infinite area, which always results in polynuclear
growth. However, in all realistic growth processes, there are always temperature
variations that limit the area where 2D nucleation will occur. The effect of
these temperature variations will be investigated using Monte Carlo and
Molecular Dynamic simulations, the results of which will be used to develop a
new 2D nucleation model. This model will predict 2D nucleation and step
propagation in spatially varying temperature fields without a-priori assuming
polynuclear growth. This model will be incorporated into high-order accurate
finite element simulations of the HRG process. These continuum simulations will
predict the onset of 2D and 3D flow and solidification instabilities and their
impact on the growth process. They will be used to optimize the process to
enable the production of uniform, thin silicon wafers, at a high production
rate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.