* 2317172
* Novel Computational Methods for Design Under Uncertainty with Arbitrary Dependent Probability Distributions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sharif Rahman, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2026
* USD 431,033.00

Design of complex systems and engineered artifacts is often confronted with
uncertainties in manufacturing processes, material properties, and operating
environments. Traditional design approaches often rely on heuristically derived
safety factors and do not quantitatively address the statistical variation of a
system response. This project will promote scientific progress through
foundational research on the design optimization of complex engineering systems
and structures in the presence of statistically dependent uncertainty. Novel
methods will be created to determine the best design alternative, considering
uncertain system behavior, influenced by dependent input variables. Potential
engineering applications include ground vehicle design for improved durability
and crashworthiness, fatigue- and fracture-resistant design for aerospace
applications, and design of microelectronic packaging under harsh environments.
The results from this research will contribute to national prosperity through
the development of complex systems and products that are more durable, robust,
and reliable. Beyond engineering, the results from this research will benefit
the U.S. economy and society through potential application in areas such as
energy, finance and management, and transportation and logistics, where
optimization under uncertainty plays a vital role. This research is multi-
disciplinary, spanning several fields, including engineering design, applied
mathematics, and probability and statistics. It will foster broad participation
of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.

The chief goal of this project is to conduct research in the creation of
efficient computational algorithms and practical computational tools for robust
and reliability-based design optimization (RDO and RBDO) of high-dimensional
complex systems subject to random input resulting from an arbitrary dependent
probability distribution. The research plan comprises three scientific
objectives: (1) novel mathematical developments of a generalized analysis-of-
variance expansion, leading to a generalized spline dimensional decomposition
(GSDD) for tackling dependent random variables directly; (2) new scalable
algorithms of the GSDD method for calculating relevant probabilistic response
characteristics and design sensitivities of a high-dimensional, complex
mechanical system; and (3) innovative GSDD-driven optimization algorithms for
efficiently solving high-dimensional RDO and RBDO problems, including stochastic
shape and topology designs. This research is innovative for several reasons.
First, the GSDD method will account for truly arbitrary, dependent probability
distributions of random input, heretofore unavailable to the scientific
community. Second, it will address discontinuous or non-smooth performance
functions, if they exist, using hundreds of random/design variables, thereby
diminishing the curse of dimensionality to a great extent. Third, the
synchronous formulation of the statistical moment, reliability, and design
sensitivity analyses, which requires a single or at most a few stochastic
simulation(s) for all possible designs, will markedly accelerate the design
optimization process, potentially producing breakthrough solutions to RDO/RBDO
problems. The implementation of the probabilistic methods will lead to next-
generation computational tools, bridging stress analysis, stochastic simulation,
and optimization to form a seamless design pipeline of the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.