* 2317852
* Collaborative Research: From Peaks To Slopes To Communities, Tropical Glacierized Volcanoes As Sentinels of Global Change: Integrated Impacts On Water, Plants and Elemental Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* David Rounce, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2027
* USD 198,753.00

In the inner tropics, glaciers are exclusively found of volcano peaks above
unique Andean páramo ecosystems that serve as global biodiversity hotspots,
harbor some of the highest carbon stocks per unit area on Earth, and sustain
Indigenous agrarian Kichwa communities who have stewarded the land and waters
for generations. Glaciers there are fast-disappearing under climate change, yet
the vast majority of studies on glacier retreat and downstream impacts are
concentrated in mid- to high-latitudes. With Ecuadorian collaborators at
academic, governmental, and community institutions, the project’s overarching
research objective is to determine how climate change drives glacier retreat on
culturally and ecologically critical Andean volcanoes in the inner tropics,
triggering impacts on water supply, vegetation and land-use, and elemental
feedbacks to the climate. To ensure benefits to Kichwa stewards of the páramos,
the approach includes co-production of predictive models of future change with
the historically marginalized Kichwa communities living at the mountain bases.
Engagement with the communities will yield a framework for ethically weaving
together Indigenous and scientific understandings of earth systems–which is
lacking in the Andes. Closer to home, at and around the U.S. home institutions,
the project will develop activities for Indigenous university science students
and Latin American/Indigenous high school students to help them face achievement
gaps for science careers while acknowledging their heritage. Through
collaboration events, the project team, as participants of the Global North’s
disproportionate contributions to global change, endeavors to fulfill their
obligations to Indigenous peoples, lands, and water in the Global South, in
their own states, and with implications for science-Indigenous community
partnerships elsewhere.

This project provides the first systematic investigation on glacier mass balance
processes in the inner tropics, models the consequences of accelerated plant
succession in deglacierized landscapes, and implements the first assessment of
sulfur and metals controls on páramo carbon stores. Its interdisciplinary work
plan will further uncover hidden subsurface flow paths of meltwater that
influence the timing of stream discharge and the weathering and export of
solutes; demonstrate complex feedbacks among plant succession, soil moisture
dynamics, soil development, and nutrient release under climate change and land
management scenarios; provide spatiotemporally resolved hydro-biogeochemical
process-understanding to determine whether vast páramo carbon stores will become
a source of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere; and finally show how climate-
driven glacier retreat triggers responses that propagate throughout mountain
catchments to affect water, plants, and elemental cycles. The project’s
integrative approach combines field and remote sensing observations, laboratory
analyses, and computational modeling, and knowledge co-production with Kichwa
communities. In addition to producing extensive multidisciplinary datasets and
predictive integrative models in a data-sparse and fast-changing region of the
world, centering Indigenous community engagement creates a novel opportunity for
Andean Indigenous knowledge to be in dialogue with conventional academic
science, which can transform conceptualizations of earth science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.