* 2317714
* Collaborative Research: SBP: Increasing Social Equality in STEM through Children's Structural Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jamie Amemiya, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Anna V. Fisher
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,200.00

There are major gender and racial inequalities in who pursues Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) careers, and these disparities
take root in early childhood. STEM inequalities are largely caused by structural
factors, which are systemic societal barriers such as negative societal
stereotypes and unequal educational opportunities. The present research
addresses STEM inequalities by encouraging children to recognize structural
constraints as a primary cause. A structural understanding may help children
from disadvantaged groups realize that current inequalities do not reflect any
deficiencies inherent about their groups and thus empower them to pursue STEM.
Moreover, structural thinking may encourage children to include their
marginalized peers in STEM activities. The proposed project thus tackles issues
of STEM disparities by addressing three interrelated questions: (1) How to
increase children’s structural reasoning about STEM inequalities? (2) Does
structural reasoning increase children’s motivation to persist in STEM and to
include marginalized children in STEM activities? (3) How can parents promote
children’s structural reasoning and STEM motivation? Findings from this research
will provide new insights on how to promote structural reasoning to increase
STEM equality from early on, and will help to develop educational materials for
educators and parents. The project also directly addresses STEM inequalities by
including research training opportunities for students from underrepresented
backgrounds in STEM.

Using cognitive and behavioral experimental methods with 5- to 8-year-old
children, the present research is a systematic investigation of structural
reasoning in childhood and its behavioral consequences. Specifically, the
research tests two approaches to promoting structural reasoning: (1) between-
group comparisons that emphasize differential structural barriers between
advantaged and disadvantaged groups, and (2) within-group comparisons that show
that how the removal of structural barriers make a difference for the
disadvantaged group. In addition, the research examines how increasing
structural reasoning can have downstream consequences for children’s STEM
motivation and inclusion of marginalized children. The project also informs the
socialization of structural reasoning by examining the role of parents in
transmitting structural information to children. The proposed research advances
the field by applying theoretically-novel approaches to increase children’s
structural reasoning about real-world inequalities. Additionally, by studying
the effects of structural reasoning on STEM pursuits and inclusion, this
research informs how structural reasoning can diversify STEM participation in
childhood. Ultimately, this project can transform our understanding of the
early-developing barriers underlying systemic inequalities in STEM.

This project is also supported by the Racial Equity in STEM Education activity
in the Directorate for STEM Education (EDU Racial Equity). This activity
supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and workforce
development through research and practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.