* 2317541
* Toward A Process Understanding of the Methane Thermodynamics Associated with Permafrost Thaw at the Arctic Continental Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kehua You, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 293,820.00

Arctic permafrost stores about 1,700 billion tons of organic carbon in frozen
deposits. That’s twice as much carbon as what’s in the atmosphere. If just a
fraction of that melts, the escaping methane would become one of the world’s
largest sources of greenhouse gas and would severely impact the environment and
climate. We know that over the last 20,000 years, a quarter of the stored
organic carbon in Arctic permafrost has been flooded by the rising, warm seas.
But what will happen to the remaining permafrost and its organic carbon stores
when warming causes further sea level rise? How much methane will be released
into the ocean water and the atmosphere when the permafrost is flooded?
Answering these questions will help us understand whether the flooding and
thawing of Arctic permafrost will lead to ocean acidification and stronger
Arctic warming. However, collecting data in the Arctic is difficult. That means
we don’t yet know enough about the Arctic carbon cycle to answer these
questions. The goal of this project is to see how computer simulations and math
can help. The project will give us a clearer picture of how the temperature,
soil, chemistry and microbes of the permafrost change together when it’s
flooded, and what happens to the methane as it bubbles through the water. That
will help us figure out the role of Arctic permafrost in the carbon cycle, ocean
chemistry and climate warming, both in the past and in the future. In addition,
the project will provide interdisciplinary education experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students and feature workshops to increase the number
and diversity of students pursuing STEM degrees and careers. It will also give
insights that will guide future drilling expeditions, improve Earth system
(climate) models, and assist policy makers.

This project will investigate how flooding of the Arctic continental margin
contributes to the cycle of methane into the ocean and atmosphere. Arctic
permafrost is a significant natural reservoir of methane, a greenhouse gas
that’s 84 times more potent than carbon dioxide over a 20-year timeframe. When
sea level began rising sharply after the Last Glacial Maximum, warmer sea water
(as warm as 10-15℃) flooded the Arctic and raised the temperature of the
permafrost. That significantly degraded the permafrost and caused widespread gas
release along the Arctic continental shelves. However, the methane source, its
current rate and magnitude, as well as future projections, have not yet been
modeled and are not well constrained. This project will compile thermal,
hydrological, microbial and geochemical parameters that are characteristic of
the Arctic continental shelves; the research team will conduct a systematic set
of one-dimensional numerical simulations to calculate the upper and lower limits
of methane release following the flooding of the Arctic continental shelves; the
one-dimensional results will then be scaled up to predict three-dimensional
probabilistic maps of seabed microbial methane exchange, and create future
projections for the U.S. Beaufort Sea and the Laptev Sea shelves. The project
will develop a systematic understanding of the coupled thermal, physical,
chemical and microbial evolution of the Arctic permafrost system in response to
warming. By understanding these processes, we can advance our knowledge of the
role of Arctic permafrost in the carbon cycle, ocean chemistry and past and
future climate warming. The project will provide interdisciplinary training
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students and develop an earth
science-focused training module for a K-12 outreach program. It will support a
female scientist to build her research team. In addition, the project will
develop specific testable hypotheses that could guide future drilling
expeditions, Earth system modeling, and policy making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.