* 2317368
* I-Corps: Physics-based Automotive Cybersecurity
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Alireza Mohammadi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an embedded technology that may protect modern vehicles against
automotive cybersecurity threats. The proposed innovation is expected to have
impacts in several areas including security of modern connected vehicles,
transportation safety, national security, and automotive Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEM). With the advent and proliferation of autonomous and
connected vehicles, the market size for OEMs and their in-vehicle (IVN)
technologies is rapidly growing and is expected to maintain a growth trajectory
to about $46 billion dollars. Automotive cyberthreat analysis, detection, and
localization is an integral component of this growing market. The proposed
innovation has the potential to save about $300 million dollars for automotive
suppliers and OEMs over the next 5 years. The benefits of the innovation to
society at large are significant in the areas including transportation safety,
automotive industry, and the cyber insurance business.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of security solutions to
safeguard modern automobile in-vehicle networks (IVNs) against a wide array of
cyberattacks. The proposed technology uses physics-based attack detection and
localization in a simultaneous manner. Currently, using the existing engine
control unit (ECU) diagnosis technologies, the vehicle ECU and in-vehicle
cybersecurity engineers spend about 30 minutes to 1 hour for each vehicle to
scan for potential security issues in IVNs. The proposed technology uses a
physical fingerprinting framework consisting of embedded hardware devices and
completely automatic in-vehicle network traffic analyzing algorithms to detect
and localize malicious activities happening within the connected IVNs. This IVN
cybersecurity tool, may protect the modern automobile IVNs against the ever-
increasing number of cyberthreats and help the cybersecurity manager of OEMs and
automotive suppliers to defend the IVNs of their products against the growing
number of cyberattacks in a time- and cost-efficient manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.