* 2317272
* CPS: Small: Controlling Sub- and Supersynchronous Oscillations in Inverter-dominated Energy CPS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nilanjan Ray Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

This NSF project aims to solve the problem of oscillations faced by power grids
with high penetration of renewable energy that are disrupting system operations.
The project will bring transformative change in fundamental understanding of
such phenomena and propose new control strategies to damp the oscillations by
leveraging the cyber layer of the power grid including sensors and communication
network. This will be achieved by novel approaches of modeling the cyber
physical power grid that can capture such phenomena, and centralized and
decentralized controls that can damp such oscillations even in presence of
anomalies in sensor measurements including cyber-attacks. The intellectual
merits of the project include development of computationally manageable cyber
physical models, novel sensor grouping and algorithms for data recovery from
corruption, and control methods that do not rely on detailed renewable plant
models. The broader impacts of the project include solving a major impediment of
renewable energy integration that can help tackle climate change, integrating
the proposed research in summer camps with high school students, offering summer
internships for underrepresented minorities, informing curricula, and student
engagement through Penn State’s Center for Engineering Outreach and Inclusion.

The proposed project has three key thrusts addressing the sub- and super-
synchronous oscillations (SSOs) in presence of inverter-based resources (IBRs).
First, a scalable, computationally manageable, and linearizable dynamic phasor-
based modeling framework with unbalance simulation capability for grids with
high penetration of IBRs is proposed, which is coupled to a realistic cyber
layer model with data packet drops and delays. Second, a centralized remedial
action scheme based damping control is proposed that relies on three steps – (a)
offline phasor measurement unit (PMU) placement, online dynamic signal grouping,
and signal recovery from sparse and non-sparse corruption, (b) detection and
source localization of SSOs using dissipating energy flow (DEF) approach, and
(c) determination of generation re-dispatch through a novel DEF sensitivity
calculation. Third, decentralized modulation-based corruption-resilient SSO
damping is proposed based on model predictive control (MPC) framework that does
not require knowledge of IBR models, wherein the computational burden will be
reduced by estimating a map by offline training of neural networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.