* 2317203
* Conference: Networks of success to broaden participation in the environmental sciences.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Bala Chaudhary, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,995.00

As global change disrupts Earth’s climate, biodiversity, water resources, and
food systems, more diverse and inclusive science teams are needed to develop
sustainable environmental solutions. This award will broaden participation in
science through: 1) the development of 1-on-1 and peer mentorship programs, 2)
academic career advancement webinars, and 3) a conference designed to strengthen
scientific networks and build interdisciplinary collaborations across ecology,
evolution, environmental microbiology, the geosciences, and atmospheric and
marine sciences. The meeting will invite environmental leaders, early career
faculty, and trainees across the environmental sciences to come together for
networking and leadership training. This project aims to help retain scientists
from minoritized groups. This award will provide training on how to advance to,
and succeed at, leadership positions; it will help participants build new
networks and new science collaborations; and, it will create opportunities for
advancing mentorship skills. The impacts of community-building, collaboration-
building and professional development will improve retention and advancement
into science leadership positions.

Reports from government, industry, academia, and non-governmental organizations
have all concluded that a lack of human diversity is costly to the entire
science community, and that broadening participation benefits all stakeholders.
The United States is a diverse nation, yet this diversity is not reflected in
the population of environmental scientists, particularly at higher ranks.
Environmental science leadership positions in universities, agencies, and
professional societies do not reflect the broader population. Among the
evidence-based approaches to broaden participation in science are culturally-
appropriate mentorship, access to opportunities, leadership training, and
interventions at vulnerable points of attrition. This project blends these
approaches with year-long mentorship, networking, and professional development
programming. Existing science organizations are leveraged to unite and form
sustainable networks that catalyze cross-cutting scientific collaborations. All
of these activities are designed with the intention of uplifting environmental
scientists, combating attrition, and launching early- and mid-career researchers
toward leadership and advancement.

This project is supported by the Division of Environmental Biology, the Division
of Biological Infrastructure, the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems -
Symbiosis Infection & Immunity program, the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences - Systems and Synthetic Biology program, and the Division of Ocean
Sciences - Biological Oceanography program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.