* 2317563
* EAGER: SaTC: Applying Adversarial Machine Learning Techniques to Recover Deleted Information from Flash Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Huaming Zhang, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

In the current data era, massive amount of data is generated at an unprecedented
speed. The total amount of data created, and used globally in the year 2022 was
estimated to be 97 zettabytes and projected to grow to 181 zettabytes by the
year 2025. The extremely large data size poses enormous challenges to data
operations and in particular to NAND flash memory deletion. Due to the unique
architecture of NAND array, current NAND flash storage systems cannot utilize
the standard overwrite-based erasure techniques but instead use a resource-light
deletion operation, such as all-zero scrubbing, which could become vulnerable
for data leakage. The deleted data can still be partially recovered by carefully
analyzing the analog reading of the memory bits. Addressing the vulnerability of
flash memory deletion requires a deeper understanding on how an adversary could
exploit the analog reading of a flash memory to reconstruct the original deleted
information. To achieve this goal, this research studies on how an adversary can
use machine learning techniques to recover deleted information from flash
storage. The project’s novelties are to apply machine learning techniques to
validate the efficacy of reconstructing original data from scrubbed flash memory
and to evaluate the susceptibility of various data types to adversary attacks.
The project's broader significance and importance are: The research findings
will led to more trusted data cleaning methods deemed secure and irrecoverable
after scrubbing. The flash memory manufacturers can directly benefit from such
findings and secure their memory scrubbing processes. A direct outcome of this
project will be the training of two graduate students with research experiences
in cybersecurity and machine learning.

By applying analog reading techniques to classify deleted bits as strong or weak
zeros, it was shown that a deleted image in flash memory can be restored to a
recognizable level. An adversary can easily use machine learning techniques to
reconstruct deleted information from flash memory. The feasibility of
reconstruction is greatly influenced by the detection thresholds and types of
data used, as they exhibit varying degrees and types of continuity that may
determine the success of ML models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.