* 2317008
* LEAPS-MPS: Deep Learning Phonons using Graph Neural Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Yi Xia, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,726.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project, supported by a LEAPS-MPS award, aims to better understand and
predict how atoms vibrate in different materials. These vibrations are important
because they affect the properties that materials exhibit, especially at high
temperatures. However, current materials databases contain little information
about these vibrations, which limits the ability to predict how a given material
will behave under various conditions. This project aims to create a new
computational framework that uses advanced machine learning techniques to model
these atomic vibrations. Applying such a computational framework will facilitate
the development of a large materials database that includes thermodynamic
properties and will thus help to design new materials for various applications,
such as certain alloys, known as high-entropy alloys, and materials for managing
heat. To achieve the goal, the PI will use a combination of different modeling
techniques, including advanced simulations based on quantum mechanics, high-
throughput calculations, and machine learning. This multi-disciplinary approach
will enable a deeper understanding of atomic vibrations and their effects on
material properties. The project will also support the education of
undergraduate and master's students in computational materials science at
Portland State University. It will help bridge the gap between traditional
mechanical & materials engineering and modern data-driven engineering
approaches. The PI will collaborate with several programs at Portland State
University to engage with and recruit students from underrepresented groups and
students from K-12 levels to participate in the project.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

All materials consist of vibrating atoms, even at absolute zero temperature, due
to quantum effects. In periodic solids, these vibrations are quantized as
phonons, which reflect themselves in finite-temperature characteristics and
energy transfer in solids. However, current material databases lack dynamical
information on phonons, limiting the prediction of materials at ambient or
higher temperatures. This project, supported by a LEAPS-MPS award, conducts
computational research and education activities with the aim to develop a
hierarchical computational framework that exploits graph neural networks to
model atomic vibrations in solids across the periodic table. This will enable a
broadened computational design of high-entropy alloys and of thermal storage and
management materials. The specific objectives of this project are: 1) developing
universal machine learning force fields using graph neural networks for phonon
modeling, 2) expanding the phonon database through uncertainty-informed active
learning, and 3) gaining a data-driven understanding of atomic vibrations in
shaping thermodynamic stability in multi-component alloys and heat transfer in
thermal management materials. This overarching goal will be achieved by a multi-
disciplinary approach featuring a synergistic integration of multiple modeling
techniques, including advanced anharmonic lattice dynamics simulation, high-
throughput density functional theory calculations, and machine learning using
graph neural networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.