* 2318938
* Old samples, new perspectives: Exploring nitrogen loss through nitrous oxide cycling in the Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rolf Sonnerup
* 08/31/2026
* USD 869,346.00

The marine nitrogen cycle plays a large role in the ocean’s ability to take up
and store carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This is because N is a key
nutrient for photosynthesis in the surface ocean. However, the ways in which
fixed N (which can be used as a nutrient) is converted to N2 gas (which cannot)
in the ocean interior are not fully understood. In particular, there are many
open questions about the production and consumption of N2O (an intermediate gas
in the N cycle), a potent greenhouse gas. This project aims to better understand
the dynamics of fixed N loss in the interior of the Atlantic Ocean through the
measurement of ~950 well preserved dissolved gas samples, modern water column
measurements, and shipboard incubation experiments. The major goals are to map
the distribution of N2O and its isotopic composition, quantify excess N2
produced by fixed N loss, and explore biogeochemical pathways. The project will
include lab and field opportunities for students (one PhD student and two
undergraduate students). The project will also broaden the reach of this large
set of dissolved gas samples by consuming only a small quantity of gas and
making the samples widely available for members of the scientific community.
Finally, the large data sets generated from this work will be made publicly
available, supporting other projects beyond the scope of this study.

This study will fill large data gaps in the Atlantic interior for the abundance
and isotopic composition of N2O. With such a large set of samples that were
collected, stored, and will be analyzed in the same way, there is an
unprecedented opportunity to constrain the spatial variability of N2O and its
isotopes without the challenges of inter-laboratory calibration, and without
requiring dozens of cruises and years of preparation. Similarly, this work will
build upon new analytical advances that permit the measurement of N2/Ar ratios
and N2 isotopes as top-down tracers of denitrification. Comparison of stored gas
tanks from the 1980s to modern measurements in North Atlantic regions of deep-
water formation (where water mass ages are younger than 40 years) provides a
unique opportunity to explore temporal changes in the N cycle over recent
decades. Shipboard incubation experiments will provide new mechanistic insight
into N2O cycling, and the large data set of N2O abundance and isotopic
composition will directly aid in ongoing work by colleagues to employ machine
learning techniques to map N2O variability in the global ocean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.