* 2318557
* OSIB: Metabolic cartography of influenza A virus infection and host-pathogen interaction in the natural and accidental host
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Laura-Isobel McCall, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 667,763.00

Understanding why an infection leads to disease, and how pathology of disease
changes over tissue site, time post-infection, and host species are critical
questions at the center of microbe-host interactions. To answer this question,
this proposal compares the interaction between avian influenza virus and natural
duck hosts who usually remain asymptomatic following infection, versus infection
with accidental poultry hosts, who present with severe symptoms. This proposal
is a highly integrated interdisciplinary collaboration between analytical
chemists, virologists, and veterinary pathologists. This team will use a state-
of-the-art spatial metabolomics approach to map the metabolic changes associated
with infection across permissive and non-permissive tissues of these hosts,
their trajectories over infection and recovery, and their association with
emergence of new virus sequences. Overall, this project will lead to major
insight into the spatial intersection between metabolism, disease and infection
outcomes. Understanding these intersections will reveal how viruses can cause
disease in host animals important for food (poultry) and may be key in
identifying therapeutics or other strategies that can benefit animals important
to the food chain and humans. Broader impacts include outreach to the poultry
and agriculture industry, major stakeholders in bird health for wildlife and
food sources. Adult education events and training of under-represented young
scientists and aspiring researchers will also occur to help our country prepare
leaders for the bioeconomy.

A fundamental question in infection biology is to understand the factors that
lead to pathogenic vs non-pathogenic outcomes, and how these evolve over space
and time, and between hosts. Infection in natural reservoir hosts may lead to
subclinical or mild disease, while infection of other “accidental” hosts will
lead to severe illness. This proposal addresses this critical gap in infection
biology, using natural vs accidental host of avian influenza virus. The central
hypothesis to be tested is that tissues will present minor metabolic changes and
a metabolic trajectory towards recovery in natural hosts, while metabolic
alterations will be more severe and persistent in accidental hosts. We also
hypothesize that differential metabolite availability between tissues and
accidental vs natural hosts provides an environment for the selection of more
virulent strains in accidental hosts. To test these hypotheses, we will combine
experimental influenza virus infection in natural and accidental hosts with
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry based spatial metabolomics and next
generation sequencing (NGS). Overall, we will generate a comprehensive, systems-
level, spatially and temporally resolved insights into the interaction between
natural avian hosts, virus-host cell metabolic pathways, and susceptibility to
influenza across a range of infection outcomes. This project is jointly funded
by the Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.