* 2318730
* CISE-MSI:RPEP:III:Sustainability Hub - A Community Data Hub for Sustainable Regional Systems Research in Colorado
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Daniel Pittman, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,186,085.00

The Sustainability Hub project is a transformative initiative that consolidates
sustainability and well-being data from across Colorado into a single platform.
This initiative fosters collaboration among community members, policy makers,
and researchers, empowering users from diverse backgrounds to engage with and
draw conclusions from the data. By making this data accessible in one place, the
Hub facilitates evidence-based decision-making, leading to improved community
well-being, economic prosperity, and environmental sustainability. The Hub is
not just another data platform; it is an integral part of a researcherâ€™s sharing
pipeline for results, thereby promoting the progress of science. It moves beyond
being a simple data warehouse, developing new connections between information in
a process known as data democracy. For all users, this approach empowers them to
"own" their data, maintain their information, contribute new research, and
create new datasets, which in turn inform decisions affecting their well-being.
For communities, the project is expected to enhance access to useful data and
interactions, serving as a critical tool for the community's journey towards
successful sustainability. The team believes that enhanced access to data and
information about opportunities is critical to the promotion of just, equitable,
diverse, and inclusive community development through education.

The Sustainability Hub project is a transformative initiative executed by
several teams working in parallel with the primary goal of developing an
application that consolidates a wide range of sustainability and well-being data
into a single, universally accessible platform. This platform is designed to be
intuitive and user-friendly, enabling users from diverse backgrounds to engage
with the data effectively. A standout feature of the platform will be its
conversational interface, similar to a chatbot, powered by advanced machine-
learning techniques, allowing users to interact with the platform in a natural,
conversational manner. This innovative approach enhances user experience and
engagement with the platform. In addition to the development of the application,
the project will focus on the collection and organization of data, employing
techniques such as keyword search and data linking to make the data more
understandable and interconnected, allowing users to find and explore related
data easily. A key aspect of the project is its community-driven approach, with
the design and development of the Sustainability Hub heavily influenced by the
needs and requirements of the community it serves. The project team will conduct
listening sessions across the state to gather community insights, needs, and
requirements, which will then be used to inform the development of the platform.
The potential contribution of the Sustainability Hub project is significant. By
facilitating evidence-based decision-making, the project has the potential to
improve community well-being, promote economic prosperity, and advance
environmental sustainability. By making sustainability and well-being data
accessible and understandable, the Sustainability Hub project aims to empower
communities to make informed decisions that contribute to their prosperity and
welfare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.