* 2318512
* Assessing the Effectiveness of Common Health Messaging Tactics on Self-Reported and Validated Vaccine Uptake: A Multi-Method Approach.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Dominik Stecula, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 448,823.00

This research identifies the messaging tactics that local, state, and federal
health agencies employ to encourage vaccine uptake, and rigorously evaluate the
degree to which those efforts are successful, in order to develop and implement
a series of “best practices” for vaccine promotion communication. The project
offers three key advancements over previous research that will improve vaccine
communication in the United States. First, the researchers build a first-of-its-
kind public database of federal and state public health agency vaccine
communications on social media. Second, based on insights gleaned from the
database, the researchers evaluate the efficacy of hundreds of vaccine promotion
messages deployed by public health agencies on Americans’ vaccine attitudes and
behaviors. Third, and arguably most importantly, this project deploys the
messages deemed most promising in the experimental work at scale (a step rarely
taken in most academic research) by conducting a large, online vaccine
communication campaign and assessing its impact on vaccine uptake. This project
advances peer reviewed interdisciplinary work on vaccine promotion, and helps
health agencies better encourage vaccine uptake through the development of “best
practices” for effective vaccine communication.

This project leverages insights from the science of science communication to
build a multi-stage, multi-method, and multidisciplinary research agenda aimed
at rigorously identifying (1) how health agencies have made an effort to
encourage vaccine uptake for three vaccines (COVID-19, seasonal influenza, and
tetanus) in the past, and (2) the degree to which those efforts are successful.
The research accomplishes the first objective by employing “big data” content
analytic procedures developed by the research team to identify themes and
message design elements present in past efforts to encourage vaccine uptake from
federal and local health agencies. The project then assesses the effectiveness
of past vaccine promotion efforts via a series of randomized controlled trials
embedded in public opinion surveys; including (a) a “pilot phase” conjoint
experimental study embedded in a longitudinal survey capable of assessing the
effectiveness of several hundred different messaging strategies, (b) a
“confirmatory phase” factorial experiment – embedded in a nationally
representative cross-sectional study – testing the effectiveness of the most
promising interventions identified in the pilot phase, and (c) an
“implementation phase” field experiment – conducted in partnership with market
research agencies – that administers our most effective treatments identified in
our “confirmatory phase” on search engine platforms. In the study’s field
experimental phase, the researchers evaluate the effect of vaccine promotion
messages on both verified vaccine uptake data and individual vaccine uptake
self-reports from state-level opinion surveys deployed across a randomly
selected set of treatment zip codes, within treated counties, and among a
representative sample of five U.S. states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.