* 2318371
* The 9th Midwest Workshop on Control and Game Theory, April 22-23, 2023
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Murti Salapaka, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2023
* USD 17,500.00

The exponential increase in the ability to compute, store and exchange massive
amount of data is fueling transformative changes in the human condition. This
has led to a highly connected world with information being accessible at remote
and diverse parts of the world. These strides in data processing, storage and
communication technologies are creating large networks of interdependencies
covering various devices as well as humans. The challenges of managing the
complex networks of interactions can only be addressed through interdisciplinary
approaches. A workshop is proposed that will bring together leading experts in
Control and Game Theory, their applications and associated areas to forge new
research thrusts to address the challenges posed by distributed, networked,
systems. The workshop will bring the involved researchers together to evolve a
synergistic and effective collaborative community in the Midwest region. The
workshop will create opportunities for students and researchers early in their
academic careers to present their results in poster sessions and lightning
talks, and to present opportunities for collaborations. The workshop will target
increased participation of women speakers and researchers. Synergies with
industry will be sought through enabling students to explore employment
opportunities as well as relevant internship positions.

The workshopâ€™s technical goals are at the intersection of game theory,
informational sciences, mathematics, and control theory and their applications.
Increasingly, privacy and security concerns are motivating distributed
architectures that are resilient to failures of a few subsystems and offer
better means to ensure information is not breached. On the methodologies front,
automated learning based on data gathered is offering solutions for managing
complex systems that are difficult to control/manage using more traditional
means of identification with a leaning toward a model-based approach based on
fundamental physics-based principles. In this workshop, leading researchers and
students will convene to address topical themes that will help delineate the
challenges precisely and to offer solution methodologies for the challenges
above. It will also serve to continue interactions of the growing research
community in the workshop topics in the Midwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.