* 2318145
* I-Corps: Developing and commercializing microbicidal surgical incision coating
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Daewon Park, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a product to improve surgical site infection prevention. The risk
of surgical site infection across all surgical procedures is estimated at over
2%, with higher-risk procedures estimated to be up 22%. Surgical site infections
(SSIs) are one of four healthcare-associated infection (HAI) metrics of
interest. Data on SSI occurrence is reported publicly, and informs hospital
rankings and performance. Individual hospitals carefully track SSIs related to
certain high-risk procedures and will implement projects to help reduce
infection rates. Hospitals also cover any medical costs associated with patient
treatment and re-admittance associated with resolving an SSI. Cost of
hospitalization increases by more than $20,000 per patient, and extends hospital
stays by an average of 9.7 days. Overall, there is a $3.3B additional cost to
the healthcare system annually to resolve SSIs. SSIs also represent a severe
complication for patients, leading to increased healthcare system utilization,
additional time for medical treatment, and associated increases in morbidity and
mortality.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a technology to prevent
bacterial surgical site infections (SSI). The proposed technology is a material
that consists of a long polymeric backbone inclusive of quaternized nitrogen.
This material is designed to be applied to the surface to be sterilized and
forms a uniform coating. The quaternary nitrogen is positively charged and
includes an acyl chain of optimized length. Bacteria are pulled to the material
via electrostatic interaction, and the bacterial cell membrane is disrupted by
the acyl chain. A bactericidal material may offer several advantages including
longer protection time, more durable coverage of the sterile area, and no small-
molecule compounds present that may be allergens or skin irritants. There have
been no significant technological advancements in surgical infection prevention
since the 1980s. The proposed technology potentially may significantly shift how
surgical site infections (SSI) and other bacterial infections in a healthcare
setting are prevented.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.