* 2318941
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Environmental and Ecological Controls on Carbon Export and Flux Attenuation near Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2027
* Amy Maas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rolf Sonnerup
* 03/31/2027
* USD 210,196.00

The research supported by this award will quantify transport of Carbon into, and
Carbon’s fate within, the mesopelagic zone (200 – 1000m depth) at the Bermuda
Atlantic Time Series Site (BATS). Chemical, biological, and physical
measurements at BATS will be combined with a mechanistic model designed to
identify key controls on the export of organic carbon into these intermediate
depths. The over-arching goal of the model-data synthesis is to identify and
understand controls on the C-flux pathways . In this project, a data-guided
model will be used to compare the relative importance of particle sinking,
mixing of dissolved organic carbon, and active transport by organisms. Broader
impacts include a video game, visits to/from a charter school which serves
students from communities underrepresented in Geosciences, supervision of
undergraduates via the Woods Hole Partnership Education Program, advising of one
graduate student, and of one postdoc. Both PIs are female early-career
scientists, one from a group underrepresented in Oceanography.

A mechanistic biogeochemical model capable of assimilating key metabolic and
physiological rates and stocks of zooplankton and heterotrophic bacteria in the
mesopelagic zone (200-1000 m) will be constructed, evaluated, and utilized with
the goal of quantifying and comparing fluxes of particle sinking, mixing of
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and active export, by diel vertical migration of
zooplankton, of respiratory CO2, particles and DOC. In addition, the fate of
organic carbon in the mesopelagic will be characterized by comparing bacterial
versus zooplankton respiration. Characterization of the relative magnitudes of
these fluxes will provide a view of environmental and ecological controls on
export pathways and on the ultimate fate of organic carbon exported from the
euphotic to the mesopelagic zone at this location.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.