* 2318999
* Collaborative Research: Oligohaline dispersion: transport processes at the estuary-tidal river transition
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Ralston, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,343.00

Transport processes controlling the salinity distribution in an estuary vary
dynamically with the river discharge, tides, and meteorological events. Most of
our understanding of the transport processes is based on studies of the central
reach of estuaries. The upper reach near the landward limit of the salt
intrusion, has distinct physical characteristics that make transport processes
different from the central reach. This project will combine in-situ and
shipboard observations, dye release studies, and realistic high-resolution
modeling to quantify tidal dispersion in the upper reach of the Delaware River
estuary. Analysis of the observations and modeling will be closely linked
through direct comparisons, and together they will be used to quantify
dispersion rates and identify the mechanisms. Bathymetric features like channel
constrictions and bends as well as anthropogenic modifications like piers and
dredged channels are expected to be particularly important to creating salinity
and velocity anomalies that lead to net landward transport. The Delaware is
representative of many estuaries around the world where water supplies drawn
from tidal rivers are increasingly threatened by landward shifts in the
oligohaline reach with sea level rise, changing precipitation, and dredging.
Specifically, drinking water intakes for the Philadelphia Water District (PWD)
are located just upstream of the study region, and the Delaware River Basin
Commission (DRBC) controls river flow conditions regulate the salt intrusion and
protect the water supply for millions. This project will build on established
relationships between the PIs and colleagues at both PWD and DRBC to identify
knowledge gaps and link study findings to management decisions. The PIs will
also contribute to a series of workshops bringing together scientists and water
resources managers to assess threats to water supplies by salt intrusion
globally. The project will support a graduate student at Rutgers who will be
involved in all aspects of the study, including observations, modeling, and
outreach.

The oligohaline reach (0.5-5 psu) is an important transition zone for many
ecological and biogeochemical processes, and yet few studies have examined the
physical mechanisms of transport. Several key characteristics distinguish the
oligohaline from the central estuary. In the asymptote to freshwater, the along-
estuary salinity gradient decreases and estuarine exchange flow weakens.
Stratification also decreases, reducing the steady salt flux and increasing
mixing, which reduces oscillatory shear dispersion. Channel narrowing affects
lateral exchange and trapping, particularly in urbanized estuaries with
shoreline modification. This project uses multiple, complementary approaches to
quantify transport processes in this region. Observations during low river
discharge will capture the spatial and temporal evolution of salinity with tidal
and meteorological forcing, and dye releases will directly quantify dispersion
at the scale of topographic features. Modeling will use a nested-grid approach
to represent the bathymetric features driving dispersion, along with a novel
analysis approach to isolate sources of non-local salt flux, as put forth by
Dronkers and van de Kreeke (1986). A process-based understanding of transport in
the oligohaline reach is critical to understanding how conditions there will
evolve with climate change and continued development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.