* 2318849
* EAGER Collaborative Proposal: Developing Engineering Faculty as Engineering Education Researchers Through Mentorship
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Karin Jensen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2024
* USD 18,400.00

This exploratory project investigates how engineering faculty learn to become
engineering education researchers through mentoring relationships via the NSF-
funded Research Initiation in Engineering Formation grants. Findings from this
research are used to develop training materials and inform a networking event
intended to pair engineering faculty interested in engineering education
research with potential mentors at different institutions. Training engineering
faculty in engineering education research expands the number of faculty adopting
research-based instructional practices in their courses, and results in improved
teaching, advising, programming, and policy-making by closing the research-to-
practice gap.

While previous mentorship models have focused on the content of engineering
education as a field, this work identifies effective strategies from successful
mentoring relationships that incorporate the social and cultural components of
becoming an engineering education researcher. By conducting qualitative
interviews of engineering faculty and engineering education researchers mentee-
mentor pairs, the study the study develops a conceptual model of the formation
of engineering education researchers' identity. This model clarifies how
researchers undergo a paradigm shift and potential career pivot to expand their
expertise in a related, but distinct, discipline of engineering education. This
novel approach provides important information to enhance existing training
materials and to develop additional training opportunities for engineering
faculty who are interested in conducting engineering education research.
Additionally, the model has implications for understanding job retraining and
approaches for engaging faculty in lifelong learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.