* 2318191
* Engaging Individual Education Plan Teams as Co-Designers of Middle Grades Computing Activities for Autistic Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Elissa Milto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,813.00

Persons with disabilities are underrepresented in STEM education and STEM
careers. Computational thinking and computer science are also becoming more
important for the workforce. This project will contribute resources and
knowledge about how to support autistic students in a robotics program focused
on computational thinking. The IDEA Act requires that the needs of autistic
students are supported by an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) that is
developed by a multidisciplinary IEP team including educators, administrators,
speech-language pathologists, paraprofessionals, and counselors. This project
will develop tools and resources to create computational thinking activities for
autistic students that are co-designed with IEP teams. The co-design process
will bring different types of expertise together to support autistic students'
learning about robotics. The transdisciplinary integration of robotics,
computational thinking, and lessons advancing IEP progress will help engage all
students in computational thinking. The project includes a partnership between
the Tufts University Center for Engineering Education and Outreach and the
Winter Hill Community Innovation School.

The overarching goal of the work is to understand how to design robotics and
computational thinking learning environments for autistic students. The research
questions examine the experiences of the IEP team members and the students in
the program. For the IEP team members, the questions explore how they can co-
design resources and tools to help students to meet their IEP goals while
practicing computational thinking. For students, the questions examine how
participation in integrated robotic design activities supports their development
of IEP-related skills and their engagement in computational thinking practices.
The project will use a design-based research methodology to iteratively develop
the learning activities. Data collection includes partner teacher interviews,
lesson observations, and artifacts of student work (e.g., photos and videos).
Data analysis documents the process of co-design and the use of the activities
with students. The findings of the research will contribute to knowledge about
how to include critical skills such as social-emotional learning, career skills,
and executive functioning with computational thinking and robotics.

This project is funded through the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.