* 2318413
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: The Intersection of Art and Science: Nurturing Diversity, Research, and Creative Expression to Increase STEM Identity and Retention
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Karen Haubensak, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 485,608.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to foster STEM identity
and increase retention, particularly of students who are underrepresented in the
Department of Biological Sciences at Northern Arizona University (NAU). Like
many institutions, NAU’s graduation and retention rates of students who are
underrepresented in the Biological Sciences are lower than those of students
from the dominant population. STEM identity, which encompasses a student’s sense
of belonging to STEM fields and their confidence in their own abilities, has
been shown to be an important aspect of retention and success in undergraduate
STEM majors, and students who are from marginalized populations tend to have
less robust STEM identities than students from the dominant population. There is
evidence that teaching for diversity and inclusion, research experience, and
artistic outlets can all contribute to the development of stronger STEM
identities. This project will combine these three approaches to test whether
participation in any or all of these pieces contribute to a stronger STEM
identity, retention, and graduation of undergraduate students in Biological
Sciences.

The specific aim of the project is to develop a more robust picture of how
students from marginalized populations develop their STEM identities, which will
allow NAU and other institutions to better foster those identities, potentially
leading to increased retention and graduation rates in STEM fields. The project
will foster STEM identity in students through three approaches: (1) a second-
year seminar (SYS) course focused on scientific discoveries and achievements by
women and people of color, critical discourse about systemic discrimination in
STEM, and actions students can take to empower their own learning; (2) a summer
research experience (SRE) focused on the early stages of research, including
place-based observations, developing research questions and hypotheses, and data
collection and interpretation; and (3) a creative arts course in which the
students reflect upon their research experiences through a creative medium.
Throughout the program, we will use surveys and interviews to measure students’
STEM identities, and after they complete the program, we will track their
progress through their degree completion. We hypothesize that all students will
see gains in their STEM identities, and that the students who participate in all
three phases of the program will have stronger STEM identities and will be more
likely to graduate with a STEM degree, than those who participate in only one or
two phases. These results will help HSIs understand how they can better support
the formation of students’ STEM identities as they progress through their STEM
majors. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.