* 2318710
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: OAC: Integrated and Extensible Platform for Rethinking the Security of AI-assisted UAV Paradigm
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ali Ahmadinia, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, are widely adopted to support a
spectrum of military, civilian, and commercial applications. With the rapid
development of AI techniques, the AI-assisted UAV paradigm becomes promising to
enhance various UAV operations in terms of intelligence, effectiveness, and
efficiency. At the same time, the integration of AI and UAVs also raises new
security and safety concerns. This project will investigate and develop a novel
integrated and extensible platform to promote security research that uncovers
vulnerabilities and designs countermeasures toward the AI-assisted UAV paradigm.
In addition, this project will not only build and promote research capacity and
resources for researchers at California State University San Marcos - a
minority-serving institution, but also provide research and education experience
to a large number of underrepresented minority students.

This project will first design and develop a research platform for the secure
integration of AI and UAVs. By leveraging the platform, this project will then
investigate two directions of the secure AI-assisted UAV paradigm, including (1)
security analysis of AI-enabled UAV anomaly detection and (2) robust AI-assisted
UAV operations in adversarial environments. The contributions of this project
will be threefold: (1) obtain an in-depth understanding of potential
vulnerabilities introduced by the integration of AI and UAV, (2) explore the
possibility of constructing effective attacks to exploit vulnerabilities and
provide the measurement of impacts of these explorations, and (3) improve the
security awareness and defense approaches of the prevalent research trend in the
integration of AI and UAVs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.