* 2318441
* Federated Optimization over Bandwidth-Limited Heterogeneous Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yuejie Chi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Harnessing the power of data collected from a vast amount of geographically
distributed and heterogeneous devices, in a manner without moving data around
and violating privacy, has great potential in advancing science and technology
and improving quality of life. Federated optimization lies at the heart of the
practice realizing this vision, encompassing problems such as training large-
scale machine learning or artificial intelligence models, delivering insightful
data analytics, as well as facilitating decision making under uncertainty, all
in distributed manners. There is a significant gap in the algorithmic foundation
of federated optimization when interfacing with bandwidth-limited heterogeneous
networks, such as internet-of-things, smart healthcare, and edge computing, to
meet the unique challenges of taming heterogeneity, privacy, and uncertainty
without sacrificing efficiency. This research project will also be tightly
integrated with education and workforce developments, through offering new
courses, mentoring students at all levels in research projects including
underrepresented minorities and women, and disseminating the research outcomes
at suitable conferences and workshops. The goal of the research program is to
develop a federated optimization framework to learning and decision making by
designing communication-efficient, computation-scalable, and privacy-preserving
algorithms that converge provably over highly heterogeneous data and computing
environments. Leveraging insights from machine learning, optimization theory,
signal processing, and differential privacy, the research program offers an
entirely new suite of theoretical and algorithmic tools to enable heterogeneity-
embracing and privacy-preserving learning and decision making in federated
environments under bandwidth constraints, unveiling fundamental trade-offs among
computation, communication, privacy, and utility. The research program will
gravitate around a semi-decentralized federated setting suitable to meet the
diverse needs of bandwidth-limited heterogeneous networks, and focus on
developing bandwidth-limited federated optimization algorithms that are
efficient, resilient, and private with rigorous performance guarantees for a
wide range of problems arising from machine learning, data analysis, and
sequential decision making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.