* 2318338
* Empowering Undergraduate Engineers Towards Inclusive Institutional Change Through Research and Organizing
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Stephen Secules, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project aims to empower students to
create inclusive institutional change at Florida International University’s
College of Engineering and Computing. Existing diversity support strategies tend
to provide students with services to improve their academic performance or
retention. While this support is important, it can limit students’ sense of
agency and feeling that they have a voice in their university, which is an
important element of inclusion. The significance of this project will come from
the implementation of a JEDI (Justice Equity Diversity and Inclusion) Ambassador
program which will focus on student empowerment in STEM at Florida International
University. Students will have a paid position to conduct either research,
leadership, or organizing projects, and they will receive regular mentorship,
and have well-scaffolded opportunities to give feedback to administrators,
faculty, and other community members on practical solutions for fostering a more
inclusive student-centered educational environment. The work will contribute to
knowledge about this novel approach to inclusive institutional change, help
better understand the opportunities and challenges associated with student
empowerment, and generate important insights about inclusion at HSIs. The
project’s broader impact will help create inclusive change at Florida
International University’s College of Engineering and Computing while also
disseminating the project insights widely for translation. The project
anticipates future expansions with partners at local and national 2-year and
4-year institutions.

The JEDI model will create a yearlong cohort-based student advocacy ambassador
program focused on education research and organizing by undergraduate
engineering students. Engineering education faculty and student support
personnel will partner to establish the program. The project goals aspire to (1)
create a program to train undergraduate engineering and computing students for
this role, (2) mentor students in Youth Participatory Action Research projects
to create insights and impacts towards inclusive change and (3) scaffold
students to share their project work with stakeholders. Students will select
from three specific model projects: (1) interview study with marginalized
student population, (2) gateway course study on inequities in success rates, and
(3) development of programming and initiatives in partnership with student
organizations. Although projects will differ in focus, the research team
anticipates outcomes related to insightful research products and impactful
programming towards inclusion. In addition to creating the novel program, the
research team will use a Design-Based Research Methodology to understand and
enable the evidence-based design of the program; and will use critical discourse
analysis to investigate participating students’ empowerment and sense of agency
and to understand the impact of the JEDI program on stakeholder views and
actions. Each student project will disseminate their work at a student project
showcase including local stakeholders. In addition, students will be encouraged
to create faculty and advisor development resources, publish at conferences, and
conduct presentations to student organizations which includes sharing them on
social media. Further, the principal investigators will publish on the program’s
structure, process, and success at national conferences and in journals. Via a
yearly reflection meeting, the project will share the process of JEDI with
additional stakeholders to prepare for translation and expansion. This project
is funded by the HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.