* 2318048
* Student Advancement and Internships in the Middle of a Computer Science Major
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Katherine St. John, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 199,948.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to pilot a program for second-year
students in the computer science (CS) major to address the problem of
persistence among Hispanic and Black students, and female students of all
ethnicities. Minority students who are underrepresented in their participation
in STEM careers enter STEM majors at similar rates to the rest of the population
but have much lower persistence to completing a degree. Increasing retention
among these students is crucial to diversifying the technical workforce. This
project will use supplementary instructional workshops to help students
integrate their academic knowledge and technical interviewing skills. Technical
interviewing is a key part of the screening process for achieving internships.
The project's investigators will create communication pipelines that support the
success of transfer students and develop institutional infrastructure to build
sustainability. The project will improve course retention, grades, and
internship achievement among underrepresented minority students. Successful
outcomes of this project should provide the rationale for expansion of the
program and more rigorous study of its impact.

This project's specific objectives will be to increase retention in second-year
computer science courses, increase fluency in programming and analytic
reasoning, and improve studentsâ€™ skills for technical interviewing. The project
team will offer two series of workshops, each aligned to course content and
different stages of the technical screening process for internships. Both
workshop series will feature active learning and regular peer- and self-
assessment in a non-evaluative and supportive environment to help students
develop awareness of their personal learning needs and self-regulated learning.
The evaluation plan will use quasi-experimental methods to generate high-quality
information for making inferences about program outcomes. Research on the
relationships between self-assessment, self-regulation, and achievement will add
to a growing body of literature within and beyond STEM fields. The project's
plan for communicating its activities and findings will include outreach to many
audiences including faculty in computer science and adjacent departments
throughout the City University of New York (CUNY) system, STEM-educational
researchers, tech industry recruiters, and students. The dissemination plan will
make use of regional seminars, conference presentations, peer-reviewed
publications, and a program website. This project is funded by the HSI Program,
which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity for institutional transformation at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.