* 2318707
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: III: Information Integration and Association Pattern Discovery in Precision Phenomics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Heng Wu, West Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,681.00

This project addresses a general class of machine learning problems involving
loosely-coupled heterogeneous domains. Such problems have significant
applications in various fields, from precision agriculture (plant genotype-to-
phenotype) to precision medicine (genotype-disease associations) to ecology
(soil moisture-climate interactions). Beyond the specific challenges in
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning, an equally important and
related challenge is diversifying the talent pool with the technical capability
to these problems. The project has three specific goals: (1) develop methods for
association pattern discovery in loosely-coupled domains; (2) perform
information integration, prototype development, and evaluation of the methods
developed; (3) capacity building in research and education in machine
learning/artificial intelligence and their applications in precision agriculture
at West Virginia State University (WVSU). The project includes two case studies.
The first is on the genotype-to-phenotype problem in precision agriculture,
specifically on fruit phenotypes in habanero pepper, an important fruit crop.
The second will apply proposed learning models to the problem of mapping fruit
phenotype to sensory perception, which is needed to predict taste and flavor in
fruit crops. The project also involves capacity building efforts to improve
research capability for faculty at WVSU, while providing research training for
students. Educational activities include curriculum development in data literacy
and research training in machine learning and data analytics for undergraduate
and graduate students. Further, the project will educate faculty, students, and
the public within the local region on innovations and trends in artificial
intelligence (AI) and its applications. The project includes deliberate plans to
involve minority students and faculty from WVSU, an HBCU (Historically Black
College and University) with collaborators at West Virginia University (WVU), an
R1 institution. By so doing, the project will improve data science literacy
across the entire university at WVSU and to develop more of the studentsâ€™ skills
in data-driven analysis.

Identifying reliable patterns of association between seemingly disparate domains
remains a core challenge at the foundation of data science and machine learning.
Doing this when the domains involved are each complex, heterogeneous, and have
enormous datasets is an even more arduous task. The project identifies a class
of problems involving loosely-coupled heterogeneous domains, and propose an
innovative framework for performing large-scale association discoveries across
such complex domains. Our framework is built on a strong theoretical foundation,
namely, the information bottleneck rooted in information theory. The project
makes new theoretical contributions to the foundation of data science and
machine learning by developing new methods for learning hidden associations
across two heterogeneous domains, and for integrating information across such
domains. The project also develops novel applications of the new learning
methods to two specific problems in precision agriculture and crop phenomics.
The proposed method of discovering association patterns under the identified
class of loosely-couple domains can easily be modified for any member of this
identified class. This class is quite general, and includes problems in various
fields of human endeavor, from agriculture to precision medicine to ecology.

This project is jointly funded by the CISE MSI Research Expansion Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.