* 2318377
* NNA Collaboratory: Collaborative Research: ACTION - Alaska Coastal Cooperative for Co-producing Transformative Ideas and Opportunities in the North
* GEO,RISE
* 11/15/2023,10/31/2027
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 10/31/2027
* USD 992,057.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the Nation,
the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships from
local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Education, Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient
Infrastructure.

Erosion, flooding, permafrost thaw, and the fastest climate-driven temperature
increases in the world are resulting in rapid and sometimes catastrophic shifts
in environmental conditions for Arctic coastal communities. The immediacy of the
problem was felt when Typhoon Merbok entered the Bering Sea in 2022,
intensifying existing coastal hazards, emergency response challenges, and
vulnerability to extreme events. Environmental changes outpace existing
governance mechanisms, including economic and relocation strategies, aimed at
disaster relief and protection. Solutions must suit cultural context, foster
Indigenous self-determination, and engage communities as equal partners and
knowledge holders. The ACTION (Alaska Coastal Cooperative for Co-producing
Transformative Ideas and Opportunities in the North) project is a commitment to
science-informed problem solving that is process-based and grounded in
actionable community-driven science and education. The project grows out of
existing partnerships among eight Indigenous Arctic coastal communities, which
are responding to increasing climate-driven coastal hazards and environmental
change, and academic researchers, who are studying these processes. The project
will develop and implement an innovative, strength-based community approach to
coastal resilience that advances convergence science and observing, identifies
community priorities, informs adaptation, integrates existing knowledge, and
improves communication across multiple stakeholder groups to effectively respond
to a rapidly changing Arctic.

ACTION will 1) analyze existing local and regional communication networks and
synthesize best practices, facilitate knowledge exchange, and innovate
networking; 2) advance place-based coastal hazard assessments, observing, and
forecasting; 3) design resilient, participatory, and adaptive governance
frameworks by advancing knowledge co-production and social-ecological-
technological modeling; and 4) facilitate workforce development and education
activities linking rural communities with universities to enhance technical
capacity within Tribal organizations. ACTION partnerships will achieve these
objectives by emphasizing the co-production of knowledge to design and reframe
coastal hazard problems. Solutions will be grounded in place-based Indigenous
knowledge, engineering and scientific methods and outcomes, and co-created
through collectively negotiated and co-learned experiences. It is anticipated
that co-generated understanding across community, social and natural science
knowledge will build trust and lead to more equitable and robust governance
outcomes, technical responses to current and emerging environmental dynamics.
The approach is iterative, and because it is co-produced, pushes the boundaries
of convergence science. The project envisions that combining place-based,
existing, and new biogeophysical knowledge will lead to new understanding and
modeling frameworks and science-informed solutions, increasing relevance for
communities and decision-makers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.