* 2318334
* SBIR Phase I:  Computational Fluid Dynamics Software for Quantum Computers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Madhava Syamlal, QUBITSOLVE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will be to utilize quantum computing to perform computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations, initially to solve problems in the aerospace
and automotive industries. The technology may also play a vital role in national
defense, as CFD is critical in designing aircraft, missiles, armored vehicles,
and naval systems. Subsequently, the product will find many other industrial
applications, including healthcare applications, such as simulating blood flow
in organs or airflow in the lungs. The product will help companies to reduce the
cost and time in developing superior technologies, such as safer aircraft that
consume less fuel, energy plants that emit less carbon dioxide (CO2), and
devices that deliver drugs more effectively. The project includes a partnership
between academic and industrial researchers. By involving student interns and
exposing them to the emerging field of quantum computing, this project aims to
contribute to science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) workforce
development. Ultimately, this project aims to create a new generation of CFD
technology based on quantum computing, advancing the CFD field, and aiding U.S.
leadership in quantum computing.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new CFD technology for quantum computers. CFD is a valuable tool for engineers
to predict fluid flow and design or troubleshoot various systems such as
airplanes, automobiles, and chemical reactors. However, some CFD simulations are
too expensive or impossible to run, even though such knowledge could save
hundreds of millions of dollars in certifying each new aircraft type. High
resolution slows CFD simulations because large amounts of data must be stored
in, read from, and written to the computer memory. This limitation can be
overcome by utilizing the vast quantum state spaces that have become available
with the introduction of quantum computers. An algorithm will be implemented in
a software prototype and the flow between fixed and moving plates will be
simulated on quantum computers. A performance metric estimated from the
simulation results will assess the potential for achieving a quantum advantage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.