* 2318685
* Neural recycling and plasticity in computer programming expertise
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marina Bedny, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 980,132.00

Computer programming skills are increasingly fundamental to many jobs across
diverse fields, including in healthcare, science, communication, finance, and
transport. Programming instruction is being incorporated into standard K-12 and
post-secondary educational curricula. Programming is a key part of STEM
education and a gateway to success in the STEM workforce. However, compared to
other skills, like math and reading, we know little about the cognitive and
neural underpinnings of programming. Many people become highly proficient coders
and program professionally, as well as for pleasure. But there are wide
individual differences in how quickly programming is learned and the ultimate
programming ability that is achieved. The causes of these differences are not
well understood. This proposal uses cutting edge neuroscience and cognitive
science approaches to study the neurocognitive systems that support programming
skills. We investigate which neural and cognitive systems support programming
and how the human brain changes itself to make learning to program possible.
This research is a first step to harnessing the adaptive capability of the human
brain to optimize the training of programming skills. The project aims to
directly engage students with disabilities and from minoritized groups to
provide an opportunity to participate in cutting edge research on this critical
topic.

In this proposal the researchers test hypotheses about which neural systems
support programming and how these systems change during learning. One hypothesis
is that learning programming ‘languages’ like Python engages parts of the brain
that evolved for processing natural languages, like English and Spanish. There
is also evidence that programming engages logical reasoning systems in
prefrontal and parietal cortices that support solving logic puzzles. This
proposal uses cutting edge neuroimaging techniques to study the different
contributions of these systems and their connectivity to programming skills.
First, the researchers aim to measure brain function, anatomy, and behavior in
the same students before and after they take their first programming class. This
approach tests what pre-existing mechanisms are repurposed by programming
education. Machine learning analyses can then be used to study detailed neural
patterns in the brains of people before and after they learn to program and the
locations and extent of changes quantified. Further, changes in the anatomical
communication pathways between language and logical reasoning systems can also
be quantified before and after learning. A second study compares brain function
and behavior across people with widely different programming expertise, from
people who are programming naïve to people who are programming experts and code
every day as part of their jobs. Together these approaches can yield a better
understanding of the neural and cognitive basis of programming and which
cognitive abilities (e.g., language, reasoning, math) and neural measures
predict programming ability. This research aims to serve as a foundation for
education research and the design of interventions to optimize programming
instruction. The study of programming also provides insight into mechanisms of
plasticity in higher-order cognition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.