* 2318894
* ATD: Diffusion and Transport on Graphs: Active Learning, Low-Dimensional Representations, and Anomaly Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James Murphy, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Data across scientific disciplines ranging from biology and chemistry to
computer vision and image processing to geography and economics are naturally
represented as graphs. For example, each node in a graph may represent an
observed data point, with edges connecting similar data points. Alternatively, a
single observed data point may be understood as a graph in and of itself (e.g.,
a geographic map or a molecule). In order to efficiently analyze such datasets,
computational methods that account for latent structure and scale efficiently to
graphs with large numbers of nodes are essential. Both rigorous mathematics and
tractable algorithms are required to make full use of rich and varied graph data
generated at terabyte scale by contemporary sensors and simulations. In this
context, the investigator will develop methods for representing, analyzing, and
learning functions on heterogeneous graphs. The project will develop open-source
software available to the public and provide training opportunities for graduate
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups.

The project will focus on two interconnected settings: (i) semisupervised
learning of functions on a graph via time-inhomogeneous diffusion processes that
infer statistical and geometric properties from a small number of function
queries; (ii) analysis of probability distributions across heterogeneous graphs
via notions of optimal transport. In the context of semisupervised learning, the
geometry of the graph will be combined with revealed label information via
active learning, yielding time-inhomogeneous Markov diffusion matrices that
succinctly characterize the data. When considering datasets consisting of
heterogeneous graphs with differing numbers of nodes and connectivity
properties, the framework of Gromov-Wasserstein distances will be leveraged for
change and anomaly detection. The emphasis of this work will be on core problems
in graph theory, high-dimensional probability and statistics, and machine
learning, but many of the conjectures of interest and proposed algorithms will
be directly motivated by real data science problems. Remotely sensed image
processing will feature as a particular broader impact of the core theoretical
and algorithmic investigations. A suite of semisupervised learning and graph
analysis tools that enjoy mathematical performance guarantees will be released
as open-source software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.