* 2318288
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Latinidad STEM Program
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Luis Rodolfo Garcia Carrillo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Latinidad: Transforming Latinx
College Experiences through Mentoring and Research Practices in STEM

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to establish a mentoring
program at New Mexico State University (NMSU), an HSI that serves a large
population of Mexican American students, also known as Latinx. The HSI
Implementation and Evaluation Project: Latinidad: Transforming Latinx College
Experiences through Mentoring and Research Practices in STEM program will be an
alliance between faculty, researchers, graduate, and undergraduate students. Our
goal is to build community â€“ a family-type relationship that provides reciprocal
growth, development, and success through academic, emotional, navigational, and
socio-cultural support. The program will support underrepresented undergraduate
STEM students in their academic journeys to expand their network and build
community with other students and faculty, especially where representation of
underrepresented minority students including Latinx in STEM programs such as
engineering, computer science, and mathematics is low. The program will provide
an opportunity for undergraduate students to be involved in research activities
guided by faculty and graduate students. The mentoring component and research
involvement will contribute to the increase in the number of underrepresented
students pursuing graduate degrees, thereby improving underrepresented faculty
representation. The project aims to explore the impact of mentoring experiences
on underrepresented undergraduate students in STEM who try to find role models,
career guidance, culturally relevant approaches, and academic/science identity.
The research questions will address: How does the participation of undergraduate
students in mentoring through the Latinidad STEM program help shape their short
and long-term goals concerning their educational and career paths? How does the
involvement of undergraduate students in research activities through the
Latinidad STEM program influence their perception as scientists? Through a mixed
methods approach, the leadership team will use surveys, interviews,
observations, ongoing participant feedback, and evaluation team reporting to
help respond to research questions and inform decisions. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.