* 2318872
* NSF-BSF: Quantum Magnetization Dynamics in Open Molecular Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Juan Peralta, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2026
* USD 244,955.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
with an aim to develop advanced computational tools and use them for the
description of dynamical behavior of magnetic molecules connected to external
electrodes and manipulated by magnetic fields. The new computational tool is
expected to be a powerful asset to the scientific community, as it will provide
a judicious balance between computational efficiency and physical accuracy in
simulating such systems. The PI and his team will use this computational tool to
propose novel molecular-based electronic and magnetic devices and to advance
understanding of operation principles of realistic nano-electronic and nano-
magnetic systems.

This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities. The
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students involved in this project will
benefit from gaining valuable skills that will make them highly qualified for
future employment in scientific and engineering fields. Their joint team efforts
via this binational collaboration, which will involve active hands-on research,
mutual on-site visits, participation and organization of scientific workshops,
and knowledge dissemination activities, will further strengthen the
international ties between Central Michigan University and Tel Aviv University.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research with an aim to
develop and implement a first principles computational methodology for
simulating electron and spin dynamics in open quantum systems. The methodology
will harness the efficiency of time-dependent density functional theory to
simulate the dynamics of many-electron systems from first principles, along with
the flexibility of the driven Liouville von Neumann approach to impose non-
equilibrium open boundary conditions. The PI and his team will investigate (i)
the effects of static electric and magnetic fields on the magnetization dynamics
of biased open quantum systems; (ii) the effects of dynamical external stimuli,
such as shaped electromagnetic pulses, on the transport properties of magnetic
nano-junctions; (iii) environmental effects on quantum coherence and
entanglement of magnetic molecular networks; and (iv) electron and spin
thermodynamic behavior of magnetic open quantum systems.

This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities. The
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students involved in this project will
benefit from gaining valuable skills that will make them highly qualified for
future employment in STEM fields. Their joint team efforts via this binational
collaboration, which will involve active hands-on research, mutual on-site
visits, participation and organization of scientific workshops, and knowledge
dissemination activities, will further strengthen the international ties between
Central Michigan University and Tel Aviv University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.