* 2318673
* Conference: CAS-Climate: Ambient Energy for Buildings (AEB) Workshop: Beyond Energy Efficiency
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Brian Robinson, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

A workshop will be held to discuss opportunities and strategies for promoting
ambient energy use in buildings. Experts in ambient energy systems and
materials, design, construction, marketing, finance, policy and social science
will be assembled to provide their perspectives. The result of the workshop is
to be a white paper outlining needs in research, education, and dissemination to
increase the use of ambient energy and, thereby, help address the looming
climate crisis. The workshop is to be held at DOE in Washington DC, tentatively
during July 2023.

Buildings account for nearly half of US carbon emissions. Further, emissions are
projected to increase due to the doubling of built floor area by 2060. All-
electric net-zero buildings will not solve the problem, because utilities are
expected to still burn fossil fuel for nearly half of all electricity by 2050.
Locally harvested ambient energy offers a transformational alternative. Nearly
ten times more solar energy is incident on buildings than they consume. A number
of historic and modern buildings have been heated and cooled entirely from
ambient sources. Solar energy can also heat water, dry clothes, cook food, and
provide lighting. 100% solar heating has been proven by numerous buildings over
many decades. For current technologies, more wide-spread adoption may require
innovations in education, training, marketing, and incentives. Thermal, economic
and environmental performance could be advanced by new technologies, including
heat pipe systems, polymeric solar collectors, phase change materials,
transparent insulation, vacuum-insulated panels, and electrochromic surfaces.
Adoption could be enhanced with improved design tools and incorporation into
building performance standards and codes. It is estimated that with local
ambient energy systems serving demands for which they are well-suited, the
remaining need for utility-level electricity could be smaller in 2050 than it is
today. The workshop will discuss opportunities and strategies for promoting
ambient energy use in buildings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.