* 2318576
* Enhanced conductance at interfaces by ballistic thermal injection
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Patrick Hopkins, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 404,398.00

One of the primary bottlenecks that is inhibiting the ideal operating efficiency
and performance in semiconductor-based electronics is the inability to
effectively mitigate temperature rises. The thermal resistances at heterogeneous
interfaces in these devices are the primary source of these deleterious
temperature rises. This work will develop novel experimental probes to study the
heat transfer processes across metal/semiconductor interfaces during conditions
of electron-phonon nonequilibrium that are typical near interfaces in high
frequency electronic devices. This work is motivated by the hypothesis that a
parallel pathway for heat conduction across interfaces is possible via electrons
that will exceed phononic interfacial conduction alone. The results of this work
will inform the design of both metal/doped semiconductor and metal/gate
oxide/doped semiconductor interfaces to enhance thermal conduction by maximizing
electron thermal conductance via ballistic thermal injection. This project will
encompass several outreach and educational initiatives, including a local
outreach event in the Charlottesville community annually designed for K-12, and
curriculum enhancement at both undergraduate and graduate levels.

The goal of this project is to leverage a recently-discovered heat transfer
mechanism – ballistic thermal injection – to manipulate conditions of electron-
phonon nonequilibrium to enhance heat dissipation across semiconductor-based
interfaces that traditionally exhibit high phonon thermal resistances. This
project will study the fundamental heat transfer mechanisms that drive the
electron-phonon interaction both across and near interfaces, which is enabled by
the development of a novel ultrafast pump-probe system with wavelength
tunability into the mid-infrared. The broader impacts of this project are in the
understanding of unique nanoscale heat transfer mechanisms that will lead to new
interface designs to reduce temperature that can, for example: delay the ominous
end to Moore’s Law for logic devices; push to higher storge densities in
thermally-driven phase change memory to keep pace with Kryder’s Law; achieve the
intrinsically possible power densities in WBG and UWBG power and RF devices
without being limited by thermal failures; and maximize efficiency of energy
conversion devices (e.g., photovoltaic, thermoelectric, thermionic) through
independent engineering of electrical and thermal carriers. The findings from
this work will result in new interfacial design concepts to embrace this novel
mechanism of interfacial heat transfer, which will ultimately lead to more
efficient technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.