* 2318841
* Minnesota Partnership to Foster Native American Participation in Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 247,686.00

A new research and education partnership in astronomy will be developed between
two University of Minnesota campuses, at Morris (UMM) and at the Twin Cities
(UMTC), aimed at building a robust pathway for American Indian and Alaskan
Native (AIAN) students to enter into the field of astrophysics. The program will
interweave the courses and research strengths at both UMM and UMTC campuses. A
series of frontier research projects in Multi-Messenger Astrophysics (MMA) will
be pursued by UMM AIAN students, mentored by both UMM and UMTC faculty. The
projects will be data-intensive, leveraging the UMTC astrophysics faculty’s
access to the most modern astrophysics datasets and computing resources as well
as UMM faculty’s expertise in data science. Both faculty and students will have
opportunities for professional development, including workshops and other
activities designed to develop communication skills, leadership and teamwork
skills, management skills, gender and racial awareness, ethics, and others. This
partnership will have a profound positive impact on the participation of the
AIAN minority in astrophysics, as well as providing a successful template that
could be replicated in other programs and disciplines.

The past decade has witnessed remarkable advances in astrophysics, including the
discovery of gravitational waves generated in mergers of binary systems of black
holes and/or neutron stars, the first observations of the black hole event
horizon, and the imaging of the supermassive black hole at the center of the
Milky Way. Students and faculty participating in the partnership will take part
in research in these areas, with specific projects proposed to use MMA to refine
the measurement of the expansion rate of the universe, to carry out rapid
searches for astronomical merger events using the UMTC TURBO instrument, to
measure correlations between gravitational waves and electromagnetic radiation,
and to better understand the space environment in our solar system. In
education, a new Astrophysics Area of Concentration at UMM will be established
at the beginning of the partnership. UMM and UMTC faculty will take part in the
UMM Gateway bridge program aimed at building college skills and reducing the
achievement gap for AIAN students before they begin freshmen year. The project
will also leverage the UMM access to the AIAN students and communities to pursue
a series of activities aimed at promoting astrophysics (and science, more
broadly) to the AIAN communities. Indigenous Astronomy workshops will be
organized each semester, targeting the UMM, UMTC and AIAN communities. Other
activities will include Astrophysics Days at UMM each semester, which will
involve public lectures by UMTC astrophysics faculty, technical workshops,
portable planetarium shows, and public observing nights at the UMM telescope.
This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.