* 2318404
* HNDS-R: Connectivity, Inclusiveness, and the Permeability of Basic Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Christian Fons-Rosen, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2026
* USD 268,338.00

Scientific innovation is a key determinant of economic growth. The United States
continues to compete to be a global leader in science and ensure the role of
government in promoting scientific progress. Two current policy debates revolve
around the connection between government investments and scientific innovation
and economic growth: (1) missed opportunities due to categorical disparities and
(2) the role of academic research in pushing the scientific frontier. By
evaluating Arpanet, this project gets at the heart of these policy debates
through the lens of connectivity. Arpanet, the precursor to the modern Internet,
was launched in 1969 and for the first time provided computer connectivity
(electronic mail and data sharing facilities) between scientists located in
different cities. This research contributes to the current debate on
inclusiveness in STEM by analyzing whether Arpanet helped to reduce the
categorical gap in scientific productivity by making collaborations across
different institutions more accessible. Second, the research informs the policy
discussion on the social value of academic research in shaping corporate R&D
thanks to the fact that Arpanet’s network spanned both universities and
corporations.

A first goal of the research is to investigate the structural reasons that
explain differences in activity in STEM fields. The researchers explore whether
exposure to Arpanet, by substantially expanding the pool of potential
collaborators outside of one’s own scientific institution, enhanced novelty and
productivity of female scientists compared to their male counterparts. The
second goal of the project is to inform the current debate on how university-
based socially valuable basic science shapes corporate innovation. The project
measures the degree of cross-pollination between basic science undertaken at
universities and applied science developed by corporate labs through Arpanet.
Specifically, the researchers estimate patent production from corporate labs and
citation rates from universities related to Arpanet. The user-friendly large-
scale datasets on ARPA contracts between 1958 and 1980 will include information
on both institutions and individuals and be matched with data from multiple
sources including the archives of the Computer History Museum in California, and
the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) in Maryland.

The project is co-funded by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communication,
and Impact program; the Human Networks and Data Science program; and Science and
Technology Studies program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.