* 2318049
* Phonon Polariton Based Infrared Optoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* John Prineas, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 411,378.00

The detection of long wavelength infrared light can help us monitor
environmental and engineering processes which are part of societal challenges
such as climate change. Specifically, long wavelength infrared cameras can be
used for non-contact imaging of temperature changes, as all materials near room
temperature naturally emit light within this wavelength range. These detectors
are also used for detecting changes in chemical composition in the atmosphere,
as many different chemicals we wish to detect possess a spectral signature in
this wavelength range. However, developing semiconductor detectors and cameras
that operate at long wavelengths has been a major technological challenge. The
long wavelength light is associated with low energy photons, which are detected
by narrow energy gap semiconductors. These semiconductors are susceptible to
noise and require cryogenic coolers to operate efficiently, making corresponding
photodetectors expensive and bulky. This research will develop detectors
integrated with optical antennas, which enhance the amount of light captured by
the detector. The antennas will use the natural vibrations of crystals, known as
surface phonon polaritons, which offer a means to trap light extremely
efficiently to the detector. The objective of the research is to realize
detectors with improved noise performance operating at higher temperatures,
which will increase the scalability of infrared technologies for many
applications. This program will also be to engage rural communities in Iowa with
semiconductor nanotechnologies through the Junior Science and Humanities
symposium, and at the University of Iowa museums.

The technical objective of this research is to demonstrate that the surface
phonon polaritons can be leveraged to realize highly efficient infrared
detectors at 8Î¼m wavelengths and longer. The unique properties of phonon
polariton based antennas could offer a significant advantage over more
conventional metallic antennas which have been used in infrared detectors
previously. Phonon polariton modes have significantly reduced material losses
and inherently produce strong light-matter interactions in the infrared for
enhancing detection. Further, as they leverage the properties of undoped
crystals, they also do not introduce diffused metal particles or dopants into
the detector absorber. The research consists of three key objectives (1)
Demonstrate resonant coupling of phonon polaritons in gallium arsenide to
intersubband transitions for infrared detection. This objective will design,
grow, and measure surface phonon polariton enhanced photodiodes designed to
resonantly enhance absorption and photodetection. (2) Utilize phonon polaritons
in epitaxial oxides for expansion to other infrared photodetection wavelengths.
This objective will couple surface phonon polariton modes supported by oxides
grown on a quantum well photodiode to leverage the phonon energies of these
materials. (3) Use mechanical transfer of Van-der-Waals materials onto
semiconductor active regions for phonon polariton enhancement. In this objective
we will address the challenges of 2D material integration to demonstrate
enhanced detection at a wide range of wavelengths. In addition to the immediate
impact in infrared detectors, the research proposed will also advance
understanding of phonon polaritons in the context of semiconductor materials and
develop new material combinations and structures in the process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.