* 2318384
* Collaborative Research: NNA Research: Electric Vehicles in the Arctic (EVITA) - Interactions with Cold Weather, Microgrids, People, and Policy
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Stephen Colt, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,450,001.00

The Arctic is seeing increased interest in Electric vehicles (EV) adoption. This
project will evaluate where, how, and for whom EVs can provide widespread
benefits, and identify what might need to change to realize these benefits for
Arctic communities. The performance of EVs in cold Arctic temperatures will be
studied as well as how EVs will affect isolated rural power systems. The
interdisciplinary project will also address how electric rates and public
policies will affect EV adoption and use. The project’s workforce development
focus will benefit the communities and address a common barrier to EV adoption:
local maintenance and repair. This project will bring together researchers,
tribal community partners, electric utilities, and vocational programs in
automotive technology in Kotzebue and Galena, Alaska, to answer the question of
how EVs can be integrated in remote Arctic communities to improve resilience,
provide cleaner, affordable mobility, and promote energy justice.

This project will conduct convergent engineering and social science research to
address the unknown impacts of extreme cold weather on EVs, the impact of EVs on
remote Arctic diesel microgrids, and the socio-economic conditions and policies
needed to facilitate widespread, equitable use of EVs in rural Alaska to support
the self-determination of underserved communities. Knowledge of the efficiency
and performance of commercially available EVs in extremely cold climates will be
advanced by collecting data, performing modeling and analysis, and publishing
results for EVs operating in temperatures below -30 degrees Celsius, including
off-road EVs. To learn how receptive rural Alaskans are to EVs, how EVs would
integrate with use patterns and needs, and potential barriers to adoption, this
project will apply the transportation acceptance model (TAM) to EV use in the
two study communities. Novel research will be conducted on the impacts of EV
charging on Arctic diesel microgrids and the impacts of policy choices on EV
uptake and charging behavior in diesel microgrid communities. This project also
brings together the University of Alaska Anchorage’s (UAA) Community and
Technical College Auto/Diesel Program, the Alaska Technical Center in Kotzebue,
and the Galena City School District’s Galena Interior Learning Academy to
develop and deliver culturally appropriate and community responsive workforce
development curricula tailored to EVs in rural Alaska.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.