* 2318287
* Creating Cognitively-demanding, Conceptually-focused Coding Opportunities in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Roger Hill, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 695,368.00

This project will develop units of instruction for third, fourth, and fifth
grade students that integrate coding into mathematics and science. Computer
coding is an essential part of knowledge for the current generation of students,
and it is important for it to be taught beginning at the elementary school
level. Many students who are interested in mathematics, science, and computers
in early grades lose interest as they progress through the grades. One way to
pique and keep their interest involves using educational robotics and coding.
However, in the increasingly packed curriculum, there is little time for coding
and robotics to be taught as separate subjects. Instead, it is useful to
integrate coding and educational robotics into other school subjects, such as
mathematics and science. This project builds on frameworks from mathematics and
science education to examine the level of cognitive demand of coding and
robotics tasks. Tasks will be written with specific attention to the needs and
interests of female and rural students, who are often underrepresented in STEM
fields. This project aims to produce exemplary tasks that elementary school
teachers can use as they integrate computer coding of educational robots into
their regular classroom learning activities. This project will also create a
framework that guides mentoring and professional development programs that
develop teachers' capacity to integrate computer coding with other STEM content
areas.

This project builds on a longstanding research-practice partnership to develop
units of instruction integrating coding into mathematics and science instruction
through use of argumentation as a pedagogical strategy combined with research
into their usefulness. The units will be co-designed by teachers from Jackson
County School System and researchers from the University of Georgia. This
project addresses the following research questions: (1) What are the
characteristics of well-designed tasks that integrate coding with mathematics or
coding with science?; (2)What resources and decision-making strategies do
experienced teachers employ when they design (and revise) conceptually-focused,
cognitively-demanding tasks that integrate coding with mathematics or integrate
coding with science (COMS tasks)?; (3)What are the characteristics of
instruction when teachers implement COMS tasks?; (4) What resources and support
do teachers need as they implement tasks such as COMS?; (5) What do students
learn from COMS tasks?; and, (6) How do students, especially girls and students
from rural areas, respond to COMS tasks with respect to interest in coding or
computer science, appreciation of integrated instruction, dispositions related
to STEM learning? Data sources include written materials, interviews classroom
recordings, pre/post assessments, and surveys. Analyses of data will include
quantitative and qualitative approaches including the use of a newly developed
framework for cognitive demand of coding tasks along with a revised framework
for supporting argumentation. This project is funded through the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.