* 2318633
* SHF: AF: Small: Algorithms and a Code Generator for Faster Stencil Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rezaul Chowdhury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 592,987.00

A wide range of application areas across industry and scientific computing use
stencil computations, including the simulation of mechanical systems, traffic
flows, meteorology, stochastic and fractional differential equations, chemistry,
modeling of erosion, fluid dynamics, quantitative finance, physical simulations,
and even cellular automata. A stencil defines the value of a grid cell in a
spatial grid at any time step t by combining the values of a fixed constant-
sized set of neighboring cells at recent time steps earlier than t. Cells near
the boundary of a bounded grid are defined by additional conditions, since they
lack the neighboring cells necessary for the stencil to use. A stencil
computation is one in which a grid filled with initial data is evolved by
repeatedly applying a stencil on the grid cells for a given number of time
steps. Stencil computations are easy to implement using nested loops and such
implementations perform work proportional to N*T for updating a grid of size N
for T time steps. Running on multiple processing cores of a multicore machine
and/or using cache-efficient techniques to reduce costly accesses to the slow
computer memory (random access memory, RAM) during the computation can result in
much smaller running times. But the work (a.k.a. computational complexity) which
represents the total resource usage (e.g., total energy consumed or the total
processing time across all processing cores) still remains proportional to N*T.
In contrast, building on the recent prior work by the investigator's research
group, this project will improve over many of these state-of-the-art stencil
algorithms not only by performing a significantly less amount of work W(N,T) for
any given N and T, but also guaranteeing a more desirable property -- the ratio
W(N,T)/(N*T) decreases with the increase of N*T. The resulting algorithms will
not only run faster than existing algorithms on modern multicore computers, they
will significantly reduce the overall resource (e.g., time, energy) usage of
many classes of stencil computations. A code generator that can automatically
produce highly efficient correct parallel implementations of the new algorithms
from simple specifications of stencil computations will be implemented. An
autotuner for further automatic performance optimization of those
implementations on any target multicore machine will also be built. Thus, this
project will bring high-performing resource-saving stencil computations to a
wider audience of scientists, students, and educators, without requiring them to
fully understand the complicated algorithms or invest time and effort necessary
to implement such algorithms on modern computing systems. Findings and research
problems from this project will be integrated in the advanced graduate courses.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the research project.

The investigator's research group has recently shown polynomial improvements in
computational complexity over state-of-the-art stencil algorithms for linear
stencils with arbitrary aperiodic boundary conditions using the Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT). Stencils that define grid values for the current time step as a
linear (resp. nonlinear) function of grid values from earlier time steps are
called linear (resp. nonlinear) stencils. Very recently the group has also shown
that linear stencil computations under the freespace boundary condition can be
well-approximated very efficiently in work and space through a novel use of
Gaussian approximations and n-body computations. Implementations of most of
these new algorithms run significantly faster than the fastest implementations
of existing algorithms. This project will build on those results and explore
other novel ideas to tackle the following algorithm design challenges: (1) fast
approximation algorithms for linear periodic/aperiodic stencil computations, (2)
faster exact algorithms for linear stencils under special boundary conditions
(e.g., Dirichlet, Neumann), (3) fast algorithms for classes of nonlinear
stencils, and (4) fast algorithms for heterogeneous stencil grids. Designing
algorithms with improved computational complexity will be the core challenge and
objective across all classes of stencils. Further improvements will come from
reducing the span and cache (or input/output, I/O) complexity. If there cannot
exist algorithms with improved bounds (work, span, or I/O) for certain classes,
the aim will be to prove asymptotically tight lower bounds. In many time-
sensitive simulations (e.g., weather forecasting) fast algorithms with
approximately correct results are more desirable than slow algorithms with exact
results. Hence, fast approximation algorithms will be designed for potential use
in such cases. A specialized software stack named "Saltar" will be built to
generate efficient multicore implementations of the algorithms to be designed in
this project. The Saltar domain-specific language (DSL) will allow users to
write down simple specifications of the stencil problems they would like to
solve, and the Saltar code generator will take the specification to generate
highly optimized multithreaded OpenCilk/OpenMP code. The Saltar autotuner will
be built for automatic offline tuning of the parallel recursive divide-and-
conquer implementations generated by the code generator. Saltar will be released
under an open-source license (BSD 3-clause or similar permissive licensing
allowing use by industry). A public web interface will be built to evaluate the
success of the project and the usability of Saltar, and a benchmark suite will
be created by collecting stencil problems from various sources including
potentially from the web users (with permission).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.