* 2318415
* Cross-Institutional Faculty Learning to Improve Critical Transitions in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Andrew Lawson, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to improve student success by
helping college STEM instructors examine the role of text in learning, select
useful texts, and assign meaningful tasks. This pilot will result in a shared
learning model between a community college and a regional public university. The
accessibility of unprecedented amounts of data necessitates making sense of that
data to turn it into information within and across sources. The current and
future STEM workforce will benefit from students who use strategies to solve
problems and make sense of texts in a variety of contexts and content areas.
Strategies from Reading Apprenticeship will focus attention on four dimensions
of learning--social, personal, cognitive, and knowledge building--to foster
persistence and improve scientific literacy. The project will explore learning
strategies faculty can easily implement to support student success. Through
building community around shared learning goals, the project will support
faculty and student learning.

A dual campus professional learning model based on the Reading Apprenticeship
framework for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) faculty
at two- and four-year HSI institutions will accelerate improvements in the
quality and effectiveness of STEM undergraduate education. In any content area,
there are discipline-specific tasks and texts that require specialized ways of
reading, thinking, and conveying information to others. This pilot and planning
proposal will equip faculty to transform student retention and progression not
only within the course, series, and curricular pathways within a department, but
also across institutions. When applied across regional Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs), the Reading Apprenticeship Framework is expected to
increase individual faculty teaching competencies, strengthen inter- and intra-
department alignment, and result in shared evidence-based teaching practices for
metacognitive strategies. Using mixed methods including analysis of direct
evidence of student learning and indirect evidence from surveys and focus
groups, the project will: 1) test, and continuously improve a model of cross-
institutional faculty learning; 2) examine the link between professional
learning and a learning community focused on evidence-based pedagogy in critical
transition STEM courses; and 3) evaluate the impact of professional learning on
faculty. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity for institutional transformation at
HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.