* 2318886
* Mechanisms of Willed Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* George Mangun, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 910,000.00

In our daily lives, it is vitally important to be aware and alert to the
challenges of our surroundings, in order take appropriate actions to survive and
thrive. Central to our success in doing so is the ability to attend to the most
salient and important events and objects, while also ignoring distracting
information that may divert us from our goals. Several factors contribute to
determining the relevance of events and objects, including our momentary goals
(e.g., navigating safely from home to the supermarket), our past experiences and
knowledge (e.g. we recall that the street near the store is undergoing
construction so we have to attend to the detour signs and change our normal
route), and encountering unexpected events (e.g. a child running after a ball in
the street). Our brain’s attention system helps us to manage the many external
challenges to achieving our key goals. But everyday, we also make many self-
willed decisions to focus our attention on a new object or event, arising from
our own internal choice, not driven by external signals, cues or events. To
fully understand attention, it is crucial to investigate the brain activity
corresponding to self-initiated, as well as externally driven attention.

This project uses non-invasive brain neuroimaging techniques to measure the
brain’s activity during the performance of challenging tasks. These techniques
allow us to measure the electrical activity of the brain as human volunteers pay
attention to visual stimuli and ignore distracting stimuli. Recordings of brain
activity with the EEG (electroencephalogram) yield superb temporal signals with
millisecond precision about the underlying brain processes that support
attention. Another brain imaging technique, known as functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), scans the brain and delivers superb spatial
resolution, revealing the underlying active brain networks and different brain
structures that enable successful attention and action. Utilizing these two
techniques, our research investigates how humans are able to direct their
attention when there are no external signals in the environment to attract or
direct our attention, by focusing on how human volition shapes what we attend
to. Using machine learning and artificial intelligence methods for data
analyses, preliminary results have revealed new electrical brain signals that
are predictive brain signatures of what a human volunteer pays attention to in
the immediate future. Identification of the brain mechanisms that initiate our
voluntary attention can lead to deeper understanding of how attention fails in
disease, with fatigue, or in highly demanding circumstances. This research also
has the potential to lead to the development of valuable interventions,
including the augmentation of our attention abilities to support human health
and improve human performance, whether it be navigating one’s automobile in
heavy traffic, or landing a spacecraft on the moon. In conjunction with
experimental studies, a key goal of this project is also to advance and
diversify STEM education by involving minority and underprivileged students in
the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.