* 2318559
* SCC-IRG Track 1 - Behavior-driven Building Safety and Emergency Management for Campus Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* David Pynadath, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Campus communities are vulnerable to a wide range of emergencies such as active
shooter incidents and fires, exposing students, teachers, and other members to
significant risks. This Smart and Connected Communities Integrative Research
Grant (SCC-IRG) project aims to explore new ways in which human behaviors are
systemically and robustly incorporated into building design and emergency
protocols. Specifically, the focus of the project is to understand how people in
different roles respond to building emergencies, both individually and
collectively, with empirical data collected from human-subject experiments,
behavioral theories, and insights from domain experts. Intelligent crowd
simulations are developed to represent the goals, preferences, and actions of
diverse groups of building occupants as well as their interactions with others
and the environment. The research team works synergistically with a range of
campus community stakeholders, including first responders, law enforcement and
emergency management personnel, and building designers to parameterize,
validate, and test the crowd simulation. Appropriate applications are identified
to mitigate safety and health risks. Underrepresented and underprivileged
students are recruited into the research activities. Furthermore, the team
explores the generalizability of the methodology, datasets, and research
findings to non-building emergencies and non-campus communities.

Current crowd simulations for examining building emergencies often rely on
oversimplified assumptions about human behaviors, lack cross-examination in
different emergency contexts, and overlook the varied needs of stakeholders. To
address these gaps, this project considers two common yet distinctive building
emergencies (i.e., active shooter incidents, and fires) that are common in
campus communities, and holistically models the impact of personal, social, and
environmental factors on human behaviors of building occupants. The team
implements agent-based models and develops multi-agent crowd simulations that
capture individual and collective behaviors based on a highly reconfigurable and
adaptable decision-theoretic framework. The team also engages campus
stakeholders as well as other community members in a series of workshops to co-
create likely and representative emergency scenarios. By allowing for exploring
the outcomes of such “what-if” scenarios, the crowd simulation software has the
potential to serve as a valuable tool for building designers, facility
operators, and emergency managers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.