* 2318460
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: Digitally Accountable Public Representation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Munger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2026
* USD 649,380.00

People who occupy leadership positions use the internet to communicate with
relevant segments of the public. They can inspire people to do good in their
communities, respond to emergencies, and give voice to many different groups.
But, just like regular users, public figures can face challenges in using the
internet in a way that is safe and helpful. Aspects of their online
communications, such as if they are easy to reach, honest, and quick to respond,
are all important for their roles. This project constructs a database that
contains information about how public elites respond on social media and other
public online forums. It includes those in leadership roles at the national and
state levels, and in the largest U.S. cities, and covers their posts on many
different websites. The database is important for researchers studying public
leadership and communication, public leaders who want to understand different
approaches to online communication, and journalists who follow public figures
online. The database also provides internet companies with information about
online communication with and by public elites.

This project assembles a database about public online discussions with prominent
public figures in the U.S. across a variety of online platforms. These data are
used to create measures of public figures' positions relevant to their prominent
roles in society. Transparency, responsiveness, and accessibility are some of
the aspects of online behavior that can be evaluated with these measures. The
investigators use an experimental approach to determine the relationship between
online communications and elites' responses. Some questions to be asked include:
Are public figures more likely to respond quickly to comments when elections are
close? When health and/or security threats emerge in the areas they represent,
how quickly do public figures work to inform their followers? This project
provides data, tools, and illustrative research to help many different types of
users understand how prominent public figures engage online. Software for data
analysis is also made available so others can analyze similar data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.