* 2318232
* Scaling MENTORS in CS (Matching Experienced and Novice Teachers for Ongoing Rigorous Support in Computer Science)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Aleata Hubbard, COMPUTER SCIENCE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,875.00

The Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), in collaboration with the CSTA
chapters in Wisconsin and New Jersey, the CSTA Black Affinity Group, and WestEd,
will implement Scaling MENTORS in CS (Matching Experienced and Novice Teachers
for Ongoing Rigorous Support in Computer Science), a CSforAll High School Strand
research-practice partnership to expand and iteratively improve a peer
mentorship program to provide ongoing, rigorous, and job-embedded support to
high school teachers who are new to teaching computer science (CS). While novice
teachers often require more intensive support to be effective, there are
relatively few opportunities for ongoing professional development and support in
CS. In this project, experienced CS teachers will guide novice CS teachers in
setting, monitoring progress toward, and meeting individualized growth goals to
strengthen their teaching practices and their ability to effectively serve
students traditionally underrepresented in CS, particularly African American and
Hispanic students and students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. This
project will reach 152 CS teachers in three years, impacting approximately
18,240 students.

Key project activities involve recruiting and matching teachers in mentoring
partnerships; training mentors and hosting regular community of practice
meetings; holding frequent mentoring meetings; and using research and evaluation
data to iteratively improve the program and outcomes. The Scaling MENTORS IN CS
partners expect the following project outcomes: (1) growth in CS teaching
knowledge and confidence in teaching CS, as measured by surveys, interviews,
mentor evaluations, and self-reflections; (2) growth in mentoring skills, as
measured by surveys, interviews, and focus groups; (3) increased use of
equitable and inclusive teaching practices, as measured by surveys, interviews,
and mentor evaluations; and (4) increased commitment to CS teaching, as measured
by surveys and interviews. This project scales the MENTORS in CS program to two
new communities, while learning how to adjust program structures to meet varying
sociocultural and educational contexts. With success, the team supported by this
grant intends to apply for a future Large-sized proposal to scale far more
broadly across CSTA’s growing network of 100+ regional chapters and affinity
groups, ultimately reaching thousands of teachers across the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.