* 2318850
* I-Corps: An Artificial Intelligence-Driven Wearable Sensor-Based System for Precision Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Jason Franz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to detect, treat, and monitor aberrant gait
biomechanics in patients with or at risk for lower extremity osteoarthritis. The
central technological innovation is to provide clinicians and their patients the
capability to detect atypical walking force profiles, deploy precision
biofeedback treatments to optimize joint health, and monitor gait to maintain
healthy movement profiles. Lower extremity osteoarthritis is the 11th leading
cause of global disability. In the US alone, individuals with OA spend nearly
$4.8 billion more in out-of-pocket healthcare costs than those without
osteoarthritis. There is no cure for osteoarthritis and rehabilitation options
for preventing disease onset and/or mitigating progression remain critically
limited. Proper gait biomechanics act to distribute forces across lower
extremity joint surfaces and thereby preserve joint function and tissue health.
Unfortunately, current clinical options are not capable of optimizing the lower
extremity joint forces critical to maintain healthy joint tissues and prevent
the development and slow the progression of osteoarthritis.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology with the ability
to detect and modify aberrant forces during walking and positively influence
joint mechanics and biology. Not detecting, treating, and monitoring aberrant
gait biomechanics in osteoarthritis patients leads to potentially devastating
health and financial consequences. To overcome these limitations, the team
developed a low-cost and clinically-feasible wearable sensor-based system that
leverages artificial intelligence and cloud computing to replace sophisticated
research-grade equipment to detect, treat, and monitor aberrant lower extremity
forces that lead to OA onset and progression. The system includes a user
interface capable of providing previously inaccessible data on lower extremity
forces to patients and their care providers, and deploying patient-centered
biofeedback treatments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.