* 2318188
* Mechanics of Bioinspired Soft Slender Actuators for Programmable Multimodal Deformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ellen Kuhl, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Soft slender actuators are active structures that have one dimension much larger
than the other dimensions, and are ubiquitous in nature. In general, these
structures have an infinite number of degrees of freedom, making them
challenging to manipulate with high precision. There is an urgent need for
efficient theoretical and computational tools to guide actuator design for high
precision actuation. Inspired by elephant-trunk motion, this project
fundamentallly investigates the mechanics of soft slender actuators under
programmable multimodal actuation. Dimensional reduction makes the proposed
model computationally efficient, inexpensive, and robust, especially with a view
towards large deformations and inverse analyses. Proposed activties can provide
opportunities to transform soft robotic research from a trial-and-error approach
to a science-based design strategy. The work can serve as a platform to promote
STEM education. After validation, the model will be implemented in an open-
source simulator that can be used by students, educators, and researchers in the
soft robotics community. The model will inform new design strategies for soft
robots in various high-precision applications including wearable devices,
flexible electronics, and surgical robotics.

This project integrates theoretical modeling, computational mechanics, material
multiphysics, experimental mechanics, and machine learning to address the
research problem. Mechanics models and experimental validation will be combined
to establish an open-source simulation platform to optimize the design of such
actuators. The underlying construct is the active filament theory that harnesses
the concept of dimensional reduction—from a fully three-dimensional structure to
an active Kirchhoff rod—by describing deformation exclusively through extension,
curvature, and torsion. It will create an open-source simulator that will be
shared with the broader, soft robotics, community . The research will first
establish a new mechanics theory to predict the trajectory of the end effector
of a soft slender actuator. It can then serve as the foundation to optimize the
trajectory of the end effector. The new theory will be validated via experiments
through the actuation of liquid crystal elastomer fibers. This project will
involve the simultaneous development of theory and experiments and will
iteratively revise both activities to ultimately establish an experimentally
validated theory and an optimal design model with high predicting accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.