* 2318705
* CAREER: Hierarchical Structure Integrity of Magnesium Alloys via Asynchronous Laser and Additive Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Michael Sealy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 244,838.00

Current commercially available metallic orthopedic implants are permanent and
often result in complications that require costly secondary removal or repair
surgeries. A potential solution is dissolvable, biodegradable magnesium alloy
implants that maintain sufficient mechanical integrity long enough for the
factored bone to heal, and then dissolve thus eliminating the need for any
further surgical intervention. The fundamental challenge in achieving this is to
slow down and control the dissolution rate of magnesium alloys within the body.
This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award seeks to address
this by applying laser peening, a local deformation process that induces
favorable compressive stresses and reduces corrosion rates, to the entire
material volume and not just its surface as conventionally undertaken. This will
be done by implementing laser peening at intermediate stages during additive
manufacturing, a process that builds parts in a layer by layer manner. If
successful this project will result in new manufacturing knowledge on printing
defined mechanical properties in metallic materials that is extendable beyond
magnesium alloys, and thus can provide the US manufacturing base with new
capabilities to strengthen their competitiveness. Educational components of the
award that will increase future workforce preparedness include: (1) encouraging
U.S. students' pursuit of advanced degrees in manufacturing, especially from
underrepresented groups in STEM; (2) promoting entrepreneurship training and
commercialization of fundamental additive manufacturing research through an
engineering startup competition and participation in the NSF I-Corps Program;
and (3) provide a pathway to employment for credentialed students through
academic apprenticeships in additive manufacturing. Further, leveraging this
project with the University's established outreach program with Navajo Technical
University will better position Dine students to pursue research-oriented
careers and start businesses that remain on tribal lands.

The technical goal of this project is isolate how strengthening mechanisms and
residual stress caused by interspersing peened layers (i.e., barrier layers)
inhibit dislocation motion and affect stress-corrosion behavior. The approach
applies laser peening on multiple layers during printing to form an aggregate
surface integrity throughout the entire build volume as opposed to a traditional
external surface modification. Central to this goal is to understand how thermal
inputs (from depositing the next layer of material), and mechanical inputs (from
later peening stages) affect the favorable compressive stress profile induced by
earlier peening steps. This will be achieved by 1) quantification of dislocation
densities resulting from work hardening, grain refinement, and residual
stresses, 2) verification of magnesium alloy strength and ductility resulting
from varied spatial treatment frequencies, and 3) verification of increased
stress-corrosion resistance. This will result in a new mathematical model to
predict how frequently to asynchronously print and peen a magnesium target to
mitigate thermal and mechanical cancellation of previous peening steps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.