* 2318442
* A Theory of Integration in Crossdisciplinary Research and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Michael O'Rourke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 287,195.00

Scientists, funders, and policy makers agree that there are challenges
confronting humanity that manifest globally, operate at multiple scales
simultaneously, and exhibit complexity that defies treatment from isolated
perspectives. To adequately respond to these complex, global challenges, which
include climate variability, food security, and sustainable energy, we must
understand their complexity. The kind of complexity exhibited by global
challenges involves, at least in part, the unified combination of different
elements that interact in complex ways. Understanding such a challenge is
typically taken to require research involving different types of expertise, each
focused on a different element of the challenge, that are combined, or
integrated, into a unified account. Integration of this sort – which can be
called cross-disciplinary integration (CDI) to highlight the centrality of
expertise from across the academic disciplines – is widely deployed by those who
investigate global challenges, but there is no systematic account of it, leaving
it under-theorized and poorly understood. This lack of theoretical development
undermines our understanding of global challenges and our ability to respond to
them.

This project focuses on developing a systematic, detailed account of CDI in
scientific discourse and evaluating it across a wide range of contexts in which
different disciplinary perspectives are combined, i.e., cross-disciplinary
contexts. This account will expand an input-process-output (IPO) model of CDI
first proposed and successfully piloted in previous work. After grounding the
model in a more general understanding of IPO approaches in psychology and
elsewhere, the project will proceed with a review of literatures in which CDI is
used to explain cross-disciplinary phenomena and in which it is theoretically
modeled. The IPO model will then be developed and calibrated in light of what is
learned in the literature reviews, yielding a version of the model that explains
CDI across a range of contexts and provides a theoretical foundation for
empirically rigorous identification, explanation, and evaluation of integrative
phenomena in cross-disciplinary research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.