* 2318216
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Infrastructure Interdependencies in the Arctic: Reframing the Urban-Rural Interface
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jane Lin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 985,831.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment and is within the Resilient Infrastructure NNA focus area.

Critical infrastructure services (CISs), such as water, transportation, energy,
communications, public health, and waste, are essential for the well-being and
economic livelihood of Alaskan communities. However, providing these services is
challenging due to the extreme and changing climate, as well as the remote
nature of hub communities and Alaska Native villages. We do not currently
understand how CISs are interconnected in Arctic communities; however, we do
know that these interconnections are sources of both resilience and
vulnerability. Furthermore, the different CIS organizations are complex, are
responsible for people’s lives and safety, and have characteristics that we must
understand further. This project explores how CISs support each other (e.g.,
increasing broadband in rural Alaska enables telehealth) and create challenges
(e.g., local supply chains often delay infrastructure repairs). Unlike most
rural communities in the contiguous US, in Alaska, the air service network is
denser than the roadway network. In turn, hub communities—i.e., communities that
can be reached by commercial airplanes or ports—are critical for surrounding,
remote villages as they provide services including delivery of fuel and
workforce support. This project considers the interface between urban hub
communities and neighboring rural Alaska Native villages, exploring how
challenges in hub towns cascade to villages. In collaboration with three hub
communities in Alaska, the interdisciplinary research team integrates systems
engineering, organizational sciences, civil engineering, and public health to
improve the provision of CISs, not only benefiting the towns themselves, but
also Alaska Native villages.

This project aims to architect infrastructure interdependencies within hub
communities and at the interfaces between urban hubs and rural Alaska Native
villages. In doing so, this work paves the way for future research by providing
new empirical data and creating a set of management approaches that can help
communities immediately improve their CISs. Leveraging semi-structured
interviews with CIS stakeholders, operational data collection, and collaborative
stakeholder workshops, Phase 1 of the project identifies and maps CIS
interdependencies in hub towns. This phase uses fuzzy cognitive mapping and
causal loop diagrams to bring together stakeholders’ expertise and perspectives.
Phase 2 analyzes how the provision of CISs in hub towns cascade to neighboring
villages by assessing end-users’ perceptions towards their infrastructure
services and how they use services in hub towns. End-users’ perspectives are
captured through semi-structured interviews and transportation demand surveys.
As CIS organizations in Arctic communities are complex, and are responsible for
people’s lives and safety, they are considered High Reliability Organizations
(HROs); thus, this project uses HRO Theory to provide a solid bridge between
social and technical issues. Phase 3 evaluates the organizations involved and
provides stakeholders with a concrete assessment of where they stand and how
they can become more robust organizations, and thus a more resilient system of
organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.