* 2318844
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards a Privacy-Preserving Framework for Research on Private, Encrypted Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mohammad Amin Rahimian, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 93,143.00

This research aims to explore the role of private, encrypted social networks
(ESNs) such as WhatsApp and iMessage in the spread of information and rumors. It
seeks to understand how manipulated information is exposed, believed, and shared
on ESNs compared to public social media platforms. By utilizing a privacy-
preserving data donation framework, the project will develop tools to uncover
and analyze the spread of manipulated information on encrypted platforms. The
resulting data and software will be shared while ensuring data privacy and
confidentiality. The research will shed light on how bad actors exploit
unmoderated spaces to disseminate disinformation, particularly targeting
vulnerable communities providing insights into the role of different social
networks (public, semi-public, private) in spreading and influencing beliefs.
This research will benefit various disciplines such as data science, journalism,
cybersecurity, demography, social psychology, behavioral science,
communications, and epidemiology. The tools developed can assist domain experts,
policymakers, journalists, security operators, and NGOs in supporting at-risk
populations and devising effective solutions. Ultimately, the research aims to
empower ESN users by providing information about their information consumption
and identifying instances of rumor and inauthentic information.

In this work, using data collected with a novel privacy-preserving data donation
framework, the project team studies the exposure, belief in and sharing of
information on encrypted social networks versus public social media platforms.
The technical contributions would enable: a large-scale, anonymized data
collection framework to identify viral content spreading on encrypted platforms
in a privacy-preserving manner; and statistical measures of the prevalence and
incidence of viral rumor and hearsay in the target population using the
collected data, while controlling the privacy risks to our users from publishing
statistics based on their donated data and survey responses. The project team is
developing novel algorithms that work on private and public data and come with
tunable parameters that allow the researchers to balance the loss in statistical
efficiency from randomization against a differential privacy budget. The
statistical measures proposed allow working with private ESN data and sharing
those answers without undue risk to the privacy of data donors. Simulation
studies with calibrated measures of spread allow the team to evaluate the large-
scale impact of various platform strategies across public and private social
networks, and experimental designs with human subjects are used to evaluate the
impact of potential interventions on individuals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.