* 2318770
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrometer to Probe Biomolecular Structure and Stability
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lisa Gentile, College of Saint Benedict
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 89,562.00

An award is made to the College of Saint Benedict and Saint John’s University
(CSBSJU) to purchase a circular dichroism (CD) spectrometer to probe the
structure and stability of biomolecules. There are several broader impacts of
this project. The first is the scientific training of CSBSJU undergraduates and
the enhancement of cutting-edge biomolecular characterization in the
undergraduate teaching laboratories, which will reach 226 undergraduates per
year. CD spectroscopy is an excellent addition to the interdisciplinary
foundational laboratory curriculum at CSBSJU that is instrument focused. In
addition, CD spectroscopy provides depth to upper-division research-based
laboratory experiences. This project will allow all chemistry and biochemistry
majors to gain hands on experience with CD spectroscopy which will aid in their
preparation for strong performance in graduate school and the scientific work
force. The CD spectrometer will not only strengthen the research infrastructure
of CSBSJU, but it will also be made available to those who are part of the
Midwest regional hub of the MDH CUREs Community (Malate Dehydrogenase Course
Undergraduate Research Experience, NSF #2119918), which the PI of this grant
leads. This will offer expanded opportunities for students from under resourced
institutions as that is the focus of the MDH CUREs Community. It is expected
that these latter partnerships will lead to enhanced collaborative curricular
and undergraduate research opportunities. In addition, as CSBSJU is an AEOP
(Army Educational Outreach Program) Apprenticeship site, high school students
from local schools and identifying with backgrounds historically underserved and
underrepresented in STEM will also have the opportunity to work with the CD
spectrometer, as the co-PI of this project directs the AEOP at CSBSJU and both
the PI and co-PI of this project have been, and will continue to be, research
mentors in the AEOP.

The intellectual merits of this project focus on advancing research in the
structure and stability of biomolecules from four undergraduate research groups.
These projects include understanding interactions of peptides and model proteins
on patterned surfaces formed through self-assembly; the structure and regulation
of ionotropic glutamate receptors by endogenous neurosteriods; protein
engineering of malate dehydrogenase to incorporate a fluorescence reporter of
conformational changes to use in metabolon studies; determining interactions of
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles with plasma proteins; understanding
the effects of oxidative modifications of proteins on protein-nanoparticle
interactions; and the structure of mutant low molecular weight protein tyrosine
phosphatases and their interactions with inhibitors. In each of these projects,
undergraduates will be using the CD spectrometer to generate new knowledge
related to the structure, stability, and function of particular proteins.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.