* 2318264
* Student-centered entrepreneurial design education to foster engineering attitudes, identities, and motivations
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jin Woo Lee, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 298,779.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to examine student
attitudes, identities, and motivations for engineering to develop contextualized
entrepreneurial design learning modules. Entrepreneurship education continues to
grow and become established as an educational platform for developing
entrepreneurially skilled and entrepreneurially minded graduates in engineering
and other STEM fields. In engineering, entrepreneurship education programs
(EEPs) provide experiential exposure to the entrepreneurial environment through
curricular and co-curricular offerings, that prepare future engineers to be
competitive in the modern-day innovation economy. Research evidence supports the
benefits of EEPs on a variety of student learning outcomes and attitudes about
entrepreneurship, and notes a secondary positive impact on student retention.
Despite this research-based evidence and a notable mention in national reports,
entrepreneurship education programs require significant resources, which limits
their broad implementation at resource-limited institutions. However, the
parallels between engineering design and entrepreneurship underscore the
possibility of integrating design and entrepreneurship education at institutions
with limited resources. The proposed project leverages entrepreneurship and
design education as an instructional platform at California State University,
Fullerton (CSUF) to improve attitudes and motivations for engineering among
undergraduate students.

The project follows an asset-based approach to create learning experiences that
value what students at an HSI bring to the educational environment through their
diverse backgrounds, and real-life experiences. Specifically, the work is guided
by the following specific aims: Aim 1: examine detailed factors that impact
students’ attitudes, identities, and motivations for engineering prior to
building contextualized entrepreneurial design learning modules; Aim 2: develop
and implement contextualized entrepreneurial design learning modules in
introductory engineering design courses; and Aim 3: perform formative and
summative assessments on the impacts of entrepreneurial design learning modules.
Using qualitative focus groups and quantitative student surveys as the data
source, the project will use a multi-methods approach to examine the research
questions. 1) What factors affect students’ attitudes, identities, and
motivations for engineering; and 2) in what ways and to what extent are
students’ attitudes, identities, and motivations toward engineering impacted by
their engagement in the entrepreneurial design learning modules? The work will
be rooted in pertinent literature on measures of student motivations,
engineering attitudes, engineering identities, and other evidence-based best
practices. The project is expected to provide an in-depth understanding of
student attitudes and motivations from minoritized backgrounds, and build
contextualized learning modules for these students. The project outcomes will be
delivered as workshops to support a diverse set of educators in their teaching.
The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity
at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge
on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.