* 2318411
* Collaborative Research: Fluid infiltration of the continental crust during Laramide flat-slab subduction: a unique tectonic setting
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Thomas Hoisch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 347,913.00

This study investigates an ancient example of a continental margin setting that
involves shallow-angle or flat-slab subduction, that is, where an oceanic plate
dives beneath a continental margin at a shallow angle. Rocks from an ancient
example, which was active 80 to 40 million years ago, are preserved in southern
California and Arizona. Comparison of the ancient example with mathematical
simulations of this setting shows that they do not accurately simulate important
aspects. For example, studies have shown that rocks at the top of the oceanic
plate got much hotter than predicted by the simulations, and that above the
oceanic plate, where cooling is predicted, some rocks melted. The investigators
will collect data from rocks in the ancient setting that were once located just
above the descending oceanic plate. This will lead to improved simulations and a
better understanding of similar modern tectonic settings, many of which pose
significant seismic risk to human populations. The project supports the
participation of undergraduates in the research at Northern Arizona University
and the University of Wisconsin at Madison. In addition, the project supports
four early career PhDs, three of whom are members of an underrepresented group.
This project will investigate the conditions, timing, and fluid sources of deep-
crustal fluid infiltration during Laramide flat-slab subduction in southeastern
California (Big Maria Mountains) and western Arizona (Cemetery Ridge). Cemetery
Ridge exposes metamorphosed oceanic sediments (Orocopia Schist) containing
blocks of mantle peridotite transported ~300 km inland by Laramide low-angle
subduction. The Big Maria Mountains exposes suprasubduction crustal rocks, also
inferred to have been located ~300 km inboard of the paleotrench. Both areas
display strong evidence for Laramide fluid-driven metamorphism and metasomatism.
Chemical changes associated with metasomatism will be evaluated by comparing the
bulk-rock chemistry of metasomatised rocks to unmetamorphosed protoliths. The
pressure-temperature conditions of metasomatism will be investigated using Raman
spectroscopy of carbonaceous material thermometry and quartz in garnet elastic
barometry and thermodynamic modeling. The timing of fluid infiltration will be
determined by laser ablation split stream mass spectrometry of titanite,
monazite, and zircon. The source of fluids will be evaluated using stable
isotopes of oxygen and boron. The new data will provide a basis for constraining
model parameters needed for mathematical simulation of the system for which
independent estimates are unavailable (frictional coefficient, subduction angle,
suprasubduction viscous heating, and critical temperature for thermal weakening
within the subduction channel). The project will achieve broader impacts through
efforts that target the development of a diverse workforce in the geosciences
and increasing public scientific literacy. Presentations of the research to the
public will be made by undergraduate participants at research symposia hosted at
both participating institutions. In addition, the project supports career
advancement for four early career PhDs, three of whom are members of an
underrepresented group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.