* 2318738
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of an Artificial Analysis (AI) Static Code Analysis Platform to Increase Software Developer Productivity
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Massimiliano Genta, METABOB INC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 246,700.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to increase the speed and accuracy of software development in
a wide range of industries and to make software developers more productive. The
technology will decrease the time spent reviewing code by shipping higher
quality and defect free code and will further ensure more secure software that
is less prone to outside attacks. This SBIR Phase I project develops a cloud-
based artificial intelligence (AI)-based static code analysis tool which can
find complex and severe problems early in the process of software development.
Unlike existing static analysis tools, the tool developed in this project will
learn automatically from bug fixes, explain the errors found, and make
recommendations on how to fix them. Results will help organizations and
developers in the finance, healthcare, and defense industries where code reuse
is important for security and compliance reasons. Overall, this project fits
well with an increasing trend of organizations integrating more AI into their
operations and a growing market for software development tools.

This SBIR Phase I project combines the latest advancements in machine learning
and natural language processing to develop a new, intelligent way to find and
explain software errors. The project focuses on developing a software
architecture that enables the analysis of a complete model hierarchy,
establishing a technique to effectively and quantitatively evaluate the validity
of explanations generated for flagged bugs, and integrating the disparate
components into a single analysis framework. The project will consist of three
models which will be developed and integrated as part of the overarching system
architecture: (1) a code fault detection model utilizing a graph attention
network, (2) a generative transformer to build explanations and suggestions, and
(3) a graph-to-graph transformer to generate mutations to the code architecture
to resolve the flagged bugs. The project will leverage recent advancements in
transformer-based and graph-based neural networks and therefore propel the
current state of research for efficient code review processes forward.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.