* 2318205
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: Cyberinfrastructure for Human Dynamics and Resilience Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kenan Li, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2026
* USD 170,942.00

Disaster resilience research is concerned with learning how people prepare for
and deal with damage to their communities because of events such as floods,
fires, pandemics, and other existential threats. The concepts of risk,
vulnerability and sustainability are very important because of the impact they
have on individualsâ€™ lives and well-being. However, advancing science-based
resilience research is hard because the data that are used to measure disaster
resilience come from many different sources and are difficult to merge. Even for
available data there are few tools available to analyze them, especially for
researchers who do not have extensive quantitative training. This project
overcomes these difficulties by developing a national cyberinfrastructure called
the Human Dynamics and Resilience infrastructure that contains large-scale data
and analytic tools to support and advance human dynamics and resilience
research. Knowledge gained from visualizing and analyzing the data using the
infrastructure can better inform policies to increase community resilience.

The project accomplishes four objectives. First, it develops four new databases
containing integrated data from around the nation, including social media and
cell-phone mobility data. Second, it constructs visualization and analytical
tools, such as maps, statistics, and dynamic modeling and simulations to
facilitate both exploratory and in-depth research. Third, it implements a
training and feedback module to help engage researchers, practitioners, and the
public to explore and conduct analyses that should lead to a better
understanding of resilience. Finally, it includes three case studies that
demonstrate how the infrastructure can lead to new knowledge about the
relationship between human mobility and resilience. The project is a
collaboration of multidisciplinary investigators from four universities,
including Louisiana State University, University of South Florida, Texas A&M
University, and Saint Louis University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.