* 2318346
* Enhancing Disciplinary Learning to Diversify Biology Degree Pathways and Career Pursuits in the Ecological and Evolutionary Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Stacy Ochoa Mikrut, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,997.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project aims to diversify Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology degree participation and career pursuits by integrating
evidence-based reforms at the course, departmental, and institutional levels.
This project is grounded in the perspective that disciplinary learning, which is
a central component to a student’s declared major, their advancement to upper-
division coursework, degree attainment and career participation, is a critical
yet understudied and underutilized equity indicator. As such, disciplinary
learning is a potentially foundational strategy for diversifying STEM
disciplines. Therefore, monitoring learning is essential for instructors,
departments, and institutions to empirically determine whether undergraduate
coursework is fostering disciplinary inclusion or exclusion. Using a novel
equity framework, this project integrates measures that capture critical facets
of learning and allow stakeholders to generate meaningful indicators of progress
towards equity goals. This new indicator has the potential to fill a gap in
evidence-based decision making at undergraduate institutions.

At the classroom scale, the project will begin reform efforts in gateway biology
courses by (i) expanding a recently published active-learning and misconception-
focused instructional approach through the interweaving of culturally-relevant
curricula, (ii) integrating an Undergraduate Teaching Assistant program into
biology classes to maximize student engagement and inclusion, and (iii)
developing Ecology and Evolution-related career modules to link disciplinary
concepts to real-world applications. Because gateway biology is only the
beginning of a student’s academic journey, this project extends to the
departmental scale by establishing a faculty learning community among faculty
who teach the next level of ecology and evolution courses. This step will lay
the groundwork to expand reforms into the next sequence of courses in the degree
pathway. At the institutional scale, the project strengthens nascent
partnerships with key institutional centers to develop and deploy modules about
ecology and evolution careers directly into the classroom early in a student’s
college experience. The approaches, materials, and results emerging from this
work will be published and shared broadly with other Hispanic and Minority
Serving Institutions. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.