* 2318053
* Collaborative Research: Topology and Infection Dynamics of Bacteriophage Viruses
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Pei Liu, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Bacteriophages (phages), viruses that infect bacteria, have been the focus of
attention in many scientific fields such as phage therapy, drug discovery, and
nanotechnology, because phages are active regulators of bacterial microbiomes.
Key steps in the phage growth process include: the packaging of the viral DNA
inside a preformed icosahedral volume (called capsid), the three-dimensional
arrangement of DNA inside the capsid and the delivery of the DNA molecule, from
the capsid into the bacterial cell, at the time of infection. These three steps
are all highly influenced by the biophysical properties of the DNA molecule in
spatial confinement. In this project, the investigators will combine experiments
and mathematical modeling to provide a thorough characterization of DNA
organization inside phage capsids and its delivery at the time of infection. The
research will bridge several mathematical disciplines including continuum
mechanics (theory and simulations) of liquid crystals, analysis of free boundary
problems, dynamics and knot theory. The interaction between the theoretical and
experimental work is fashioned following the ideas of the Materials Genome
Initiative, that fostered a systematic interconnected approach between
mathematical modeling and experimental work, aimed at improving efficiency in
the design and discovery of new materials. The project will train two graduate
students and one postdoctoral fellow.

In this project, the investigators will focus on a paradigm shift in the field
of DNA knotting due to spatial confinement by hypothesizing and rigorously
proving, according to the theory by Landau and de Gennes, that DNA knots
observed are line defects of a tensor field associated to liquid crystal
configurations. This paradigm shift is aimed at better capturing the three-
dimensional arrangement and topological properties of packaged DNA, the
formation of DNA knots, and their dependence on the environmental ions. In
parallel with the development of mathematical theory, new experimental work will
be pursued. In particular, the research will explore the generation of knotted
conformations exclusively driven by the liquid crystalline structure of confined
DNA. The investigators will also develop models to study genome release from
bacteriophages at the time of infection. The investigators will apply methods
previously developed in the study of polyelectrolyte gels combined with tools
from protein binding to develop a state-of-the-art approach to genome release.
The mathematical problem consists of a constraint system of partial differential
equations for an ionic two-phase media: water and DNA, that includes activation
by ratchet forces. By combining modeling, analysis, and computation, the
investigators aim at characterizing the time scales associated with the
different mechanisms of genome delivery and simulate a full infection process
for specific viruses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.