* 2318680
* Understanding stress focusing in thin solids in the absence of tensile loads
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Joseph Paulsen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 475,062.00

Nontechnical Abstract

Thin materials can be bent, twisted, and wrinkled into a multitude of forms. The
resulting shapes can be smooth like the undulating edge of a flower, or sharp
like the creases and points in a crumpled ball of foil. The goal of this
research is to understand when these features turn out to be smooth versus when
they are sharp. This deceptively simple question is surprisingly difficult to
answer, and it impacts a variety of technologies that rely on thin sheets. This
project consists of a suite of model experiments where polymer films are forced
into different geometries, forcing them to buckle. Because the project focuses
on physical behaviors that should be scale-free, our discoveries should be
applicable to material systems ranging from the very small to the very large,
from graphene films to food packaging to deployable satellites. The research is
coupled to a set of education and outreach projects that target a wide range of
audiences. The project will train two PhD students who will work with
undergraduates and high school students in the lab. The work will also engage
high school teachers from Central New York, who will conduct 6-week summer
research internships.

Technical Abstract

Despite the ubiquity of sheets in our everyday lives and their importance to a
range of technologies, we nevertheless lack a general predictive framework for
when a buckled sheet will have a smooth or sharp character. The overarching goal
of the project is to measure, quantify, and predict when an elastic film will
form sharp, singular features where stresses and strains spontaneously condense
to a small set. The project focuses on situations where there are no applied
tensile loads to organize the buckling patterns. One set of experiments will use
a stamping setup where a thin sheet is confined in the gap between two curved
walls. A second set of experiments will investigate the buckling of an ultrathin
spherical cap confined to a liquid bath. The buckling patterns range from smooth
concentric circular wrinkles, to smectic domains of parallel wrinkles separated
by sharp grain boundaries. The project will characterize the transitions between
these morphologies while pursuing a tantalizing link to a polygonalization
transition in indented shells. This research lies at the intersections of
physics, applied mathematics, and engineering, and the project engages with
general themes in condensed matter including singularities, symmetry breaking,
and order-disorder transitions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.