* 2318339
* Agricoding: Broadening Rural Participation in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Joseph Wiggins, KATABASIS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/28/2025
* USD 288,749.00

This project is supporting the early establishment of a Research Practice
Partnership (RPP) focused on the preK-8 strand of CSforAll which focuses on
designing, developing, and piloting instructional materials that integrate CS
(computer science) and CT (computational thinking) into preK-8 classrooms. The
RPP is comprised of (1) educational and agricultural technology companies, (2)
researchers in the fields of agriculture, computer science, and education, and
(3) district level leadership in the Granville and Jones County Public School
Systems in North Carolina. The RPP is named the "Rural North Carolina Computer
Science + Agriculture Alliance." The Alliance will develop a curriculum for 4th
thru 7th grade students that fuses CS and agriculture content together in a
game-based learning platform that prepares students to succeed in future careers
both in technology and agriculture.

The Rural North Carolina Computer Science + Agriculture Alliance brings together
a unique mix of research and practitioner interests to collaborate on novel
research projects while also creating several artifacts that aid in the
integration of computer science materials into rural classrooms. The initial
phase of the project formalizes a grounded theory of opportunities and pitfalls
for computer science materials in rural classrooms. This in turn informs the
design of Agricoding, a game-based learning platform that teaches 4th through
7th grade children about the basics of computer science, while tying the content
to the agricultural industry that is a core pillar of rural communities. The
system has students use block-based programming to control drones on a plot of
farmland that complete various objectives tailored around sustainable
agriculture practices aligned with earth science curriculum. The Alliance
facilitates co-design of a set of professional development materials that
enhance rural teachers' computer science education skills and facilitate the
adoption of the game-based learning platform. The Rural North Carolina Computer
Science + Agriculture Alliance is setting the stage for full development of a
novel curriculum that prepares all students to succeed in the technology infused
workplaces of the future and bring together diverse stakeholders in these
distant locales to collaborate on solutions that foster prosperous communities
across the region. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.