* 2318081
* EFRI BRAID: Resilient autonomous navigation inspired by the insect central complex and sensorimotor control motifs
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Yvette Fisher, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

The last decade has seen a substantial increase in the frequency of natural
disasters including wildfires, flooding, landslides, and outbreaks of
agricultural pests and diseases. Mitigating the severity of disasters will
require early warning and rapid responses, both of which could be aided by
reliable and inexpensive autonomous robots. Unfortunately, modern robots have
difficulty responding to new environments or damage to their bodies that might
occur during disaster response. In contrast, living systems are remarkably adept
at quickly adjusting their behavior to new situations thanks to redundancy and
flexibility within the sensory and muscle control systems. Scientific
discoveries in fruit flies have helped shed light on how these insects achieve
resiliency in flight. The primary goal of this project is to translate this
emerging knowledge from insect neuroscience to enable the development of more
resilient robotic systems. This project builds on existing engineering theory to
develop algorithms that are easy to understand and explain. As part of this
project, unique research experiences will be offered to middle, high school, and
undergraduate students to participate in both neuroscience and robotics
research. The multidisciplinary research team will develop open-source course
content to help bring neuroscience fluency to engineering students: translating
neuroscience principles to engineering for enhanced resilience.

A significant engineering challenge that has stymied the rollout of autonomous
robotics is their lack of resilience in novel scenarios. In contrast, organisms
are adept at quickly adjusting their behavior to new contexts thanks to
redundancy and flexibility within their sensorimotor systems. Incorporating
comparable functionality in engineered systems has proven challenging because we
lack the basic knowledge for how to fuse information streams from different
sensors and coordinate a large array of actuators without detailed models and
constant calibrationsâ€”this sophisticated operation is achieved effortlessly by
even simple animals. The overall goal of this proposal is to leverage recent
neurobiological discoveries to develop new designs for autonomous robots that
learn to adapt rapidly to changes in the environment or in their sensory and
motor systems. The proposed approach draws inspiration from two themes found in
insects: 1) the exploitation of a versatile, multisensory compass for
navigation, and 2) the flexible implementation of stereotyped sensorimotor
motifs in locomotion and other behaviors. The goals are to translate these
concepts into engineering principles at an abstracted control-theoretic level,
and then to implement and test them on functioning multirotor systems.

This project is jointly funded by the Emerging Frontiers in Research and
Innovation Program (BRAID) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.