* 2318612
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: IIS RI: Research Capacity Expansion via Development of AI Based Algorithms for Optimal Management of Electric Vehicle Transactions with Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Pressing challenges such as climate change and the necessity to reduce carbon
emissions require the transition from gasoline-powered vehicles to electric
vehicles. The Federal Government has set a goal to make half of all new vehicles
sold in the U.S. in 2030 zero-emissions vehicles. It is projected that there
will be 26.4 million electric vehicles on U.S. roads in 2030. One concern
regarding the adoption of electric vehicles is the ability of power systems to
accommodate their high-power demand. Another concern is the present high costs
of electric vehicles, which make them unaffordable for most of the country’s
population. This project contributes a solution to address both the concerns.
First, it contributes to developing advanced intelligent demand response
programs, which have been recognized as being effective in shaving peak demand
of power systems (including the demand by electric vehicles), thereby reducing
the system operation cost and cutting costs by deferring equipment upgrade and
investment. Such intelligent demand response programs can potentially save
billions of dollars annually. Second, the project develops intelligent
algorithms that enable transactions between electric vehicles and power grids,
where the vehicle owners can make considerable additional income by charging
during off-peak hours and selling (i.e., discharging) power back to the power
system during peak hours. The owners can earn thousands of dollars per year,
thereby offsetting the high costs of electric vehicles and making them more
affordable. Furthermore, the project supports underrepresented minorities and
female students participating in high-level and high-quality research. Its
overall outcomes increase sustainable development and economic competitiveness
of the United States.

The emphasis of this project is to advance artificial intelligence and machine
learning algorithms for optimal management of electric vehicles interactions
with the electric power grid. First, a hierarchical forecasting framework that
is scalable and distributable is developed using cellular computational
networks. Electric vehicle charging (Grid-to-Vehicle) and discharging (Vehicle-
to-Grid) potential transactions are forecasted. Secondly, a hierarchical
architecture-based methodology for scalable demand response with electric
vehicles is developed. The hierarchical demand response architecture overlaying
the physical hierarchy of the power system allows for decomposing the demand
response to tackle the electric vehicle’s problem and solve it in a distributed
manner. The computational time required to solve this optimization problem using
this framework is only dependent on the number of levels in the hierarchical
architecture. Thirdly, an adaptive critic design approach based on combined
concepts of approximate dynamic programming and reinforcement learning is
created for utilizing the capabilities of the electric vehicle battery systems
for optimal reactive power compensation and voltage control on the distribution
system. This is essential to maintain grid security and reliability as the
number of electric vehicles penetrating the electric power distribution system
rapidly grows to millions over the next few decades.

This project is jointly funded by the CISE MSI Research Expansion and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.