* 2318343
* Exploring Computation Integrated into Technology and Engineering II
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Megean Garvin, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,999,992.00

Hofstra University will lead a CSforAll High School Strand Researcher
Practitioner Partnership (RPP): Exploring Computation Integrated into Technology
and Engineering II (ExCITE II). Technology and Engineering (T&E) teachers have
generally not been prepared to teach computer Science (CS), yet they teach in
virtually every one of the nation’s school districts and serve all student
populations. ExCITE I conducted a teacher professional development (PD) pilot
program with teams of teachers in Maryland and Virginia. ExCITE II will offer a
full spectrum of PD workshops for T&E teachers and education leaders who serve
diverse students in nine states (Georgia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Louisiana, Missouri, North Dakota, New Jersey, and Minnesota) as a
prototype for enabling T&E teachers nationwide to provide pedagogically sound
advanced placement Computer Science Principles (AP CSP) instruction. The project
will target districts and schools with large or majority populations of Black
and Hispanic students. The project has been designed to use culturally relevant
pedagogy to meet the needs of underrepresented populations and form the backbone
of the Project’s PD efforts, that will lead to on the creation of an equitable
classroom environment.

The mission of ExCITE II is to implement a replicable model to expand CS
participation by providing pedagogically sound AP CSP instruction for T&E
students nationwide. Nine state RPPs will be created that will demonstrate the
potential for scalable implementation of a recruitment and PD program for T&E HS
teachers nationally. The Project will use hands-on computer-control engineering
design challenges to stimulate high student engagement when learning about
computer science principles. The RPP framework will enable practitioners to use
powerful analytical tools such as the Strategic CSforALL Resource &
Implementation Planning Tool (SCRIPT) process to recruit students from groups
underrepresented in CS and ensure common outcomes in each of the state RPPs. The
Project will coordinate its state-level efforts with that of the Expanding
Computer Education Pathways Alliance (ECEP). The Project will intentionally
focus on Black and Hispanic student populations as it aims to offer CS
instruction to thousands of students in geographically, economically,
ethnically, and racially diverse school districts. The use of an on-ramping
evolutionary process ensures that after two years of Project support, every
Project state would develop an in-state support and implementation team to
continue the recruitment and training of T&E teachers into the future. The
International Technology and Engineering Educators Association will sustain the
work of the Project after the conclusion of the NSF funding cycle with wait-
listed states, and 20 additional states recruited as a result of a National
Dissemination Workshop. The Project will research and evaluate the impact of the
PD, the Community of Practice ongoing support system, and the computer control
and robotic activities on CS teaching and learning, on the recruitment,
motivation, and retention of Black and Hispanic students, and on the engagement
and identities of T&E teachers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.