* 2318759
* Energy-Efficient Broadband Spectrum Sensing in Real Time Based on a Frequency-Domain Analog Signal Processor
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Wooram Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 460,000.00

RF spectrum is a scarce resource as the number of wireless electronic devices
continues to explode. To maximize the utilization of the limited spectrum
resource, temporal and spatial spectrum sharing is essential in next-generation
wireless networks. Real-time spectrum sensing is a crucial technology to enable
dynamic spectrum sharing. It identifies available spectrum instantaneously in
the crowded frequency spectrum and helps the networks to dynamically adapt
operating parameters such as transmit power, carrier frequency, and modulation
format. As more applications continue to occupy millimeter-wave (mm-wave)
spectrum, broadband spectrum sensing which covers both traditionally spectrum-
congested frequency bands and new mm-wave bands will be needed. However,
scanning a very broad spectrum bandwidth of more than 10 GHz is challenging due
to the power-hungry high-speed analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and digital
signal processing (DSP) circuitry. To address these challenges, this project
will explore a novel silicon-based frequency domain analog signal processor co-
designed with advanced signal processing algorithms. The research will be the
first theoretical and experimental study of applying frequency-dependent
constructive and destructive interference in an array of digitally programmable
on-chip elements to frequency-domain analog signal processing. The research
outcomes from this project can be adopted by industry to benefit a wide range of
semiconductor and wireless network companies. The success of the project will
also help maintain the continuous leadership of the United States in wireless
technologies and semiconductors by training students to be innovative engineers
in wireless industry.

The goal of this project is to develop a silicon-based frequency domain analog
signal processor co-designed with advanced signal processing algorithms to
realize an energy-efficient (< 100 mW power consumption), broadband (>25 GHz
bandwidth), and low-latency (<100 ns scan time) spectrum sensor. The design is
based on frequency-dependent constructive and destructive interference in an
array of on-chip programmable dispersion-engineered elements to create the
frequency response of a digitally tunable narrow-bandpass filter. The proposed
analog processor can sweep the center frequency of a "pencil-like" narrow
passband linearly over a wide frequency range for spectrum scanning while
maintaining a constant bandwidth. For the silicon implementation of the proposed
analog processor, several fundamental IC and architecture-level innovations will
be explored for the design of 1) a dispersion-engineered element that consists
of a multi-functional phase shifter and cascaded delay cells, 2) a scalable
path-sharing delayed signal combiner for chip area reduction, and 3) a digital
control circuitry co-designed with advanced signal processing algorithms to
orchestrate the dispersion-engineered elements for the optimal trade-off among
resolution bandwidth, scan range, latency, and energy efficiency. The proposed
signal processing algorithms leverage the recent advances in compressive sensing
and hierarchical group testing and utilize the programmability of the proposed
architecture to improve the sensing performance further. The successful
development of the proposed broadband, energy-efficient, low-latency spectrum
sensing will enable dynamic spectrum sharing to revolutionize the operation and
management of modern and future wireless networks by dramatically alleviating
the constantly increasing demands of the limited radio spectrum and maximizing
utilization of the spectrum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.