* 2318936
* Conference: International Symposium on Biomathematics and Ecology, Education and Research-BEER-XVI ASPIRE Advancing Sustainable Partnerships Integrating Research and Education
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Olcay Akman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 45,104.00

This award will support a conference on November 3-5, 2023 to be held in
Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond, Virginia
(https://about.illinoisstate.edu/beer/). The International Symposium on
Biomathematics and Ecology, Education and Research (BEER) provides an
opportunity for undergraduate students, graduate students, and early career
researchers, especially those from underrepresented groups, to advance their
research and mentoring portfolio in the area of mathematical and computational
modeling in health and data science. It will facilitate interactions and
discussions in an international and diverse environment for initiating
interdisciplinary collaboration covering health and data science and motivate
students who attend universities designated by NSF as minority institutions
and/or students from underrepresented groups who come from economically
disadvantaged families as well as from local community colleges to pursue
graduate studies and know more about funding opportunities. In addition, the
broader community of Biomathematics researchers and teachers will become aware
of the latest developments in the area through the proceedings.

BEER aims to provide an opportunity for undergraduate students, graduate
students, and early career researchers to advance their research and mentoring
portfolio in the area of mathematical and computational modeling in health and
data science. The panel discussions in BEER will include interdisciplinary
research, career and professional development for early career researchers and
faculty. The sessions and discussions are novel in promoting interactions and
collaborations of leading and young researchers including underrepresented
minorities with different areas of expertise at the interface of mathematics,
biology, modeling, health, and data science. This year's theme ASPIRE (Advancing
Sustainable Partnerships Integrating Research and Education) will celebrate
diversity in research by connecting members from underrepresented backgrounds,
ethnicity, and genders while obtaining advice and inspiration from leaders in
academia and industry at the interface of applied mathematics and public health
and data sciences fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.