* 2318733
* RAPID: The East Anatolian fault earthquake sequence of 6 February 2023: epicentral afterslip and anticipated future rupture propagation
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 61,135.00

The PI proposes to build four "extensometers", which are devices that precisely
measure offsets across faults exposed at the Earth's surface, and install them
along the East Anatolian Fault Zone (EAFZ) in Turkey. The EAFZ is responsible
for the M 7.8 and M 7.5 6 February 2023 earthquakes that recently devastated
much of southeastern Turkey. These instruments will measure in detail how slow-
motion offset along the fault is continuing, weeks to months after the
earthquakes - and in the event of future earthquakes, they will measure sudden
or gradual offsets across the fault. This information helps seismologists
understand how earthquakes occur, estimate the probability of future large
earthquakes in the region, and identify parts of the EAFZ that tend to move
gradually instead of generating large earthquakes. The PI will be doing this
work with Turkish scientists he knows well and has worked with in the past. He
and his collaborators will also make needed repairs to extensometers monitoring
other dangerous faults in Turkey, so they can send out their data in real time
via 5G cellular service.

The PI proposes to install four extensometers along segments of the East
Anatolian Fault that were loaded by the 6 February 2023 M 7.8 and M 7.5
earthquakes. The extensometer data, together with seismic and geodetic
observations, will provide information about ongoing postseismic creep and
stress transfer, which feeds into probabilistic estimates of seismic hazard.
These data will also constrain frictional properties of the EAFZ seismogenic
zone and provide coseismic and postseismic slip constraints for potential,
future EAFZ earthquakes. In addition to installing and telemetering new
extensometers, the PI will work with Turkish colleagues to upgrade the telemetry
on existing GAGE extensometers along the North Anatolian Fault Zone (NAFZ) to
5G. Bilham will work closely with Turkish scientists from Istanbul Technical
University and Kandilli Observatory, strengthening an existing collaboration and
sharing creepmeter design, installation, and interpretation knowledge with
students. The new creep data will be freely and publicly shared via the
UNAVCO/GAGE data archive.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.