* 2318110
* Understanding the Dynamics of Periodic Planar Microstructures Responding to Colliding Micro-Particles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jae-Hwang Lee, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 516,989.00

Speeding airborne particles often result in severe physical erosion damage in
aircraft, for example damage to jet engine turbine blades caused by ice or sand
particles. This award supports research to understand the mechanics of
collisions of high-speed particles on surfaces. Controlled collisions of rigid
microparticles against surfaces with precisely manufactured microstructures will
be conducted at various speeds and angles. Energy exchanges between the speeding
particles and the periodic structures will be observed with ultrafast imaging.
The mechanical interaction characteristics varying with the particle’s energy
and momentum will extend the scope of traditional spectroscopy to mechanics.
Modeling the ordered surface structures as planar metamaterials wil further
contribute to the fundamental understanding of these interactions. The impact of
this research has the potential to facilitate the development of novel
industrial processes, such as particle sorting and selection, in industrial and
public health sectors.

Implementing functional microscopic textures in soft materials has shown
exceptional adhesion and friction properties, as evidenced by the gripping
abilities of Gecko feet and bio-inspired synthetic adhesives. This ballistic
mechanical metamaterials study will extend the scope of tribological
characteristics of microstructured surfaces from the quasi-static (sub-second
regime) to the high-strain rate (sub-microsecond regime). Furthermore, the
researched mechanical metamaterials based on rationally designed planar
viscoelastic microstructures, which serve as a collection of viscoelastic
resonators, are expected to demonstrate various unexplored nonlinear dynamic
phenomena, such as energy absorption resonance, anti-Stokes scattering, and
geometrical quantization in the mechanical system. This research project will
advance the fundamental understanding of how mechanical metasurfaces dynamically
create interfacial responses originating from viscoelasticity, geometrical phase
transformation, and the evolution of microstructural adhesion. Ultimately, the
researched mechanical metamaterials capable of manipulating the scattering
cross-section of the incoming microparticles will extend the knowledge of the
transient rheological and tribological behaviors of deformable solid materials
and structures when subjected to ultrahigh-strain-rate mechanical stimuli.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.