* 2318211
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: The Role of Supermarkets as Key Agents in Systems of Sustainable Consumption and Production
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Vincenzina Caputo, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2026
* USD 192,343.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
develop and employ new transdisciplinary approaches to address sustainable
consumption and production as a socio-technical system to help inform decision-
making for sustainable, resilient, and just systems of consumption and
production. The project focuses on the highly influential role that supermarkets
play in the shift towards Systems of Sustainable Consumption and Production
(SSCP). These entities impose standards on their suppliers and shape consumer
behavior - for good or bad. Sustainability behavior of supermarket chains
differs considerably across sustainability dimensions, business models, and
countries. This project links the observed sustainability patterns to the
business rationale of firms to understand why corporate sustainability profiles
differ so strongly across retail corporations, to gain insight on corporate
decision-making and to help explain strategic differences. The project
investigates decision-making through an innovative analytical framework
integrating management science, value chain research, and socio-technical
systems research and several methodological approaches including business
management research, consumer behavioral economics, and environmental impact
analysis. This project will increase the knowledge of policymakers, civil
society organizations, private sector associations, and consumer groups about
what are the current actions, opportunities, and challenges for supermarket
chains to increase the sustainability of their food products and services. This
knowledge will help design better sustainability strategies, and products and
processes, directly benefitting consumers and the environment by tracking and
monitoring the environmental footprint of food retailers’ sourcing and marketing
actions in their societies and build long term partnerships to sustain change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.