* 2318308
* HSI Pilot Project:Diversificadas y Valientes (DIVAS) in Science, Technology,  Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Environments
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Nadjah Negrón, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase the self-
efficacy of Latina STEM Students. Even though Latinas account for 9% of the
United States population and have enormous contributions to the country's labor
force, studies exploring their potential in STEM-related fields are limited.
More importantly, interventions to tackle the gendered social norms that Latinas
encounter to follow STEM careers with a focus on measuring their self-efficacy
in mathematics, are basically non-existent. To fill this gap, the project
proposes to scale up a prior intervention study focused on female STEM
undergraduate Latinas that demonstrated that online mentoring and social
networking increased their self-efficacy, motivation, and intentions to persist.

To tackle the low numbers of Latinas in STEM the project aims to (1) study in-
depth the STEM female undergraduate students’ self-efficacy levels, focusing on
their math self-efficacy across the curriculum; (2) create a hybrid community
including mentoring sessions and mentor-mentee groups to connect professionals
and undergraduate students across STEM fields through a network of higher
education institutions; and (3) create an online toolbox/website for empowering
Latinas. The framework for this project design is Bandura’s (1986) social
cognitive theory (SCT) which demonstrates the reciprocal connection of human
cognition, behavior, and environment to determine the ability to self-beliefs
when performing tasks and activities. The project will determine key principles
that positively impact the perception of females' role, knowledge, and
experience in STEM academic and professional pathways with a strong emphasis on
what works to increase the mathematics competencies of our students. This will
be a living experiment where the DIVAS community will support each other and
strengthen the Latinas' participation in HSIs. The project will directly train
90 DIVAS and impact more than 1,000 Latinas via the utilization of the website/
toolbox. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.