* 2318663
* Collaborative Research:CISE-MSI:DP:CNS:Enabling On-Demand and Flexible Mobile Edge Computing with Integrated Aerial-Ground Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yuanxiong Guo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The rapid proliferation of mobile and Internet-of-Things devices has
revolutionized various aspects of our lives. However, the enormous amount of
data generated by these devices poses significant challenges for wireless-
communication infrastructure, which has limited radio spectrum. Additionally,
many emerging applications require low-latency and computation-intensive
processing, making the traditional cloud-centric approach inadequate. To address
these challenges, this project proposes an innovative solution called Aerial-
Ground Intelligent vehicular Edge (AGILE) which leverages the capabilities of
aerial and ground vehicles with artificial-intelligence-processing capabilities
to create an on-demand, flexible, and cost-effective mobile-edge-computing (MEC)
system. AGILE aims to provide ubiquitous and low-latency computing services to
support massive connected devices and enable efficient data processing.

The project focuses on designing the AGILE architecture, which integrates aerial
and ground vehicles into a 3D network for intelligent MEC service provisioning.
Firstly, the research investigates collaborative training schemes between
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and ground vehicles to enable fast and energy-
efficient federated learning for intelligent MEC services. Secondly, the project
addresses the coupling issue of UAV positioning, communication, and computing-
resource allocation, optimizing them for on-demand MEC service provisioning.
Finally, dynamic UAV movement and resource-reconfiguration schemes are developed
to adaptively meet user demand and to achieve flexible MEC service provisioning
in the presence of varying ground-vehicle resources. This project will
strengthen the existing research collaborations among the three participating
minority-serving institutions, while fostering research involvement of African
American/Black, Hispanic, and women undergraduate and/or graduate students with
the knowledge and skills to contribute to the fields of MEC and artificial
intelligence. Those underserved students will benefit from this project through
research projects, classroom teaching, and senior-design projects. Such
participation will help all institutes in improving underrepresented students'
retention rates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.