* 2318914
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: OPP-PRF: Exploration of How Historical Climate Events Impacted Pacific Cod (Gadus macrocephalus) Evolution and Fishery Use
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Sara Schaal, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2025
* USD 300,950.00

Pacific cod has historically been and continues to be an extremely important
economic resource for coastal communities. However, the worldâ€™s oceans are
experiencing rapid warming events that have already negatively impacted fish and
fisheries. This research explores how two historical climate events, the
Medieval Warming Event and the Little Ice Age, affected Pacific cod populations
in the past and influenced their evolution. The project employs
zooarchaeological specimens, historical records, and environmental data to track
the evolution of Pacific cod and how coastal communities used this resource
throughout the last two thousand years. This work will be done in collaboration
with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists, who may use
these findings to inform management decisions of modern-day Pacific cod. This
project will train an undergraduate student recruited through the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program in bioinformatics and
molecular laboratory techniques, bring evolution education to high school
students through an outreach activity using simulations, and conduct additional
outreach to K-12 students at Bering Sea Days on St. Paul Island, Alaska.
Findings from this research will be shared via conference presentations, peer-
reviewed articles, and presentations to Alaska communities.

The research investigate how two late Holocene climatic events affected Pacific
cod populations. The project tests the hypothesis that climatic events caused
significant population declines followed by population recovery, evidenced by
loss of genetic diversity, increased genomic adaptation, trophic-level shifts,
and variation in the seasonality of fishery use. The PI will use a
multidisciplinary approach, combining zooarchaeological, archaeogenomic, and
isotopic data from Pacific cod bones excavated from three archaeological sites
in the North Pacific. The work will 1) characterize population genomic changes
over time; 2) identify signatures of selection in response to historical
climatic events, and compare them to modern genomic adaptations; 3) identify
whether past climatic events caused trophic-level evolution; and 4) compare and
contrast the seasonality of fishery use through time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.