* 2318608
* Collaborative Research: The developmental course of cerebral lateralization for space and language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Barbara Landau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 07/31/2027
* USD 511,527.00

One of the fundamental organizing principles of the brain is hemispheric
specialization, where one side of the brain supports a specific behaviors
cognitive process more than the other. Previous studies of adults have shown
specialization for language processing in the left hemisphere and visual-spatial
abilities in the right hemisphere. However, young children seem to use both
sides of the brain more equally and do not show specific cognitive impairments
after one-sided brain damage. This project uses behavioral testing and non-
invasive functional brain imaging to investigate how behavior and the pattern of
brain activation for language and visual-spatial abilities changes between ages
5 and 11 as hemispheric specialization emerges. Each participating child
completes a range of language and visual-spatial tasks while their brain
activity is measured, providing insight into how individual differences in brain
activation relate to differences in language and spatial abilities, with
implications for individual learning styles and educational programming. A key
component of the project includes sharing the research with teachers of young
children through targeted presentations emphasizing the scientific bases for our
understanding of the brain’s two hemispheres and the exciting questions this
project raises for understanding children's learning. In sum, the project can
provide both the scientific and educational communities with a detailed
understanding of the timetable for the development of hemispheric lateralization
from early to middle-childhood, how changes during this developmental period
affect children’s growing cognition, and why the specialization across the
hemispheres in adults might be beneficial.

Theories about the causes of brain lateralization have focused on different
intrinsic processing biases between the hemispheres that make one hemisphere
more efficient for carrying out certain kinds of computations than the other. 
However, studies of the long-term outcomes of perinatal stroke suggest that in
earliest life, both hemispheres of the young brain are equipotential and equally
capable of developing language and/or spatial functions. Moreover, neuroimaging
data show that typically developing children have more bilateral brain
activation for tasks that evoke lateralized activation in adults. The research
in this project tests the hypothesis that the typical developmental trajectory
of lateralization begins with bilateral activation of both hemispheres in early
childhood, with lateralization increasing over time and reaching mature
lateralized patterns by late childhood. The researchers propose to use
behavioral testing and fMRI brain neuroimaging (functional magnetic resonance
imaging) to examine developmental trajectories in lateralization and
performance. The relative timing of reaching this mature pattern may provide
insights into the causes of this developmental pattern and help us better
understand cognition in children, with deep implications for childhood
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.