* 2318888
* Support for University of Arizona Dendrochronological Laboratory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 221,804.00

Dendrochronology is the most exact archaeological dating method available to
scholars interested in the recent past. Tree-rings are accurate at the annual,
and often seasonal, level of resolution and many other dating techniques are
calibrated using tree-rings. Such resolution is critical when assessing
hypotheses of human/environment interaction, settlement and subsistence change.
Societal benefits of this project include increasing our understanding of long-
term human adaptation to sociocultural and environmental variability and from
knowledge of past environmental variability, both of which are important for
developing environmental and social policy. The Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research
(LTRR) at the University of Arizona is the only institution active in all
aspects of dendrochronological research. A major component of the Laboratory's
research program is the analysis and dating of wood and charcoal from
prehistoric and historic archaeological contexts. Thus, the LTRR has become the
leading processor of archaeological tree-ring materials, the primary source of
tree-ring dates in multiple regions of the world, and the largest repository of
archaeological tree-ring samples in the world. The integration of the dating
program into the full range of dendrochronological research, teaching, and
outreach activities at the Laboratory creates a unique interdisciplinary context
that maximizes the scientific value of archaeological tree-ring samples and
chronologies, and provides a variety of publics to enjoy the research. The
project's primary contribution to archaeological research involves exact dating
and chronology building, topics crucial to understanding human behavior, human-
environment interactions, and processes of sociocultural stability, variation,
change, and evolution.

The project contributes to understanding past human activities that remain
outside written history, either because they occurred prior to written records
or were in areas that were not recorded. Using traditional and new innovative
techniques, the project offers stakeholders a long-erm perspective in which to
understand past human land and resource use. The findings of the project are
almost immediately integrated into University of Arizona classes including an
Undergraduate General Education Tier II science course for nonscience majors and
undergraduate/graduate courses in the School of Anthropology and departments of
Geosciences and Renewable Natural Resources. The project directly contributes to
PhD dissertation and MA thesis research by students at the University of
Arizona, Northern Arizona University, Washington State University, and other
colleges and universities. The project contributes directly to extensive
outreach activities that have reached more than 12000 people in the last year,
including K-12 programs, graduate and undergraduate students, visiting scholars
from around the world, and field training for government, private, and Native
American cultural resource management programs. The project engages in
cooperative research and training with many US and International universities,
government agencies, and private consulting firms. The LTRR tree-ring sample
collections and data archives are unparalleled, easily accessed resources for
archaeological, historical, and environmental research. Project results are
distributed to the public through lectures, newspapers, radio, television, and
the internet.. Project personnel have contributed directly to formulating policy
for documenting, sampling, and protecting cultural and natural resources by
federal, state, local, and tribal land management agencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.