* 2318469
* The Agencies of Animal Governance in Los Angeles: an historical and ethnographic inquiry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Kelty, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,988.00

The goal of this project is to understand the co-habitation of humans and
animals in American cities. Past approaches to urban animals have emphasized
getting rid of them (by killing or removing them), but over the last century
many American cities have developed new approaches to co-existing with animals.
How are these approaches changing how cities deal with animals? Do these
approaches change animal behavior? Do they change human behavior? Do they give
animals more rights than they used to have, impacting the way they are treated?
These questions are important because the more that is learned about animal
behavior---what animals can do, what they feel, how they live in cities---the
more opportunities government agencies (at all levels) have for living better
and more safely with non-human animals in cities.

To understand this, it is necessary to learn how the sciences of ecology and
animal behavior have changed understandings about urban animals, and how that
knowledge has been used by government agencies (for instance, animal control
agencies or departments of fish and wildlife). Knowledge about animal behavior
is produced not only in universities or labs, but also by government agencies,
non-profit organizations, Native American tribes, community groups, and private
firms that work with animals daily. Stakeholders from these different
organizations and agencies will work the team to understand the history as well
as the legal and social aspects of how animals are governed. Research includes
interviews, observations of animal governance, looking for historical documents,
exploring alternative approaches, and engaging communities that produce
knowledge about this topic. The results will be made accessible through
websites, articles, podcasts, documentaries, as well as scholarly publications
and books.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.