* 2318433
* I-Corps:  Multiplex diagnostic assay using interdigitated nano-sensing technology implemented point-of-care device
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Eon Soo Lee, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of the multiplex diagnostic assay and device using interdigitated
nano-sensing technology for point-of-care diagnostics. The proposed initial
application is the detection and monitoring of ovarian cancer. The early
diagnosis of ovarian cancer is difficult because the benign condition usually
obfuscates its symptoms. Currently, there are approximately 250,000 women living
with ovarian cancer in the U.S., and ovarian cancer has more than a 70% chance
to recur. The proposed technology may provide early detection of the ovarian
cancer and monitoring functions to improve the survival rate and save thousands
of women lives. In addition, the proposed diagnostic platform may be expanded to
detect many other diseases, such as other cancers, malaria, and Covid-19, at
commercial diagnostic laboratories. It is envisioned that the proposed
technology may be used in hospitals and medical centers as well as physician's
offices, pharmacies, and drug stores, which may make it more accessible and may
save more lives and improve the quality of patientsâ€™ lives and health care
environment.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a multiplex diagnostic assay
and device using interdigitated nano-sensing technology for point-of-care
diagnostics. The proposed technology is designed to separate biomolecules
spontaneously in the microchannel of the device and detect multiplex biomarkers
with high accuracy. The proposed technology initially will be used to test for
ovarian cancer, and works by quantifying the concentrations of various
biomarkers for ovarian cancer at an extremely low limit of detection (pico-
level). It is a standalone device that consists of two main components: a
microfluidic channel that is capable to separate the blood plasma spontaneously
in the capillary blood flow, and a biosensing platform integrated with
microchannels that contain multiple nano-biosensors used to detect various
antigens at pico-level concentrations in the separated plasma. The proposed
technology may be used to accurately test the concentration of targeted
biomarkers and assist in the early diagnosis of cancer as well evaluate the
efficacy of the treatment during the monitoring process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.