* 2318316
* Conference: Young Mathematicians Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Fowler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 64,838.00

The Young Mathematicians Conference (YMC) is an annual undergraduate research
conference hosted at the Ohio State University. Our diverse group of accepted
undergraduate students (typically numbered from 40–65) are selected from a
competitive application process and invited participants receive travel and
lodging support to attend the conference. In addition to the high quality
student presentations and poster sessions, the YMC also has plenary speakers
from a diverse group of award winning mathematicians. Speakers in the past
included recipients of the Fields Medal, the MacArthur and Sloan Fellowships,
Pólya and Nevanlinna Prizes, as well as of the Haimo, Chauvenet, and
Allendoerfer Awards for excellence in exposition and teaching. Participants also
have the opportunity (and are strongly encouraged) to attend the Graduate School
panel where they meet representatives from several math PhD programs. During the
panel, students can ask questions regarding graduate school application process,
particulars of the presenting program, and advice on putting together a
competitive graduate school applications. YMC is also a gathering spot for
selected faculty mentors and REU supervisors to exchange best
practices,funding/support opportunities, and discussion of contemporary
challenges in running REU programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.