* 2318383
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Socio-Ecological Systems Transformation in River basins of the sub-Arctic under climate change (SESTRA)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Vladimir Alexeev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* kate ruck
* 08/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems and natural systems in
the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data and Observation,
Education, Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.

Certain parts of the globe are experiencing rapid environmental change
coinciding with social and economic transformations. For example, given the
vital role of water systems in cold regions, climate and socioeconomic changes
have significantly impacted many riverine communities. Focusing on the Kuskokwim
and Selenge river basins, located in remote parts of sub-Arctic Alaska and
northern Eurasia (Mongolia), respectively, this project analyzes the changing
interactions between climate, water, and society, with the goal of assessing
their impact on people, ecosystems, and infrastructure. Researchers will also
collaborate with impacted local and Indigenous communities to develop current
and future adaptation options. Results from the project will be made available
online for easy public access and so that impacted communities can make
evidence-based decisions. Ultimately, this project will inform residents and
policy makers on how changes in climate and water cycles impact people living in
cold regions. Further, the results will recommend effective ways to deal with
the current and future climate changes in the Arctic and sub-Arctic. Project
results will help navigate the current and arising challenges of climate change
and lay the foundation for future international community-driven collaboration.

The Arctic and sub-Arctic are experiencing climate-induced environmental change
alongside substantial social, economic, and institutional changes. This project
seeks to analyze complex, dynamic linkages between different components of the
changing hydroclimatological and social systems to improve our understanding of
socio-ecological system (SES) interactions, assess their combined impact on
human well-being, and co-develop current and future community adaptation
options. This research, conducted by an interdisciplinary group, will advance
understanding of linked hydroclimatic and human processes in the Arctic by: a)
identifying and analyzing changes in hydroclimatological components of the
natural system that affect human activities and ecosystem services, b) analyzing
changes in riverine socioeconomic systems; c) conducting advanced community-
engaged modeling based on the ecosystem services framework to understand
interactions within the local and regional SES; d) exploring complex
interactions and feedbacks within the SES; and e) providing scenarios for future
SES changes and their impacts on ecosystem services and community adaptation
options. The methodologies will combine transdisciplinary integration,
engagement of Indigenous knowledge, multiscale analysis, and modeling, focusing
on community- and stakeholder-engaged research, knowledge sharing, and
implementing practical approaches to inter- and transdisciplinary challenges.
This research will provide a set of plausible trajectories of human responses to
climatic, social, economic, and political stressors developed for Alaskan and
Mongolian regions and communities with implications for the broader Arctic and
sub-Arctic. The project will involve Indigenous artists and develop an extensive
training program for students and early career scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.