* 2318641
* CISE-MSI: DP: CNS: AI-powered Diagnosis Augmented by Self-sustaining Sensing System for Intelligent Wastewater Infrastructure Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hua Zhang, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,826.00

Wastewater infrastructures are critical for modern cities, but aging sanitary
sewer systems often suffer from defects like cracked pipes and damaged manholes,
leading to the infiltration and inflow problem. This problem results in
excessive surface runoff and groundwater flowing into the sewer system, causing
sewer overflows and posing risks to public health and the environment. Current
management approaches require significant time and expensive resources. This
research project addresses this challenge by combining Graph Neural Networks and
in-situ water pressure monitoring. The Graph Neural Networks surrogate model
represents the urban wastewater system as a graph, allowing for efficient
modeling of its temporal, spatial, and topological properties. Further by
integrating a physical sensing system, this research enables accurate
infiltration and inflow anomaly detection and predictions of cascading impacts
with the Graph Neural Networks backbone allowing proactive and corrective
actions to be taken in time.

This research revolutionizes the management of urban wastewater systems by
leveraging the interdisciplinary knowledge and expertise from hydrological &
hydraulic sciences, embedded systems, and artificial intelligence. The technical
outcomes of this research can significantly enhance public safety and health in
coastal regions by improving the resilience of urban wastewater systems to
climate change effects and facilitating quick recovery after natural hazards. By
exploring the development of a fully sensed digital twin of the targeted
wastewater system in south Texas, the project advances towards increased
understanding and management capabilities of wastewater systems. The research
results are closely integrated into the education and training of students.
Besides, this project promotes the participation of underrepresented groups and
K-12 students to pursue STEM studies. All designs are made publicly available to
ensure equitable access to Artificial Intelligence-powered decision-making tools
for broad implications and future research advances.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.