* 2318290
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Increasing user autonomy and advertiser and platform responsibility in online advertising
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Alan Mislove, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 12/31/2026
* USD 362,324.00

Popular social media services are primarily funded by powerful advertising
systems built using data collected from users. While social media's advertising
platforms are becoming more feature-rich and powerful, the underlying services
themselves are increasingly embedded—--and influential--—in everyone's daily
lives. Unfortunately, these advertising systems are opaque and difficult to
study. Using complex techniques to overcome these systems' resistance to study,
scientists and journalists have begun documenting the harms of the advertising
experiences created by online services' advertising systems. This project
introduces novel techniques to study users' advertising experiences and the role
of advertisers and advertising platforms in creating those experiences. The
project will contribute to improving the advertising ecosystem by strengthening
the autonomy of end users, as well as ensuring accountability of advertisers and
advertising platforms.

The project consists of three thrusts, each focusing on a different stakeholder:
(1) users, (2) advertisers, and (3) online services. First, the project team is
conducting a series of replicable controlled experiments to evaluate the extent
to which the controls provided by platforms meaningfully empower users to change
the ads they receive and develop improved user controls. Second, the team is
focusing on online ad libraries, which provide targeting and delivery
information for certain categories of ads. They are collecting this data at
scale for all available U.S. advertisers, to develop replicable approaches for
measuring (a) how advertisers are using (and abusing) targeting features, (b)
the extent to which platform algorithms are steering ads to biased groups, and
(c) the consequences of observed advertiser behavior for legislative and
regulatory proposals. Third, the project team is focusing on the online service
itself; the team is introducing novel techniques that creatively use advertiser
tools to study the impact of potential discrimination on intersectional groups.
Overall, this project will help (a) promote change in online services'
advertising systems toward mitigating negative individual and societal effects,
(b) provide replicable approaches to monitoring autonomy and bias concerns in
online advertising, and (c) raise awareness among regulators and lawmakers about
the extensive and opaque advertising ecosystem that powers these services.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.