* 2318139
* EFRI BRAID: Fractional-order neuronal dynamics for next generation memcapacitive computing networks
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Yuriy Pershin, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

This Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation (EFRI) project will explore
the use of a special type of capacitor to both describe the behavior of
biological neural circuits and to design brain-inspired computers. These
devices, which are a type of memelement, or electrical component with memory,
are called memcapacitors. Classical models of neural dynamics can be formulated
using resistors with memory – called memristors – to capture the effects of ion
channels in the axon membrane. This project builds on work showing that
memcapacitors may be used for neural models instead. These models may be used to
design hardware circuits that emulate the learning and computing capability of
biological neurons. In this context, called neuromorphic computing,
memcapacitors promise significant energy savings over memristors. The research
team will implement a plan to maximize the opportunity to recruit Under
Represented Minorities to participate in the activities of the project. This
project will stablish a collaboration with a Biomedical Ethicist to promote the
study of Ethical and Social Implications of adoption of new technologies through
a series of workshops and project based activities.

Increasing evidence suggests that nervous and artificial intelligence systems
benefit from having elements that are history-dependent, also referred to as
intrinsic memory. In single neurons, history-dependence in the timing or firing
rate of action potentials (spikes) is the result of the continuous interactions
of different membrane conductances distributed over a complex morphology.
Spiking history-dependence underlies important computational functions such as
efficient adaptive coding of both infrequent and persistent natural stimuli and
contrast adaptation over multiple scales of input levels. Theoretically,
fractional-order dynamics captures the complexity of the intrinsic neuron
excitability. A fractional order leaky integrate-and-fire model reproduces a
wide range of non-linear spiking behaviors by assuming that the capacitance of
the membrane is itself history-dependent. Electrical elements with memory, or
memelements, are physical components whose intrinsic characteristics change with
previous activity. The most studied memelement is the memristor, a passive
component that consumes static energy. In contrast, memcapacitors consume far
less static energy, and thus have the potential for building orders of magnitude
more efficient neuromorphic systems. The main objective of this project is to
use a fractional order differential formalism to model history-dependence in
neurons and apply it to model, design, and fabricate memelements, particularly
memcapacitors. Using a highly interdisciplinary approach, the team will apply
this theory to characterize the computational and physical properties of
realized memcapacitors. The project will then evaluate the computational
properties of memcapacitive and fractional order spiking neurons and their
networks. The team will use energy and performance metrics across the different
devices to compare with related work. This project brings together a team of
researchers at the intersections of computer science, neuroscience, engineering,
and physics to address these questions and challenges. Our following tasks
integrate theory, modeling, and physical implementations of neuronal fractional
order and memcapacitive systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.