* 2318636
* Collaborative Research:CISE-MSI:RCBP-RF:CNS:Orchestration of Network Slicing for 5G-Enabled IoT Devices Using Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Renu Balyan, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 122,598.00

Wireless communication is one of the most important mediums for transmitting
information from one device to another. Most of the current wireless phones are
supported by either 4G or 5G networks. 5G is meant to deliver higher data
speeds, increased availability, and a uniform user experience to multiple users.
5G advanced capabilities will impact several industries including healthcare,
education, entertainment, Internet of Things (IoT), autonomous vehicles, and
smart cities. This research aims to create a system that can effectively manage
IoT devices connected to the 5G network. Managing a multitude of IoT devices
with diverse requirements is a complex task, making manual management
challenging. Some devices require fast data transmission for activities like
watching videos or playing virtual-reality games, while others need a quick
response time for tasks like self-driving cars or monitoring devices. The
solution to these problems is network slicing which involves dividing the
network into smaller parts to handle different types of devices and services.
However, the challenges inherent to network slicing are efficiently managing
network resources, coordinating, and optimizing different parts of the network.
This project addresses these challenges by designing a system that can
automatically manage the resources of 5G-enabled IoT devices. The potential
benefits of this approach are that it simplifies the network and reduces cost,
saves energy, balances the workload, optimizes mobility, and makes the network
easier to manage. This research advances the field by laying a solid groundwork
for studying machine learning and network automation in devices that are part of
the 5G-enabled IoT network. Furthermore, by employing and mentoring students
from underrepresented backgrounds in STEM, this project will aim to bridge the
gap in institutions across the US. This project will train the next generation
of scholars from minority-serving universities and marginalized communities and
help in workforce development in the fields of 5G and reinforcement learning
(RL). The project leaders will also reach out to K-12 to promote education and
engage with a diverse range of students, including women.

The goal of this project is to devise a framework for automating end-to-end
resource management of 5G-enabled IoT devices that utilizes RL techniques with
massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) in large-scale networks. The
diverse needs of various use cases, devices, and applications in 5G networks
make manual operation costly, difficult, and inefficient. This project will
consider agility to ensure that the network can quickly adapt to evolving
requirements. It aims to decrease network complexity and cost, conserve network
energy, optimize load balancing and mobility, and simplify resource management.
The scope of the research is a) designing 5G network slicing using Massive MIMO
for IoT devices, b) developing an RL model to solve orchestration problems of
IoT devices in large-scale 5G networks, and c) integrating the RL solution into
a Massive MIMO network sliced 5G-enabled IoT network. The 5G network-slicing
approach will enable resource allocation to each slice considering its specific
needs and provide networks-as-a-service by minimizing operational expenses
(OPEX) and capital expenditure (CAPEX) by adopting the Massive MIMO technique
and RL models. This approach will result in higher availability, a specified
latency, faster speed, better security, and higher throughput of RL-enabled
Massive MIMO 5G networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.