* 2318817
* ATD: Active Learning Activity Detection in Multiplex Networks of Geospatial-Cyber-Temporal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Databases of relevance to security and threat detection often have complex
multimodal structures with geographic information, timestamps, name labels,
human behavior patterns, and more linked together. A modern way of organizing
such data is in the form of knowledge graphs. Such large information structures
can have hidden information. This project will focus on detecting templates of
activity in large and complex data structures organized as a multiplex graph.
Examples of real-world data include transportation networks, knowledge graphs of
geotagged Twitter data, and synthetic graphs that model human activity.

The project aims to investigate a subgraph matching problem that can have a
large and combinatorially complex solution space. In order to wade through the
myriad of information that might have similar patterns to a known activity
template, subject matter experts may be called on to provide additional
information. This project will develop algorithms that incorporate a human in
the loop and are thus called active learning methods. The research will address
both exact and inexact subgraph matching. Metrics for subgraph matching will
include graph topology measurements (e.g., graph edit distance), timestamp
comparisons, similarities in label attributes (e.g., Levenshtein distance), and
geographic distances. The project will quantify both template and world graph
active learning strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.