* 2318065
* EFRI BRAID: Brain-inspired Algorithms for Autonomous Robots (BAAR)
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Mary Hayhoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Autonomous robots, such as self-driving vehicles (SDVs) and household
collaborative robots (Cobots), possess great potential to benefit society and
meet several important national needs. Although artificial intelligence (AI) has
made substantial progress, the current data/computational efficiency and
adaptability of autonomous robots pale in comparison to humans in performing
routine sensorimotor tasks such as driving and cooking. Enabling such autonomous
robots to continually learn from experience and persistently improve their
efficiency and resilience in the real world as humans do is imperative for their
widespread deployments. This project aims to develop novel computational
algorithms for robot autonomy with principles and insights of neurobiological
learning and brain intelligence. The outcomes could make a multifaceted and
transformative impact on autonomous robots such as SDVs, Cobots, and other
intelligent robotic systems in manufacturing and healthcare applications that
face the same challenges of computational/data inefficiency and adaptation
inflexibility.

The project seeks to provide a paradigm shift in autonomous robotic systems by
incorporating brain-inspired intelligence throughout their fundamental and core
capabilities of perception, planning, and continual learning. Using convergent
engineering-science approaches, the project aims to create a fundamental and
innovative framework of brain-inspired perception, learning, and planning
algorithms for autonomous robots. The framework will be applied to SDVs and
Cobots as two representative and complementary engineering systems through
combined theoretical and empirical studies. Integrating brain-inspired
innovations, the work will adapt and engineer the general brain-inspired methods
and algorithms to SDVs and Cobots for experimental validation of the
effectiveness in data- and energy-efficiency, adaptability, and resiliency. It
is expected that the findings will not only provide a significant leap to SDVs
and Cobots toward their real-world deployments, but also have a transformative
impact on other intelligent robotic systems such as those in manufacturing and
healthcare domains by improving their data/computation efficiency, adaptation
resiliency, and intelligence interpretability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.