* 2318953
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Simplifying End-to-End Verification of High-Performance Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Bryan Parno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 375,000.00

This project aims to simplify and automate the verification of high-performance
distributed systems, i.e., systems that run on multiple computers to improve
reliability and/or performance. Such systems are as crucial for our society as
they are complex and subtle. This makes them a prime target for formal
verification, a technique that can eliminate many classes of bugs from
distributed systems. Existing verification approaches, however, are impractical:
They require an unreasonable amount of human effort and intuition or rely on
unrealistic assumptions about the systems they are verifying. This project will
make a number of contributions to bring formal verification closer to
practicality, targeting real-world, high-performance implementations, including
those that rely on multi-threading. This project will develop Message
Invariants, a new way to reason about a distributed system as if it were a
centralized system, thus simplifying the human effort and intuition required. It
will also explore Ownership Types: Distributed systems often involve concepts of
ownership or uniqueness; e.g., when passing a lock around, or when moving keys
from one system to another. Currently, such reasoning is done manually—and
painstakingly—by the developer. The proposed work will formalize distributed
Ownership Types to enable a type checker to quickly and automatically discharge
many such obligations, thus simplifying the reasoning for developers. The
ultimate aim of this project is to make formal verification of distributed
systems a practical alternative to the current, best-effort approach of testing,
an approach that has fundamental limitations when safeguarding today's large-
scale systems from software errors. By automating the verification of real-
world, high-performance distributed systems—unfettered by the limitations that
come with existing automated approaches—this project aims to ensure that formal
verification will not remain an academic curiosity, but will instead be actively
adopted by practitioners. A shift from today's best-effort testing techniques to
formally verified software will lead to a future where the software products
that society depends on will be truly reliable and robust, backed by machine-
checked mathematical proofs of correctness. The research program will be
complemented by integrated education and outreach initiatives, including an
annual summer school and activities focused on broadening participation in
computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.