* 2318810
* Conference: Science and Ethics of De-extinction at SXSW
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jason Delborne, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,868.00

This is a conference travel grant for the PI to participate in a panel
discussion at the South by Southwest Conference (SXSW) 2023 (March 10 - March
19, 2023, in Austin, Texas). He is one of several NSF supported researchers who
were selected to discuss The Science and Ethics of De-extinction. The panel
discussion was submitted to SXSW by NSF; it was accepted for presentation and
scheduled for March 14, 2023. Because the panel occurs at a popular, public-
facing science and technology conference, insights will be shared immediately
with conference attendees, who come from the many sectors that interface with
science and technology: academics, technology developers, science enthusiasts,
technology investors, and funders of research. The panelists participation at
the NSF booth at the Creative Industries Expo will further disseminate insights
and knowledge to broader audiences at the SXSW conference.

The topic of de-extinction raises key questions about anticipatory governance,
responsible innovation, and the ethics of research and technology. This panel,
with its multidisciplinary participants, is poised to wrestle with these issues
in a format that will emphasize dialogue and exchange.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.