* 2318922
* RaMP: Biological Opportunities and Training in Science (BOATS)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Delbert Smee, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,512,858.00

Coastal ecosystems provide numerous economic benefits through shipping and
trade, fishing, and tourism, but are facing significant challenges from climatic
and man-made disturbances. A diverse, skilled, and integrated workforce is
needed to assess and meet imminent challenges associated with managing coastal
ecosystems across sectors to balance commercial, conservation, and tourism
interests. To create such a workforce, this project will develop a training
program Biological Opportunities And Training in Science (BOATS) to prepare the
next generation of leaders to tackle contemporary and future problems. Many
recent university graduates lack access to meaningful research experiences and
tangible applied skills in modern baccalaureate degree programs. Gaining such
experience is hampered when students, particularly those from lower
socioeconomic backgrounds, must work during their undergraduate years instead of
pursuing internships or work study opportunities. Thus, students may complete
their degrees only to find limited job availability due to lack of experience,
which can lead students to leave the sciences completely. Targeting students
with limited training opportunities during their undergraduate degrees, the
Alabama’s Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium (MESC) will develop a
postbaccalaureate internship program in collaboration with local government and
nonprofit organizations to provide hands-on training, tangible career focused
skills, and networking opportunities. This training coupled with professional
development will facilitate the pursuit of graduate education and/or future
careers in ocean science for BOATS participants and help develop future leaders
to address complex problems in coastal ecosystems.

Coastal marine ecosystems are experiencing radical changes due to widespread
climactic and anthropogenic disturbances. These stressors affect habitats,
organisms, and food web dynamics, ultimately changing ecosystem services and
resources relied upon by coastal communities. Situated between the Mobile-Tensaw
Delta (i.e., America’s Amazon) and the Fisheries Fertile Crescent in the
Northern Gulf of Mexico, Alabama’s MESC is well poised to address how multiple
stressors influence organisms’ distribution and interactions. Environmental
change is driving species northward (i.e., topicalization), while simultaneously
causing unprecedented changes in hypoxia, salinity, temperature, and alkalinity.
Coupled with pollution and overfishing, environmental change poises significant
challenges for coastal ecosystems. Understanding the synergistic interactions
among these factors is paramount for both basic and applied scientists. The
BOATS training program involves cutting edge research on interactions among
multiple stressors while providing training and experience with academic and
nonacademic scientists to address complex issues in coastal environments.
Ongoing collaborative research and facilities are in place for the BOATS program
to be impactful for basic and applied science while preparing the next
generation of leaders and their mentors to solve complex problems in coastal
ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.