* 2318438
* HNDS-I: A Data Visualization Tool for the COVID-19 Online Prevalence of Emotions in Institutions Database
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Terri Hernandez, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,836.00

The COVID-19 Online Prevalence of Emotions in Institutions (COPE-ID) database
contains online discussions of COVID-19, including posts about emotions, such as
fear, anxiety, and social institutions, such as healthcare and family. These
data can be used to answer questions about the spread of information and
individual well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic. This project creates a data
visualization tool to process social media data from COPE-ID. This tool makes it
easier for people to explore large volumes of social media data to study the
emotions, thoughts, behaviors, and health of people during a pandemic or related
disaster. The visualization tool allows researchers of all backgrounds and skill
levels to access and process data from the COPE-ID, as well as data from other
social media sources. Improving access to COPE-ID data can inform future public
health policies and interventions. The data visualization toolâ€™s users will be
able to access an overview of large social media datasets through a platform
dashboard. The dashboard presents visualizations of the data that are
constructed by topic modeling algorithms, which produce a summary of the data in
the form of word and topic frequencies. The tool also allows users to perform
sentiment analysis, such as the attitude toward topics from negative to
positive. Visualizations such as word clouds and time series charts generate
insights for users to drive their task-based interactions with the tool. Users
can also request samples of data that can be labeled using qualitative or
content analysis. This labeled data can then be used to make predictions about
future events, predictions that are generated by advanced statistical analyses
or machine learning techniques. Training datasets can be used to code and
process COPE-ID data, and these coded datasets can be used to examine the rate
of agreement between coders so that the quality of the data can be improved. The
tool improves scientists' access to social media data and allow researchers to
test theories of human behavior using user generated big data. This project is
jointly funded by Human Networks and Data Science -- Infrastructure (HNDS-I) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.