* 2318280
* Testing the High-Pressure Manifold Model of Phloem Transport and Unloading
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Knoblauch, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 567,408.00

Plants feed our planet by a light-powered process called photosynthesis. The
sugars produced form the general energy basis for plant and animal life.
Photosynthesis mostly takes place in leaves (referred to as sources), which are
not the organs where most of the sugars are consumed. Instead, sugars are
transported to developing sink organs such as roots, fruits, grains, and tubers
that we utilize for our nutrition and for animal feeding. Sugar translocation
from sources to sinks takes place in a vascular tissue called phloem. The
partitioning process in the phloem is surprisingly poorly understood, given its
central role in food and feed production. Today it remains unclear what controls
the allocation of sugars in the phloem. Are sufficient sugars produced during
photosynthesis, while the downstream transport process is the limiting factor?
Or do plant sinks have sufficient capacity while photosynthesis is insufficient
to meet the sink storage capacity? This project will investigate if sources or
sinks are limiting plant productivity, and what strategies plants have evolved
to fill their sink tissues. To tackle these fundamental questions and to
investigate sugar allocation on the cellular level, we will employ recently
developed tools for in situ observation of the phloem, microscopy protocols for
3D reconstruction of tissues at high resolution, and a novel machine learning
algorithm software to quantify structural changes. Together, our diverse
approaches will provide a solid basis for the evaluation of the most promising
strategies for future crop improvement. Additionally, this project also engages
diverse student groups and teachers worldwide through webpages on cell biology
and software tools generated for educational purposes.

A core question in plant productivity is whether plants are sink- or source-
limited. This question is directly linked to phloem physiology because the
phloem distributes photoassimilates to sinks. The phloem forms a network of
tubes of low hydraulic resistance throughout the plant. The physical driving
forces for long-distance translocation are generated by assimilate loading and
unloading in distant organs. Detachment from either sinks or sources causes an
instant cessation of transport function and structural artifacts. Meaningful
experiments therefore have to be performed in situ. This is technically
demanding and the main reason why fundamental questions have remained
unanswered. Here we address a basic problem with our understanding of sink-
source relations. Based on the physics of the current textbook hypothesis of
phloem unloading and transport – the High-Pressure Manifold Model – plants
generally should be sink-limited, which would imply that increased crop
photosynthetic capacities would be of limited value. This problem relates to the
central question if sieve tube conductivity is actively controlled in plants.
New methods for in situ observation, electron microscopy protocols, and machine
learning algorithms have been developed to precisely and quantitatively
characterize the structure of phloem components. We will utilize plants with
controlled source-to-sink distances to provoke morphological and functional
responses in the phloem. If there is an active adjustment of tube conductivity,
the identification of the controlling factors would create a new research field
and provide potential targets for crop improvement. If there is no such
adjustment, the High-Pressure Manifold Model will be rejected, setting the stage
for the search for alternative sink filling models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.