* 2318033
* Moving Beyond Size: Word Meanings Underlying Children's Productive Vocabulary
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Gary Lupyan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2026
* USD 711,202.00

Language acquisition largely occurs during the first few years of life. A common
measurement of children’s language development is their productive vocabulary
size, which is highly predictive of later academic achievement, social-emotional
functioning, economic prosperity, and more. However, why vocabulary size
predicts life outcomes remains unclear. The proposed research advances science
and understanding of children’s long-term health, prosperity and welfare by
examining whether use of children’s word meanings predicts vocabulary growth.
The investigators predict that vocabulary size is simply a coarse measurement of
children’s word meanings, and that word meanings shape how children learn; that
is, using one word meaning can help children to acquire new meanings for the
same word, which in turn helps children learn more words and word meanings. The
investigators create a database by collecting data from a large sample of
parents, which report children’s use of word meanings over a 9-month period.
This database is likely to lead to new insights into developmental trajectories
of vocabulary use and growth, and thus afford myriad secondary data analyses and
research opportunities for the field. The diverse group of student researchers
working on this project receives interdisciplinary training on how to study
children’s language development.

Why children’s early vocabulary size predicts late life outcomes remains
unclear. The investigators’ primary hypothesis is that word knowledge serves as
the basis for inferences about words and word meanings (i.e., word knowledge
serves as categorical inductive priors). That is, using one word meaning can
help children to acquire new meanings for the same word, which in turn helps
children learn more words and word meanings. To directly test their hypothesis,
the investigators develop a new measure of vocabulary development that goes
beyond productive vocabulary size, and measures factors including the
meaning(s), activities, social partner(s), spatial location(s), and
timing/frequency of children’s word production. In collaboration with other
researchers in the field, the investigators have selected variables to measure
children’s general language, cognitive, motor, social-emotional, and adaptive
behavior, to provide a holistic assessment of children’s development in relation
to their word meaning use. After refining and validating the measure, the PI and
team create a database by collecting data from a large sample of parents, which
report children’s use of word meanings over a 9-month period. The data are
analyzed to determine whether the quantity and/or diversity of word meanings
measured at Time 1 (a) predict later learning of words and word meanings at Time
2 and (b) predict developmental outcomes beyond language (measured during study
and at Time 2) to a greater degree than vocabulary size.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.