* 2318725
* Collaborative Research:CISE-MSI:DP:CNS:Adaptive Multi-Tiered, Multi-Task Base Station Infrastructure For Communication-Denied Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mehdi Sookhak, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 352,360.00

Nowadays, cellular networks have emerged as the preeminent communication
technology, primarily due to their profound impact on modern society. 5G and
beyond offer distinctive features, such as high transmission rate, ultra-
reliable low-latency communication, massive machine-type communication, and edge
and cloud computing. Nevertheless, the performance of these networks can be
susceptible to fluctuations in demand or unanticipated physical damage to the
underlying infrastructure - i.e., terrestrial base stations (TBSs) - through
natural or man-made disasters. Recent advancements in artificial intelligence,
control systems, and autonomy within the realm of cyber-physical systems have
facilitated the utilization of autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and
autonomous vehicles to establish temporary cellular networks. These networks
rely on flying base stations (FBSs) or vehicular base stations (VBS) in large-
scale disasters or events where TBSs are either unavailable or unable to provide
the required coverage and quality of service (QoS). In addition to their
communication services, these autonomous vehicles can offer diverse
functionalities, including rapid mapping of expansive areas, operations in
hazardous zones, emergency deliveries, and search-and-rescue missions. However,
despite the conceptual, scientific, and engineering advancements achieved thus
far, the FBS and VBS infrastructures have not yet reached their full maturity.

The principal objective of this project is to develop an adaptive, multi-
objective, multitier, and multi-task infrastructure consisting of aerial and
vehicular base stations (MTBS). The aim is to improve the coverage and QoS of
cellular systems while simultaneously facilitating various services, including
situational awareness, package delivery, and target tracking, particularly in
scenarios where the number of available vehicles is limited. The research and
education agenda is framed around three thrusts: (1) performing fundamental
research aimed at developing models and algorithmic tools for developing and
implementing an adaptive, multi-tiered collection of UAVs and VBSs, to provide
communication infrastructure in challenging environments, such as in a disaster
zone; (2) developing trajectory-planning models in MTBS systems to deliver a
realistic solution for effectively utilizing the base stations in critical
missions wherein a small number of vehicles are available; and (3) evaluating
the performance of the proposed models using testbed environments. The testbed
and open-source code packages developed in this project will allow educators and
field professionals to deploy them in both learning and training environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.