* 2318422
* Promoviendo La Esperanza Equitativa/Advancing Equitable Teaching Practices to Reduce Systemic Inequities in Computer Science Courses for Latinx Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jorge Fonseca Cacho, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,791.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to improve teaching
practices that will positively impact undergraduate education in STEM
disciplines for students from underrepresented groups in computer science with a
focus on improving retention among members of the Latinx college population.
This project proposes to: 1) update and expand computer science teaching
practices by providing comprehensive faculty development to improve instructors’
capacity to academically, socially, and emotionally support computer science
students; and 2) increase retention and graduation rates for Latinx
undergraduate students pursuing a degree in computer science through co-
curricular relationship-building activities designed to cultivate their sense of
welcome, belonging, and well-being in the computer science discipline. With
already high and growing Latinx enrollment at UNLV, the proposed improvements
are imperative to boost the retention and graduation rates for Latinx
undergraduate students, especially those pursuing a degree in computer science.

This project seeks to improve computer science teaching and learning by applying
Transparency in Learning and Teaching (TiLT) techniques informed by critical
multicultural education and supported by open educational resources (OER). These
teaching techniques: 1) focus on making it obvious to students how and why they
are engaging with course content in particular ways; and 2) have been shown to
improve overall student learning outcomes, particularly for first generation
students in many academic majors including non-STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics). After participating in a comprehensive faculty
development institute, course instructors will apply computer science-related,
critical multicultural education-informed, and OER-supported TiLT techniques to
their courses and co-curricular activities. Through mixed methods survey
research with students, and qualitative individual and focus group interview
research with students, course instructors, and course coordinators, research
team members will assess the impact of application on Latinx computer science
students’ learning. Research findings will be disseminated through the project
website, conference presentations, and publications. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.