* 2318948
* Collaborative Research: U.S. Crossroads—Connectivity of the North Atlantic Deep Western Boundary Current through the Subpolar-Subtropical Transition Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Xiaobiao Xu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 59,825.00

The subpolar-subtropical transition zone in the western North Atlantic has been
identified as potentially key to Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
(AMOC) variability on decadal time scales. At this crossroads of the AMOC, the
southbound Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC) meets the northbound North
Atlantic Current (NAC), and their interaction sets the properties of the deep
waters exported to the rest of the Atlantic Ocean and beyond. The global
overturning circulation—of which the AMOC is an important component—has proven
to be a far more complex system than perhaps imagined when it was first likened
to a great ocean conveyer in the 1980s. Progress in developing a mechanistic
understanding of the response of the AMOC to various forcings is accelerating as
direct continuous observations of its structure and variability are being
sustained at a few latitudes for multiple years and even decades. Of interest
here is the southward progression of water mass anomalies, generated at high
North Atlantic latitudes, along the western boundary, particularly for overflow
waters crossing the subpolar-subtropical transition zone. Recent observations of
a decline in AMOC strength at 26°N have been attributed in part to overflow
water density anomalies at the western boundary. Tracking down the upstream
origin and pathways of these anomalies, and having them realistically
represented in models, is key to being able to predict future AMOC changes. This
project will measure the pathways of overflow waters with the deployment of 80
acoustically tracked floats and virtual floats in a high-resolution model. The
float measurements will fill a critical gap in observations needed for model
evaluation and contribute new understanding of the pathways and processes
impacting the properties of overflow waters as they transit from the subpolar to
subtropical North Atlantic. AMOC variability has been associated with a long
list of climate impacts with societal relevance. U.S. Crossroads is focused on a
region that has been proposed to "set the variability of the AMOC on decadal
time scales," and therefore has implications beyond a regional process study.
U.S. Crossroads is highly synergistic with two concurrent European-led programs
with similar aims and complementary tools, namely "Explaining and Predicting the
Overturning Circulation" (EPOC) and "French Crossroads." The partnerships with
European programs will foster international resource sharing as well as exchange
of ideas. The project will also support training and career development for a
post-doc, who will spend time at both WHOI and FSU to gain experience in the
analysis of both observations and model output. The project will also extend
OceanInsight, a long-standing outreach program for blind and visually impaired
students, with support for development of an accessible "remote field trip kit"
to help foster interest and excitement in ocean science for a group
underrepresented in STEM.

Most attention has to date been focused on Labrador Sea Water (LSW) export and
its impact on AMOC variability, revealing weak connectivity across the subpolar-
subtropical boundary. Modeled particle trajectories suggest a greater
connectivity for the deeper overflow waters (lower NADW) passing through the
transition zone via the DWBC compared to LSW, but equivalent Lagrangian
observations in overflow waters are lacking. This project will build on previous
observational and modeling work with new float observations of overflow water
pathways and new particle simulations using state-of-the-art, high-resolution,
multi-decade North Atlantic simulations. A total of 80 acoustically tracked
floats will be released in overflow waters in the DWBC to measure their pathways
through the transition zone and identify processes that lead to boundary-
interior exchange. Orders of magnitude more modeled particle trajectories will
be generated using 1/12° (6 km) and 1/50° (1.5 km) configurations of HYCOM
(Hybrid Coordinate Ocean Model) North Atlantic simulations to amplify the
necessarily limited float observations, test the sensitivity of overflow water
pathways to model resolution and investigate decadal variability in those
pathways related to NAC and AMOC variability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.