* 2318585
* Conference: Student Support to Attend 17th US National Congress on Computational Mechanics; Albuquerque, New Mexico; 23-27 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Pania Newell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides complimentary registration for 100 students and postdoctoral
fellows studying in the US to attend the 17th US National Congress on
Computational Mechanics (USNCCM17) which will be held 23-27 July 2023 in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. The objective is to broaden the participation from
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, participants from underrepresented
communities and women, and undergraduate students that aspire to learn more
about the broad discipline of computational mechanics. Consideration in the
selection process will be given to the inclusion of members of underrepresented
groups, diversity of institutions that the participants represent, and diversity
of programs within engineering. The aim is to grow the pipeline of U.S.
researchers interested in computational mechanics.

The US National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM) has been the
biennial congress of the US Association for Computational Mechanics (USACM)
beginning in 1991. USNCCM17, organized in collaboration with staff from Sandia
National Laboratories, will provide a forum for bringing together students,
researchers, and practitioners from academia, industry, government, and
laboratories from all over the world to discuss the latest advancements and
future directions in various fields pertaining to computational engineering and
sciences. With over 85 topical minisymposia, the conference includes research
areas across the broad spectrum of computational mechanics and engineering
science, as well as additional themes that represent special topics of current
importance including data-driven modeling and machine learning, advanced
manufacturing, climate modeling, and exascale computing. Congress highlights
include plenary and semi-plenary lectures, minisymposia with keynote lectures
and regular presentations, and product displays by various industries and
software companies. The Congress will include a networking event for female
researchers, a student poster competition, a career panel, a funding agency
information session, and several short courses addressing advances in current
topics of interest in computational engineering and science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.