* 2318985
* Unlocking the noble gas toolbox to quantify rates of denitrification and nitrogen fixation in marine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Craig Tobias, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rolf Sonnerup
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,778.00

Ocean productivity depends on nitrogen availability. The atmosphere is 78%
nitrogen gas, but this form of nitrogen is unusable to most organisms. Nitrogen
gas dissolves in the ocean and is converted, or fixed, into more reactive forms
through nitrogen fixation. Reactive nitrogen inputs to the oceans are reversed
through denitrification, which converts reactive nitrogen to nitrogen gas.
Measuring the balance between nitrogen fixation and denitrification is
challenging because the rates of these processes are small relative to the large
inventory of nitrogen gas. Also, biological and physical processes both impact
the nitrogen gas inventory. The researchers will develop a new method to measure
three noble gases (neon, argon, and krypton), which are not impacted by
biological processes, as well as nitrogen gas. They will use this method to
quantify the fixed nitrogen balance: the rate of fixed nitrogen production minus
fixed nitrogen loss. This method has many applications, including identifying
nutrient management strategies to support healthy coastal ecosystems. The work
will benefit society by generating new research infrastructure, educational
materials, and a diverse workforce. The researchers will develop technology to
measure the fixed nitrogen balance. They will prepare a college and high school
course module about nutrient pollution in Connecticut. The module will describe
how humans have identified harms of pollutants and developed solutions through
legislation. The work will support an early-career female investigator, a female
graduate student, and an early-career Hispanic lab manager.

The researchers seek to improve the reliability of widely used incubation
techniques for determining benthic fixed nitrogen production/removal (the
nitrogen/argon technique and nitrogen isotope pairing technique) by
incorporating measurements of multiple noble gases into existing protocols. They
will identify under which conditions physical perturbations can impact the
calculated nitrogen fluxes and develop quantitative methods to correct for these
effects. Additionally, the researchers will develop and demonstrate a new method
for measuring net biological nitrogen fluxes at the ecosystem scale through in
situ measurements, which will enable monitoring of fixed nitrogen removal and
production in dynamic coastal systems. Improved tools for constraining
biological nitrogen fluxes will help to resolve recent questions regarding the
fixed nitrogen balance in coastal systems and improve scientific understanding
of the capacity of coastal systems to attenuate eutrophication. The researchers
will develop a high-precision, high-throughput method for noble gas analysis
that is adapted from existing commercially available instrumentation and share
the method with the scientific community. This work will enable other
researchers to apply noble gas measurements to address a wide range of
biogeochemical research questions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.