* 2318617
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Multi-scale design of liquid hydrogen carriers for spatio-temporal balancing of renewable energy systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Dharik Mallapragada, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2027
* USD 425,000.00

The affordability of transporting and storing liquid petroleum products has
facilitated worldwide accessibility to transportation fuels such as gasoline and
diesel. Similarly, the widespread adoption of variable renewable energy to
decarbonize the energy sector relies on developing cost-effective energy
transportation and storage technologies. Employing hydrogen for storing and
transporting variable renewable energy is a promising solution, but
technological advancements are necessary to ensure economic viability. Two-way
liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) are organic molecules whose well-known
reactions can be exploited to store hydrogen. LOHC-based hydrogen storage and
transportation technologies require a global network of distributed processing
sites where LOHCs are produced (at the hydrogen source) or consumed (where
hydrogen or energy is in demand); molecules are transported between these sites.
The choice of LOHC molecule impacts the reactions that can be used, processes
that can be employed at the processing sites, and the economics and
sustainability of the entire supply chain. Thus, designing LOHC-based
technologies must consider the interdependent aspects holistically. Accordingly,
this project seeks to accelerate the discovery of alternative high hydrogen
capacity LOHCs that are cost-effective, safe, and environmentally sustainable. A
multidisciplinary team with scientific expertise from the atomic/molecular to
the global scale will tackle this complex multiscale challenge. Complementing
this research, the team will train the next generation of STEM engineers from
diverse backgrounds. The team will also mentor students from underrepresented
groups through on-campus programs and local organizations, such as the Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program and the American
Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) student chapter. Additionally,
the team will engage with an Alaskan village, leveraging the participation of a
local educator, to demonstrate the advantages of next-generation variable
renewable energy storage and transportation technologies.

The central hypothesis of the research is that alcohol-based LOHCs such as
ethanol can overcome the challenges of traditional carriers, including poor
thermochemistry and low hydrogen capacity. To evaluate this hypothesis, the
investigators will (1) rigorously evaluate the discharging and charging
catalytic chemistries of ethanol LOHC, both thermochemically and
electrochemically, (2) develop kinetic models of these reactions, and (3)
leverage the kinetic models to assess the techno-economics and sustainability of
deploying this LOHC system in a regional and global supply chain. Given the vast
space of organic molecules and several types of acceptor-less dehydrogenation
chemistries, many carriers and mixtures of carriers potentially exist.
Systematically exploring this space is essential to discovering optimal, cost-
effective, and environmentally benign carriers. Building on the insights from
studying ethanol, the investigators will explore novel alternative alcohol-based
LOHCs using a new chemistry-cognizant molecule discovery platform,
experimentally validate top candidates, and evaluate the economics and
environmental impacts of the leading candidates relative to ethanol and
currently known LOHCs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.