* 2318057
* EFRI ELiS: Biosynthetic Additive Manufacturing of Living Building Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Tian Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,999,999.00

This award aims to integrate cutting-edge approaches in advanced manufacturing,
synthetic biology, and materials science to transform microbe-engineered
lignocellulosic biomass into a printable ink for biosynthetic additive
manufacturing of 3D-printed living materials and structures for building
applications. The integration of carefully designed microbial networks in
printable lignocellulose inks will produce hierarchically structured organic-
inorganic living composites with enhanced mechanical and thermal properties,
increased carbon storage, self-healing capacity, and scalable and modular
fabrication. The awardâ€™s vision is that the technical innovations will lead to
positive social impacts through: fighting climate change with carbon-negative
living materials; combating homelessness through smart and modular building
materials production; and filling technical gaps in the nation's
Biomanufacturing and Bioeconomy initiative. The research thrusts will be tightly
coupled with comprehensive educational and outreach components, including new
projects and contents in graduate courses, REU/K-12 activities such as Science
Festival showcase, iGEM undergraduate team mentorships, living materials art
exhibitions, and biomanufacturing outreach workshops to prepare future
scientists and engineers from diverse backgrounds in the highly
interdisciplinary research fields of biomanufacturing and living materials.

The goal of the research is to adopt ecological concepts of biomineralization
and repurpose the symbiotic principles of fungal-bacterial interactions to model
and design living microbial networks within lignocellulosic-biomass-derived
materials as ink for biosynthetic additive manufacturing and in situ modulation
of the material's properties. The research objectives of this project include:
1) ink Development: Design, model, and produce biomass-derived, microbe-
integrated, and printable biomaterials feedstock for in situ biomineral and
biopolymer synthesis; 2) additive Biomanufacturing: 3D printing with living
components to optimize the material's performance and customize the construction
of living building materials and structures; 3) benchmarking and Optimization:
characterize and optimize the performance of the 3D bioprinted materials and
structures, including strength, thermal properties, self-healing capacities,
fire resistance, and carbon storage. We will finally scale up ink production
with local feedstock, and scale up the printability and biomanufacturing for
Environmental Impact Analysis and Techno-Economic Assessment. The overarching
focus will be on obtaining a better understanding of how the synergized
interactions between microbe-consortia and inert components within the
3D-printed physical-biological system can be engineered to enhance the
material's performance. The project will allow the exploitation of microbial
interdependencies and fungal-bacteria interactions in novel ways to analyze
their habitation, reproduction, metabolism, interaction, and biosafety in an
engineered space across different time scales and physical dimensions. The
project will also allow the PI to develop a new biomanufacturing process that
seamlessly integrates 3D printing and the biosynthetic process for tailored
materials design based on highly scalable and sustainable biomass materials as
feedstock. Therefore, this project will enable novel strategies to magnify
biomanufacturing capacity in hybrid living-manmade systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.