* 2318393
* Collaborative Research: NNA Incubator: Improving Culturally Sensitive Energy Strategies in the Arctic Residential Buildings with the Co-Production of Knowledge Framework
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Lu Liu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 240,006.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems and built environments
in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents and Resilient Infrastructure.

The climate in much of the Arctic is characterized by long cold winters and
short cool summers. Global climate change is shifting the Arctic climate by
raising temperatures and melting snow and ice at an increasing rate. These
changes are causing unique challenges to the sustainable operation of
residential buildings in Alaska Native communities as these buildings are often
energy inefficient due to inadequate insulation, thermal bridges, and air
leakage. In addition to inadequate building conditions, energy and electricity
prices in Alaska are often higher than the average prices in the lower 48
States, thereby causing additional challenges to Alaska Native communities. The
overarching goal of this NNA Incubator project is to explore the design,
development, and implementation of a co-production of knowledge framework to
improve residential building energy efficiency in Arctic regions in
collaboration with partners and stakeholders from two Indigenous communities
from the Bristol Bay region of Alaska. To advance this goal, the project
research team proposes to investigate the relationships between socio-cultural
factors, building design/construction strategies, building energy efficiency,
and climate in residential buildings from the target Alaska Bristol Bay region
of study. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the development and implementation of a co-production of knowledge framework
that could be used to identify and design solutions to improve residential
building energy efficiency in Arctic regions. Additional benefits to society
will be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring
of one graduate student at Iowa State University.

To design and develop solutions for improving the energy efficiency of
residential buildings of Indigenous communities in Alaska, it is critical to
engage these communities and relevant stakeholders from the beginning of the
research within a co-production of knowledge framework. In this NNA Incubator
project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to engage with two Indigenous
communities and stakeholders in the Alaska Bristol Bay region with the goal of
building reciprocal and trustful relationships to advance the design and
implementation of a co-production of knowledge framework to improve residential
building energy efficiency in Arctic regions. The specific objectives of the
proposed research are to (1) investigate in what ways socio-cultural components
impact housing construction and energy usage in Alaska Indigenous communities;
(2) evaluate how socio-cultural components and climate affect residential
building construction, and assess the main barriers to energy efficient
residential building construction; (3) assess how socio-cultural components and
climate affect residential building design and energy use patterns, and extract
critical factors for energy analysis, and (4) understand and predict how future
climate change in Alaska might affect energy usage in residential buildings
using modeling and simulations. By integrating targeted need assessment studies,
workshops, and the results of modeling and simulation studies, the project
research team hopes to identify critical energy-usage-related features in Arctic
residential buildings associated with the unique cultural background and
heritage of Alaska Indigenous communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.