* 2318592
* Collaborative Research: Conference: 2023 CISE Education and Workforce PI and Community Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Nuria Jaumot-Pascual, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 297,109.00

CISE Education and Workforce (EWF) programs aim to create equitable and
inclusive opportunities for computing education and develop a diverse workforce.
STARS Computing Corps, a CISE Broadening Participation in Computing Alliance,
will support the 2023 CISE EWF Principal Investigator (PI) and Community
Meetings. This convening will provide opportunities for the principal
investigators of projects funded by CISE EWF programs to share their research
outcomes, promising practices, and lessons learned. The PI meeting is
intentionally co-located with the RESPECT Conference, to facilitate more
engagement across research communities with shared interest in broadening
participation in computing. The 2023 EWF PI meeting will also include an
Aspiring PI workshop, providing guidance and insights for researchers new to EWF
programs and/or NSF funding.

The 2023 CISE EWF PI and Community Meeting will be a large event for the
Foundation and the computer science education research community, bringing
together PIs with representatives from government, academia, and non-profit. For
this event, there is a pressing need to meticulously plan and organize agenda,
venue and conference logistics. This grant provides funding for the venue and
logistics, including conference registration, audio visual, and meeting space
for the CISE EWF PI and Community meeting and Aspiring PI workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.