* 2318184
* Conference: 2023 Liquid Crystals GRC and GRS: Learning from Nature to Transform Technology through Liquid Crystal Science
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Cecilia Leal, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports travel registration fees for undergraduate and graduate
students, post-docs, and under-represented, and junior faculty to attend and
present at the the 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Liquid Crystals:
“Learning from Nature to Transform Technology through Liquid Crystal Science”
and the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) taking place at the Southern New Hampshire
University, Manchester, New Hampshire between June 24–30 2023. The conference
will bring together a diverse and interdisciplinary community of students and
scientists pushing the frontiers of liquid crystal science and technology.

The conference will involve cross-disciplinary researchers discussing research
at the intersection of materials science, engineering, biology, chemistry, and
physics, that is redefining and reinvigorating the field of LC science.
Particularly emphasis on biological and biologically-inspired systems will be
made. Besides broadening participation through the involvement of a diversity of
participants, the conference includes a session designed to address diversity
and inclusion in the scientific workplace. The GRS is a dedicated avenue for
doctoral and post-doctoral researchers to present and discuss their work and
establish collaborative relationships with their peers. Mentors and trainee
moderators will facilitate active participation in scientific discussion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.