* 2318072
* Conference: Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christine Kelley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 62,721.00

The 26th Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics (NCUWM) will
be hosted by the University of Nebraska-Lincoln from Jan. 26-28, 2024. The 27th
and 28th iterations of the conference will take place in late January or early
February in 2025 and 2026, respectively. The mission of this conference is to
support undergraduate women mathematics majors who wish to attend graduate
school and to help and encourage them to identify possible careers using
mathematics. All undergraduates are welcome to apply, regardless of gender
identity or expression, race, color, ethnicity, or national origin. NCUWM plays
an important role in inspiring undergraduate participants to pursue mathematics
and has a positive impact on their professional growth. The conference program
includes plenary talks by prominent women mathematicians, three panel
discussions, small group conversations focused on a range of topics, and
undergraduate research presentations in talk and poster sessions. Various
networking opportunities throughout the program connect participants with peers
and role models. Held annually since 1999, the conference has grown from 53
undergraduate participants to over 250 each year. In total, more than 5,000
undergraduates have attended NCUWM in its 25-year history. In addition to
professional development opportunities, participants learn cutting-edge
mathematics from plenary speakers and from one another. Many attendees have
conducted independent, original research projects, and the conference program
includes a poster session and more than five hours of talks by undergraduate
participants scheduled in parallel sessions. The three panel discussions focus
on careers in mathematics, choosing a graduate program, and random bits of
advice. The design of the conference centers on the research-supported assertion
that developing a broad mentoring network can be incredibly important for the
recruitment and retention of women in STEM fields, and results of formal
evaluations have corroborated the broad impact the conference has had on its
participants. The conference webpage is available at
https://math.unl.edu/ncuwm/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.