* 2318158
* Closing Achievement Gaps in Core Undergraduate Civil Engineering Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Felipe Perez, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to develop, implement, and
evaluate a new approach designed to improve student outcomes in early
engineering courses at California State Polytechnic University at Pomona (CPP)
and Mt. San Antonio College (Mt. SAC). Approximately one third of students at
the collaborating institutions do not pass two of the most important
foundational engineering courses: Engineering Statics and Mechanics of
Materials. Furthermore, students from groups that have historically been
underrepresented in engineering complete these courses at a rate approximately
10% lower than their peers. Poor outcomes in these key courses contribute to
increased dropout rates, delayed graduation, and lower success rates in
subsequent courses. This project will improve students’ success in Engineering
Statics, Mechanics of Materials, and subsequent courses through four evidence-
based activities: 1) a Summer Bridge Program (SBP) to prepare students for the
gatekeeper courses; 2) peer tutoring; 3) undergraduate research experiences for
24 students; and 4) participation in the American Society of Civil Engineers'
Excellence in Civil Engineering (ExCEEd) Teaching Workshop for 17 faculty. These
activities are designed to improve students’ academic performance in the two
focal courses, reduce average time-to-degree, and promote consistent, high-
quality instruction across course sections. This will drive student success and
create a pathway for a more diverse and capable STEM workforce.

The effectiveness of this project will be measured through mixed-methods
research guided by two theoretical frameworks: the How People Learn model and
the Intersectionality framework. The results will drive positive student
outcomes by pursuing four objectives. First is to inform the engineering
education field about best practices for improving academic performance and
reducing the achievement gaps in Engineering Statics and Mechanics of Materials.
Second is to provide evidence for specific topics that need to be reviewed and
emphasized to prepare students before they enroll in these courses. Third is to
extend understanding of how a summer bridge program, peer tutoring, and
undergraduate research experiences could impact students’ engagement, academic
performance, and time-to-degree. Fourth, and finally, is to promote consistent
course offerings and teaching practices. Major data sources include performance
on assessments covering key topics in the summer bridge program and focal
courses, validated survey instruments measuring spatial reasoning and student
engagement, and data on faculty pedagogical practices taken before and after the
ExCEED Teaching Workshop. This project is support by the HSI Program which aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity for institutional transformation at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.