* 2318056
* Hydrologic constraints on global carbon dioxide emissions from inland waters
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Winnick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2026
* USD 523,014.00

Inland waters, streams, rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, act as an important
component of the global carbon cycle, particularly in their role as sources of
carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere. Despite recent advances in our
conceptions of inland water carbon cycling, global CO2 emissions from these
waters remain highly uncertain. This research will develop process-based
computational models of global CO2 fluxes from streams, rivers, lakes, and
reservoirs by combining models of water flow, surface water morphology, and
carbon transport and transformation. The models will provide new insights into
global CO2 fluxes and the distribution of inland water CO2 sources, and how
these fluxes and sources respond to changes in streamflow. The researchers will
train a PhD student and mentor a postdoctoral researcher, and enhance STEM
education in the Holyoke and Springfield, MA area, by creating educational
activities for high school girls through the Eureka! Program in collaboration
with Girls, Inc. and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. The primary goal
of this project is to provide robust, physically constrained estimates of global
CO2 fluxes from inland waters including rivers, streams, lakes, and reservoirs.
This will be accomplished through hypothesis-driven research objectives to: (1)
couple global state-of-the-art hydraulic and hydrologic routing systems with a
recently developed stream network model of CO2 including physical
representations of mass transport, inputs (groundwater inflows, hyporheic
exchange with CO2-rich pore waters, water column respiration), and outputs
(primary productivity, atmospheric exchange); (2) validate the coupled hydrology
and stream network model of CO2 against existing datasets of global surface and
groundwater geochemical observations, and compare our physics-based model with
existing statistical upscaling techniques; and (3) apply the model across a
range of flow conditions to characterize average and spatiotemporal variability
in CO2 emissions, and explore how changes in streamflow impact stream CO2
emissions.

The award will be co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and the Geobiology and
Low-Temperature Geochemistry programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.