* 2318851
* Collaborative Research: Chain Transform Fault: Understanding the dynamic behavior of a slow-slipping oceanic transform system
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Jessica Warren, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2028
* USD 32,466.00

A longstanding goal of Earth Science is to understand why some sections of
faults slip in large earthquakes while other sections do not. Oceanic transform
faults are ideal for studying fault slip due to their simple composition and
predictable motion - yet the spectrum of behavior on these faults is poorly
understood. This study will employ a range of techniques to study the Chain
transform fault in the equatorial Atlantic, which is an ideal locality due to
its variable seismicity and its bathymetric expression that is typical of many
transform faults. This project will train early career scientists in
interdisciplinary marine science through their participation in research cruises
and their analyses of data and samples. A broader cross-section of students will
be engaged through a multi-institution virtual course on marine geology and
geophysics.

Oceanic transform faults consist of sections that slip in large earthquakes
separated by sections that are primarily aseismic. Oceanic transform faults also
display a variety of structural features – valleys, transverse ridges, median
ridges, flower structures, fault segmentation – whose origins are linked to
stress, strain, and material properties. A two-cruise experiment will be used to
probe these fault dynamics. The first cruise aboard the R/V Langseth will
collect multi-channel seismic data and deploy 20 ocean bottom seismometers. A
year later, a second cruise will recover seismometers, deploy the autonomous
underwater vehicle Sentry for high-resolution geophysical surveys, and use
dredging to sample the active fault zone. These datasets will connect surface
observations of fault structure and composition to seismic constraints at depth.
Goals include: • Substantially advancing current understanding of slow-slipping
transform faults. • Surface-to-depth images of fault structures from seismic
data and Sentry micro-bathymetry. • Identification of active fault strands and
areas of active uplift based on linking microseismicity patterns and focal
mechanisms to fault structures. • Deciphering how strain is accommodated on
poorly coupled portions of the fault, and whether, and at which depth, those
portions are characterized by swarms of microseismicity, as has been observed at
faster slipping transform faults. • Determination of the dominant lithologies in
the fault zone—including in uplifted structures—using samples, photo transects,
and seismic velocity. • Elucidation of the role of fluids in modifying fault-
slip behavior, based on sample analyses, chemical-sensor datasets, seismic-
velocity variations, and microseismicity distribution. • Location of sites of
magmatic activity within a slow spreading transform and evaluation of source
variability, melting systematics, and storage depths from magma compositions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.