* 2318990
* CMOS+X: Retinomorphic Infrared Imager with Sparsity-adaptive  Machine-Learning Accelerator
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Mingu Kang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Real-time signal analysis plays a critical role in applications such as
autonomous navigation and robotic guidance. However, conventional imaging
systems are hindered by delays and high energy costs associated with
transferring large amounts of data to centralized processors. To overcome those
shortcomings, this project will embed computational elementals directly in the
sensor arrays to locally run machine-learning algorithms that would provide
capabilities for object recognition and motion tracking in real time and at low
power. Such local in-sensor computing approach would offer significant
reductions in energy consumption and delays by avoiding the data transfer
bottlenecks. This project will co-optimize the designs of organic infrared
sensors and silicon circuits, taking inspiration from the biological retina,
which is highly sensitive to dynamic changes and well-suited for motion
analysis. The proposed prototype is expected to reduce energy consumption by up
to 100 times compared to conventional architectures, thereby paving the way for
low-power machine learning. The integration research will contribute to
advancing semiconductor manufacturing technologies within the United States and
support workforce training. The research team will also engage in outreach
activities to promote awareness of various career paths in science and
engineering and the rewards of engineering careers.

The goal of this research project is to integrate retinomorphic infrared sensors
and silicon circuits in order to create a prototype imaging system with machine-
learning capabilities for motion analysis. The design strategy assigns
complementary roles to the organic sensors and silicon circuits: the
retinomorphic sensors will generate highly sparse, feature-extracted data in
both temporal and spatial domains, while the circuitries will use the sparsity
to boost the overall system performance and power savings. The first research
objective focuses on enhancing the sensorâ€™s signal gain and adjusting the time
constant to deliver streamlined data into the silicon processor. The second
objective aims to optimize sparsity-adaptive architectures that can handle a
wide range of sparsity levels and implement the circuit designs using 65 nm
technology. The third objective involves establishing the processing workflow to
integrate organic sensor arrays onto silicon chips and evaluating the
functionalities of the imager by measuring the success rate of object tracking
and classification. The resulting prototype will offer valuable insights into
design guidelines for effectively balancing energy use, noise and variation
tolerance, and latency in smart infrared imaging systems. The proposed imager,
equipped with sophisticated yet energy-efficient machine learning capabilities,
will have broad applicability across various fields including navigation,
biomedical imaging, security, and machine vision applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.