* 2318567
* Collaborative Research: Whole Ecosystem Test of Restoring Resilience in Lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Grace Wilkinson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 08/31/2026
* USD 611,389.00

Ecosystems are at widespread risk of losing resilience due to environmental
changes from climate and other human actions. Resilience is the ability of an
ecosystem to maintain its current state in the face of variability. The loss of
resilience harms human well-being because it can lead to the loss of land and
water resources. Being able to measure and manage resilience is essential for
adapting to these large changes. The researchers will perform an ecosystem
experiment aimed at increasing resilience to algal blooms in lakes. Algal blooms
threaten drinking water, reduce tourism, and harm wildlife. The primary goal of
the experiment is to test if resilience can be enhanced and assess the
performance of three resilience metrics. This experiment will advance our
understanding of ecosystem resilience, evaluate methods for tracking
environmental change critical for policymaking, and provide management insight.
The results and the evaluation of the resilience metrics will be shared with
lake managers through workshops hosted by the research team.The research is not
only applicable to lakes but could be applied to manage other ecosystems such as
grasslands and forests.

To test if light availability changes resilience to nutrient loading, the
researchers will experimentally add nitrogen and phosphorus to two lakes to
encourage an algal bloom. One of the lakes is highly stained and therefore has
low light availability. The other is relatively clear with higher light
availability. A third lake that will not receive nutrient additions will serve
as a reference ecosystem. The researchers will measure algal pigments, dissolved
oxygen, and pH at a high frequency to monitor algal blooms. Resilience will be
evaluated with ecosystem models, dynamic statistical indicators, and mean exit
time. These three methods for quantifying resilience provide a new approach to
evaluating ecosystem change. The expectation is that resilience of algal blooms
to nutrient additions will be higher in the stained lake compared to the clear
lake due to lower light availability. To test this hypothesis, in the second
year of the experiment the researchers will add a commercial dye to the clear
lake, designed to absorb light. The expectation is that this will make the clear
lake more resilient algal blooms from nutrient additions, similar to the stained
lake. The results of this experiment and the evaluation of the resilience
metrics will be shared with lake managers through workshops hosted by the
research team.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.