* 2318505
* HNDS-I: CatMapper:  User-friendly tools for integrating data by complex, dynamic categories
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Daniel Hruschka, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2025
* USD 549,946.00

Scientists and policymakers often bring together data from many different
sources to study pressing social issues (e.g., economic change, migration, war,
political movements, and health and well-being). However, bringing together data
from different datasets is challenging when datasets use different labels for
the same thing or use the same label for different things. CatMapper is an
online application that helps users overcome the challenge of translating across
datasets. With CatMapper’s tools, users can unlock and combine data in new ways
to answer pressing social questions. This project creates a version of CatMapper
that includes user-tested online tools and builds a community of users who can
benefit from them. The project also provides educational and research
opportunities for students. CatMapper consists of two applications that are used
to connect categories often used in the social sciences. SocioMap focuses on
thousands of categories for ethnicities, languages, religions, and
administrative districts. ArchaMap focuses on thousands of categories used for
material artifacts and sites in archaeology. To help link datasets together,
CatMapper provides four sets of tools to: (1) explore information about specific
categories, (2) translate categories across datasets, (3) bring together
datasets in new ways, and (4) store and share translations of and merges between
different datasets for use by others. CatMapper includes self-guided tutorials
for researchers, students, and other interested members of the public wishing to
learn how to connect data across diverse data streams to answer scientific
questions. CatMapper is freely available to users across academia, industry,
non-governmental organizations, and government institutions. It includes a user-
friendly interface to facilitate analyses of population data at multiple spatial
and temporal scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.