* 2318704
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-ED: CCRI: TechHouse Partnership to Increase the Computer Engineering Research Expansion at Morehouse College
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Laura Haynes, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 98,242.00

The award expands a symbiotic, sustainable alliance between a top-five
engineering program, Georgia Tech, and a top-five HBCU, Morehouse College, with
a primary end goal of increasing the number of African American students who
possess knowledge of both computer science AND computer engineering to help
address national needs like semiconductor manufacturing. With the passing of the
bipartisan CHIPS and Science Act of 2022, it is not only a goal of the nation to
increase jobs and strengthen supply chains but of national security. Many of
these emerging jobs will require advanced degrees in electrical and computer
engineering. With the cost of equipment, labs, and faculty to teach in graduate
programs, strategic partnership maximizes the yield of engineers and researchers
needed to work in these roles. To achieve this goal, the grant is centered
around increasing the research infrastructure in the Department of Computer
Science at Morehouse College. Support will come from a collective effort from
Georgia Tech. However, the College of Electrical and Computer Engineering will
serve as the primary college at Georgia Tech supporting this effort.

Project activities included in the grant are organized visits to Georgia Tech
research labs, regular meetings to discuss collaboration goals, pre-freshman
summer research program integration, conference travel, and academic support for
participating Morehouse students. The partnership aims to train Morehouse
students who may consider returning to Morehouse as postdoctoral researchers,
research scientists, or faculty after completing their graduate degree at
Georgia Tech. Two computer science faculty members from two other Atlanta HBCUs
(Spelman College and Clark Atlanta University) will also be invited to
participate in meetings for eventual collaboration on future NSF proposals.
Graduating students who participated in the program’s activities may go on to
dual degree and graduate programs outside of Georgia Tech, creating a nationwide
funnel of CHIPS talent.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.