* 2318628
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Cross-stack Memory Optimizations for Boosting I/O Performance of Deep Learning HPC Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Yue Cheng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 121,442.00

New computing applications are emerging in smart networks, scientific
explorations, business management, security, and healthcare. These applications
depend on very large amounts of data. This data must be used in a fast and
efficient manner. The use of large supercomputers to analyze such data is on the
rise. The techniques they use are referred to as deep learning (DL) high-
performance computing (HPC). Researchers are using DL HPC to make sense of this
flood of data and obtain useful information. To do this they must redesign HPC
systems. A key challenge is how to use resources such as data storage and
computer memory at a huge scale. This project will build Metis, a high-
performance data storage system that uses new, end-to-end, hardware-supported
memory and storage design to meet the needs of DL HPC applications. The goal is
to satisfy the challenge posed by increasing data management performance for
next-generation supercomputers. The project will connect several different
computing communities and increase interactions among them. The project includes
educational and engagement activities which will greatly increase the
community's understanding of HPC systems. These activities include broadening
participation activities to attract and retain new students. Special emphasis
will be given to students from underrepresented groups. The project will
encourage student interest in design and research in large-scale computing
systems design.

This project brings together researchers in micro-architecture, distributed
computing systems, namely cloud and HPC systems, storage systems, and
power/energy modeling to boost DL HPC data processing performance. The research
will yield a fundamentally new software-hardware co-designed memory compression
technique that transparently compresses DL application memories with negligible
runtime performance overhead. Metis will leverage the novel compression
substrate to enable a distributed, intelligent, operating-system-level data
cache that effectively exploits the physical memory freed via program-memory
compression. The developed techniques will open doors for innovative HPC and
scientific applications in a broad range of disciplines, which have not been
previously possible. Metis' focus on addressing the challenges of increasing
performance in the Exascale era, along with engaging researchers from multiple
areas, aligns it very well with the goals and objectives of the SPX program.
Additionally, the research will also create new knowledge on design principles
of memory compression, and yield insights to provide seamless integration of DL
applications into the next-generation DL-aware supercomputer infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.