* 2318722
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Composable Verification of Crash-Safe Distributed Systems with Grove
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Joseph Tassarotti, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2026
* USD 249,998.00

Distributed systems play a crucial role in computer systems infrastructure.
Nevertheless, developing reliable distributed systems is challenging due to the
need to contend with concurrency across machines, concurrency within each
machine, unreliable networks that can delay or drop messages, and partial
failures if one or more machines crash and reboot while others continue running.
As a result, distributed systems are error-prone and subtle bugs can lead to
significant outages. Traditional testing approaches are insufficient to
eliminate all such bugs. This project's novelty is a new approach to formal
verification of distributed systems that allows verifying components in a
modular fashion. It allows for verification of distributed systems in the
presence of crashes. This project's impact is intended to include improving the
reliability and correctness of distributed systems and avoid costly outages. In
addition, new lab assignments for systems-verification classes are being
developed, focused on distributed systems.

The technical approach addresses two specific challenges: reasoning about crash
recovery in distributed systems, as well as composing distributed systems from
smaller components. Crash recovery is challenging because individual nodes can
crash and reboot. Once a node starts running again, it might no longer be
consistent with the rest of the system that did not crash. This means the node
may have lost all of its memory contents on crash but may have kept some state
durably on disk. The second challenge lies in composing specifications and
proofs of distributed systems (such as a key-value store) that are built out of
smaller components (such as a configuration service, a lock service, or the
implementation of an individual node). Scaling verification of distributed
systems requires the proof to reflect this modularity. For example, reasoning
about an application that uses a lock service should not require reasoning about
the network messages sent by the lock service itself. It should be done purely
using the specifications for the lock service client stubs. This project tackles
these challenges using concurrent separation logic, which provides a natural
approach for composing proofs about multiple components, as well as abstracting
away implementation details with a pre/post-condition specification. This
project extends earlier work with techniques for distributed system reasoning,
including new kinds of per-node invariants (which might need to be repaired on
crash) as opposed to global invariants (which must hold even if some nodes have
crashed). In addition, the project provides techniques for reasoning about
exactly-once semantics of Remote Procedure Calls (RPC) on top of unreliable
computer networks and locks that span multiple machines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.