* 2318123
* EFRI ELiS : Carbon Sequestration and Coastal Resilience Through 3D Printed Reefs
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Laura Mydlarz, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,987,723.00

Natural reefs and their connected ecosystem play a vital role in sequestering
carbon dioxide and in protecting coastal areas from climate change-induced
extreme events, such as hurricanes, flooding, etc. Unfortunately, climate
change-induced ocean acidification has damaged nearly 40% of the reefs and the
dependent ecosystem. While artificial reefs with a wide range of materials have
been constructed in the past few decades, the environmental impact and longevity
of most of these materials remain concerning. To find a solution, this project
will investigate the use of self-healing carbon-sequestering composite materials
for artificial reef construction that will enable storage of carbon dioxide
while also protecting coastal areas from rising seas and extreme floods. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society by identifying a
novel pathway to protect coastal communities from the immediate hazards of
climate change and contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training,
including the mentoring of three graduate students at the University of Texas at
Arlington, a graduate and undergraduate student at Texas A&M University-
Kingsville, a graduate student at the University of Texas-Dallas, and a graduate
student at Texas A&M University.

This project aims to establish a novel pathway to design living engineered reefs
that will enhance coastal resilience, store carbon, and restore habitat. The
research goals are to: (i) investigate the process-structure-property relation
of the self-healing carbon-negative composites to attain maximum carbon
sequestration capacity with superior longevity in seawater; (ii) understand the
interactions across carbon-negative composites, surface algal, and microbial
biofilms to ensure the settlement and growth of calcareous organisms on
engineered reefs; (iii) investigate wave-structure interactions of 3D-printed
engineered reefs via laboratory experiments to identify the optimal shape and
void ratios of the reefs that will enable adequate wave attenuation while also
providing habitat to marine life; and (iv) perform coastal hydrodynamic modeling
to identify the optimal geophysical setup for deployment (location, dimensions,
orientation) at which the engineered reef structure would produce quantifiable
flood reduction in response to compound hazards of inland hydrologic variations,
storm surge, ground subsidence, and sea level rise. In addition to research, the
project team will provide hands-on learning opportunities to high school
students via workshops on the STEM topics involved in this project including
carbon sequestration, 3D printing, marine biology, and coastal flood modeling.
The project team will also engage underserved communities through multiple
workshops in collaboration with the Nature Conservancy and the Texas Sea Grant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.