* 2318816
* A direct modeling approach to momentum, heat and mass exchange at the ocean-atmosphere interface at high wind speed
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Luc Deike, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 844,671.00

A better understanding of exchange of momentum, heat, and mass at the ocean-
atmosphere interface at very high wind speed is necessary to better predict
extreme weather events, which have dramatic impact on human activities, such as
tropical cyclone intensification. Given the complexity of these two-phase
turbulent flows, modeling tools are extremely valuable to unravel the detailed
physical mechanisms. This research will provide a novel computational framework
for fully coupled air-water simulations at high wind speed, including breaking
waves, turbulent wind, droplet generation and their influence on the heat and
mass exchange in the turbulent wave boundary layer. The initial work on the
small-scale dynamics of individual breaking waves and droplet evolution will
feed into a larger-scale model able to resolve the flows that provide the
forcing context for the small-scale model. This comprehensive approach will lead
to a general improvement in simplified models and parameterization, that can be
implemented and tested in a wide range of numerical tools, from high resolution
models to larger scale Earth system models, leading to improvement in climate
and weather forecast. This project will expose undergraduate and graduate
students at Princeton to critical environmental challenges that require research
on fundamental multi-phase flows, and promote the use of open-source methods,
through workshop and teaching activities.

The large range of scales involved in air-sea interaction will be split into two
sets of more tractable problems. The first will consider droplet evaporation in
the air, fully resolving droplet ejection and heat exchange with the surrounding
air for wind-wave breaking dynamics forced by turbulent boundary layer. Such
high-fidelity simulations will span scales from 100 microns to 1m and focus on
understanding the small-scale coupling between high wind forced turbulence close
to the water surface and droplets, directly solving for heat and mass exchange,
waves and droplets processes and the coupling of heat and momentum exchange at
high wind speed. The models developed for these small-scale processes will be
integrated into a multi-layer numerical framework, akin to large eddy
simulations. Such simulations will be able to resolve realistic breaking wave
statistics spanning scales from 1m to 1km, allowing to represent the outer
scales of the turbulent flow. Analysis of the heat and momentum budget will help
understand current uncertainties in bulk formulation and may lead to new
parameterizations for the heat and drag coefficient applicable to larger scale
models used for tropical cyclone intensification studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.