* 2318974
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Automating and Synthesizing Parallel Zero-Knowledge Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2027
* USD 449,999.00

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) protocols allow one party to prove to others the
correctness of a statement without revealing why. Although a relatively old and
well-understood concept in cryptography, ZKP protocols recently came into the
spotlight again given their many applications in blockchain privacy, private
auditing, verifiable computation, and anonymous networks. While ZKP protocols
offer exciting capabilities, they also come with a huge overhead in
computational resources. For ZKP protocols to reach the same level of practical
significance as machine learning algorithms, an automated framework is needed
that can allow even non-cryptographers to develop optimized applications backed
by parallelizable protocols. The project's broader significance and importance
are advancing deployability of state-of-the-art ZKP protocols from a
cryptography perspective. The project's novelties are the formal systematization
of ZKP protocols to obtain novel parallel and highly optimized ZKP algorithms.
Furthermore, the investigators are developing a course that encompasses the
foundations of formal computing methods and cryptography and their applications
in practical settings.

The framework enables non-expert programmers to write efficient and intuitive
programs in that domain, by taking full advantage of the scalability and cost
savings offered by distributed computing and ZKP-specific optimizations. In
particular, the project enables programmers with little background in
cryptography to write ZKP applications, automatically obtain optimized versions
of the algorithms, and deploy them on multiple machines for improved end-to-end
running time. The framework features (i) a programming language where developers
can write applications with a sequential mindset, (ii) a compilation and
optimization toolset that can first optimize the program and then automatically
partition the resulting application into smaller ones, and (iii) a set of
supporting components that can help programmers verify and synthesize code in
the framework's language. The problem of parallelizing ZKP protocols is studied
from a formal methods lens, where many new research questions emerge regarding
new optimization problems requiring careful language design and rigorous proofs
of security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.