* 2318899
* Neuronal substrates underlying the construction of value in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ueli Rutishauser, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

How do our personal preferences arise? We all have a multitude of preferences
and a sense of our own individual taste – but why do we come to like some things
and not like others? For instance, why might a person like potato chips but not
like popcorn, pop music rather than country-western, baseball rather than
basketball, or come to like a representational painting by Rembrandt, but
dislike abstract, modern art of Jackson Pollock? The major question we are
addressing in this project is how are our preferences formed in the brain? The
researchers aim to test a theory that the brain relies on “features” of objects
which are the elements that make up an object – such as the ingredients in a
food item, or the color, shapes and textures in a painting, in order to make a
decision about how much something is liked or not. The hypothesis is that the
brain cells (neurons) respond to these elementary features of an object, and
that other neurons integrate over these features to form an overall preference
judgment. To test for this, the responses of neurons are recorded directly from
the human brain, while people make simple judgements about how much they like a
variety of items including food, visual art and even clothing items. This
research is made possible because of safe technological advances in brain
surgery, and the generosity of patients who are being treated for intractable
epilepsy. Prior to brain surgery to remove the epileptic brain tissue, patients
have small electrodes temporarily placed into their brain to locate their
seizures as part of their treatment. These patients are often willing to
volunteer to take part in research studies, yielding a rare opportunity to
measure electrical activity from neurons directly. Understanding how neurons in
our brain form our preferences could help us better understand how people make
decisions in the real world.

While value signals are known to be encoded in the brain, a fundamental question
remains about how such signals come to be computed in the first place. The major
hypothesis to be tested in this project is that value signals for stimuli
ranging from foods to consumer goods through to art, are constructed by the
brain in a dynamic fashion by integrating over the component features or
attributes of a stimulus. While a number of prior studies have examined value
construction using neuroimaging techniques (such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging or fMRI), insights can only be gained over the spatiotemporal
resolution of the technique, which cannot measure single cells. As a
consequence, little is known about how stimulus features are represented by
individual cells and integrated to compute an overall stimulus-value. Here, this
limitation can be overcome through the use of intracranial recordings in human
epilepsy patients while they perform three different tasks probing value
construction. The research focuses on neuronal populations in the three key
parts of the value network in the brain: the amygdala, lateral orbitofrontal,
and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. The spatial resolution of these methods
enables insight into how individual features are represented at the neuronal
level, while the temporal resolution allows us to identify the temporal dynamics
by which features are actively integrated to yield an overall value signal.
Features in the amygdala and lateral orbitofrontal cortex are hypothesized to be
integrated to yield value signals in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Furthermore, the research aims to address the means by which value signals are
altered following a change in one’s overall goals, comparing a model in which
features are modulated directly by a change in context, against an alternative
in which the connectivity between feature neurons and value coding neurons are
modulated by goal context, yet feature representations remain unchanged. This
project promises to yield fundamental mechanistic insights into the neural
computations underlying the production of value signals in the human brain, and
the origin and neural basis of our individual preferences, which in turn serve a
fundamental role in guiding human decision-making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.