* 2318600
* SBIR Phase I:  A Fully Electric Space Vehicle Propulsion Engine
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Chance Glenn, MORNINGBIRD MEDIA CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 272,800.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a fundamental change in the way spacecraft
propulsion can be achieved, perhaps leading to orders of magnitude faster space
travel. Recent physics breakthroughs suggest that the development of an
electromagnetically powered engine could enable high-speed travel under the
right conditions. Commercially, there is great potential to decrease transit
time to destinations on earth, to low-earth orbit, to the moon, and to
destinations further in our solar system. Success in developing this engine will
initially be developed by improving satellite positioning and accessing orbits.
Further scale up of this propulsion system could serve as a platform technology
to enable increased access to space due to reduced need for chemical propellant
and enhanced speeds.

This SBIR Phase I project develops and tests a prototype engine by verifying the
creation of electromagnetically driven propulsion. By utilizing a complex
dielectric material as the environment where electromagnetic energy is
introduced, the proof-of-concept engine will verify that the weak and strong
force conditions are not violated and that a positive energy density can
initiate nanoscopic distortions, to demonstrate novel electromagnetic propulsion
in the form of further scalable engines. A number of researchers have begun
building upon the work of Albert Einstein’s general relativity theory and now
Miguel Alcubierre’s metric that suggests that a vessel can be propelled by
selective distortion. Two key goals are the development and implementation of
the complex dielectric material, and the determinization of the radio frequency
power required to achieve sufficient propulsion. The project approach will
include: (a) mathematical modeling, (b) comprehensive simulations of different
embodiments of the approach, (c) experimental verification of nanoscopic
distortions using an established laser interferometry approach, and (d) design
and testing of the prototype propulsion engine. Beyond the initial prototype,
the next stages include an optimization of the power/distortion metrics,
association of the distortion to thrust, and maximization of the thrust to
weight ratio. Ultimately, this research is expected to lead to enhanced electric
propulsion that will be applicable initially to satellites, but ultimately, to a
wide range of on earth and off planet propulsion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.