* 2318255
* Emphasizing Explanation in AI Augmented String Instrumental Education
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Irina Muresanu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Music is an integral part of our lives and there is a lot of evidence that
giving students opportunities to instrumental music education is important,
because of its advantages for developing cognitive, social, and physical skills,
and its benefits for mental health. Learning to play a musical instrument,
however, constitutes a lengthy and complex process. Private music instruction is
costly, afforded only by a privileged part of the world population. The recently
developed tools in AI and online education provide an opportunity to create new
technology for music education which can reach a very diverse student
population. Little is known, however, on how to do intelligent online teaching
of musical instruments, and how to keep students engaged through individualized
instructions in a discipline that involves motor instructions. In this project,
a team with expertise in violin pedagogy and visual and auditory signal analysis
aims to develop an AI platform to analyze a student’s playing during individual
practice time. Video and audio input recorded by cameras and microphones on
handheld devices are used to provide feedback on posture, bow movements, sound
quality and selection of curricular materials. This project advances our
understanding of the learning and teaching of motor tasks, and provides new
insights for computational perception of human movements from multi-modal data.
It supports digital humanities in the field of music; from a humanity
perspective, it democratizes music education, and provides the benefits of
instrumental instruction to a large and more diverse population.

Inspired by cognitive studies on educational feedback intervention, this project
develops a prototype AI system that acts as a virtual assistance to violin
students, teachers, and supervising parents, and like a human teacher it also
provides explanations. This is accomplished through two unique components: 1) a
feedback system that provides advice based on visual and auditory analysis and
causal relationships of errors, i.e., why a movement error caused non-ideal
sound; and 2) assignment of educational materials specific to the students based
on the perceptual evaluation and a corpus of recorded materials. The technical
work involves the collection of multi-modal data from violin players, the
development of machine learning algorithms for analyzing the players’
performance, the recording and curation of a corpus of educational music pieces
from videos and created sheet music, the design of a gamified user interface,
and feedback instructions. The combination of developed AI software, data
collected through observation of violin students, and the music corpuses to be
digitized, recorded, and categorized constitute a major step forward into the
21st century for the field of music pedagogy and innovation of tools for
studying human motor learning through perception.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.