* 2318937
* FMitF: Track I: Synthesizing Semantic Checkers for Runtime Verification of Production Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Xinyu Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 750,000.00

As users increasingly depend on distributed systems to provide various services,
it is critical to ensure that these systems function properly. However, software
bugs and hardware faults can cause production distributed systems to violate
semantic guarantees without demonstrating any explicit errors. These "silent
failures" can have serious consequences and are difficult to detect using
existing methods. One promising approach to this problem involves continuous
verification of system behavior using runtime checkers that can detect semantic
violations. Unfortunately, few production distributed systems have adopted
runtime verification due to the associated difficulty and cost of creating
robust and efficient checkers. This project aims to bridge this fundamental gap
by designing new, end-to-end methods that automatically synthesize high-quality
semantic checkers for modern distributed systems. The project will result in a
framework that leverages the many existing tests developers have already written
for particular system inputs by analyzing the test code and generating semantic
checkers that perform correctly under new inputs. The project will further
establish a new language and corresponding runtime verifier to generate more
expressive and efficient checkers and to refine the checkers as the system
evolves.

Distributed systems are the backbone of vital services in our society. Silent
failures have led to significant losses and disruptions. This project will make
large-scale distributed systems resilient to silent semantic failures and reduce
their impact on users and society. Furthermore, it will increase awareness and
understanding of runtime verification for distributed systems and provide
practical toolchains that facilitate its widespread adoption. The project
includes education and outreach activities that include student mentoring,
curriculum development, release of software (and related) artifacts, and
dissemination of results through a variety of academic and industry venues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.