* 2318977
* Variational Optimal Transport Methods for Nonlinear Filtering
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Amirhossein Taghvaei, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 441,162.00

The reliable and safe operation of autonomous systems relies on accurately
quantifying uncertainty and assimilating noisy sensory data through nonlinear
filtering. This research proposal seeks to combine recent advancements in
machine learning (ML) and the mathematical theory of optimal transportation (OT)
to create scalable and adaptable nonlinear filtering algorithms. The research
objectives encompass computational development and evaluation of the proposed
algorithms, theoretical error analysis, extending the algorithms to handle
geometric constraints for pose estimation, and the development of a new learning
framework to adapt incorrect models using output sensory data. By merging ML and
OT, this research aims to enhance the performance and versatility of nonlinear
filtering methods for autonomous systems.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this research lies in the
innovative variational formulation of conditional distributions, acting as a
bridge between nonlinear filtering and machine learning. This connection
facilitates the exchange of theoretical and computational tools. The research
aims to explore ways to overcome the curse of dimensionality in particle
filters, offering insights into existing nonlinear filtering algorithms like
feedback particle filter and ensemble Kalman filter. This, in turn, paves the
way for new avenues in stability and error analysis. Furthermore, the proposed
model adaptation and learning framework holds great potential to advance the
study of learning stochastic dynamic systems from sensory data and provides new
opportunities in solving problems related to partially observed Markov decision
processes (POMDPs). Broader Impacts: This research proposal has broader societal
impacts as it lays the foundation for uncertainty-aware autonomous systems,
leading to significant improvements in their safety and efficiency in the
presence of uncertainty. This impacts domains such as robotics, by increasing
their capability to navigate unknown environments, adapting to dynamic
conditions, and making informed and safe decisions. The research would also
impact the smart-grid by effectively managing the uncertainty, due to
integration of renewable energy sources, leading to more efficient utilization
of available energy sources. Additionally, the proposal includes educational
objectives, leveraging the existing infrastructure at the University of
Washington to provide research opportunities for undergraduates and mentorship
for underrepresented minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.