* 2318887
* Computing Educator Diversity Initiative Research Practice Partnership (CEDI RPP)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Carol Fletcher, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,184.00

The University of Texas will expand the Computing Educator Diversity Initiative
(CEDI) and focus on recruiting and supporting teachers who reflect the racial
and ethnic identities of Texas’ student population through a Research Practice
Partnership (RPP) and use tools within improvement science research that will
help future certified Computer Science (CS) teachers increase their content
knowledge, pedagogical skills, and inclusive instructional strategies. CEDI will
contribute to the research-practice partnership field within education by
exploring the efficacy of a Networked Improvement Community (NIC) to build Black
and Latine teachers’ capacity to become CS certified, implement inclusive and
culturally responsive CS teaching and learning opportunities, and improve equity
in their high school computing programs. The NIC model will test a holistic
approach to tackling the underrepresentation of CS certified Black and Latine
teachers by leveraging an affinity group to consider the potential root causes
for the current disparities such as professional development opportunities,
teacher identity, administrative support, and cultural contexts. Applying the
CEDI NIC model to this problem of practice will contribute to an emerging body
of scholarship in improvement science focused on tackling complex issues within
educational systems that have rarely been responsive to isolated or siloed
interventions. CEDI will develop a collaborative model for addressing CS equity
issues in schools and districts for minoritized teachers that could be
applicable to recruiting and retaining certified CS teachers who are able to
serve as role models for Black and Latine students, teach CS courses, and expand
enrollment of Black and Latine students in CS courses through both instructional
and programmatic changes. This CSforAll High School Strand RPP builds CS
teaching capacity to be responsive to culturally responsive and inclusive
teaching and learning tools and approaches that would benefit students. CEDI
researchers and practitioners will implement and test a holistic, research-based
approach to tackling complex problems of practice using PDSA (Plan-Do-Study-Act)
cycles to iterate on interventions to build teacher preparedness and
effectiveness. NIC practitioners will be supported through virtual and in-person
professional development and network building experiences. CEDI will facilitate
and nurture a robust learning community among teachers and researchers through a
comprehensive professional development program that will occur monthly. CEDI’s
research and evaluation will support teachers in becoming culturally and
inclusive educators who will provide CS learning opportunities that reach
minoritized student populations and improve high school CS programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.