* 2318210
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a HPC Cluster for Fostering Interdisciplinary Collaboration on AI-driven and Data-intensive Research and Education in West Tennessee
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Duane McKenna, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,115,997.00

This project will acquire, deploy, and operate a high-performance computing
(HPC) cluster at the University of Memphis (UofM). By sharing the proposed
equipment across the West Tennessee region and throughout nearby states (e.g.,
Mississippi and Arkansas), this cluster will significantly increase research
quality and productivity, enable new areas of research efforts, promote training
HPC workforce, and enhance the educational commitment of at least 10
participating institutions in this region. The cluster encompasses multiple
types of over 100 state-of-the-art GPUs (NVIDIA 4090, A6000, and A100) that fit
the diverse needs of regional institutions for research development. The cluster
will support teaching and research for undergraduate and graduate students in
the region across interdisciplinary research fields, helping prepare the next
generation of AI scientists and HPC operation workforces. Education
opportunities in the cluster for female students, underrepresented racial
groups, and those from other marginalized communities will broadly promote the
diversification of the AI and HPC workforce in the region. The cluster will also
be available for regional colleges, such as LeMoyne-Owen College and Christian
Brothers University, which lack a computing facility.

The rapid development of deep learning across research computing communities has
facilitated increasingly massive needs for computing capacity to develop AI
approaches and big data applications (e.g., ChatGPT). The GPU cluster will
support AI research and applications across five research areas: intelligent
health, cybersecurity, education technology, smart transportation, and
computational biology. Each thread will enable fundamental and applied research
in many areas, such as 1) pediatric cancer diagnosis; 2) securing real-time
systems; 3) AI-driven tutoring systems; 4) auto-driving navigation systems; and
5) computational simulations for the evolution of insect-plant interactions. The
research will put West TN at the forefront of integrating AI and data science
into addressing the timely research of scientific and societal issues and
providing training opportunities for the next generation of AI scientists and
HPC administrators. This cluster will involve more than 37 faculty members with
193 student advisees from a diverse population from over 10 research
institutions at West TN, particularly benefiting the underrepresented minorities
in STEM (e.g., first-gen and women). Finally, the proposed cluster will enable
teaching and training programs, which will empower to better equip students with
AI and HPC operations skills; in turn, this will benefit and diversify the
future workforce of AI research, HPC management, and regional industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.