* 2318659
* Approaches toward External Validity of Randomized Controlled Trials in the Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Naoki Egami, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 231,858.00

Social scientists and decision makers have been interested in whether and how
well they can generalize the results of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to
new populations, places, and contexts. This question of external validity is a
foundation of evidence-based decision making because study populations and sites
are often different from the real-world populations and sites to which an
intervention might be scaled up. This research develops statistical approaches
to improve the external validity of RCTs in the social sciences.

The research makes two methodological contributions. The first is a new
framework to design RCTs for external validity. Specifically, this project
develops an algorithm to select experimental sites such that researchers can
credibly estimate generalizable causal effects. Site selection is essential
because experimental results in the social sciences are often heterogeneous
across places, and biased selection of experimental sites can lead to low
generalizability and replicability. The second contribution is a statistical
tool to quantify the robustness to external validity bias. This new measure of
external robustness allows researchers to evaluate external validity even when
RCTs were conducted without external validity considerations. These two methods
complement each other and together provide a unified pipeline to improve the
external validity of RCTs in the social sciences.

The project is co-funded by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communications,
and Impact program; the Accountability, Institutions and Behavior program; and
the Office of Integrative Activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.