* 2318984
* NCS-FO: Brain-Informed Goal-Oriented and Bidirectional Deep Emotion Inference
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Andreas Keil, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2027
* USD 920,000.00

Human emotions are dynamic, multidimensional responses to challenges and
opportunities that emerge from network interactions in the brain. Disruptions of
these dynamics underlie emotional dysregulation in many mental disorders
including anxiety and depression. To empirically study the neural basis of human
emotion inference, experimenters often have observers view natural images
varying in affective content, while at the same time recording their brain
activity using electroencephalogram (EEG) and/or Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). Despite extensive research over the last few decades, much
remains to be learned about the computational principles subserving the
recognition of emotions in natural scenes. A major roadblock faced by empirical
neuroscientists is the inability to carry out precisely manipulate human neural
systems and test the consequences in imaging data. Deep Neural Networks (DNN),
owing to their high relevance to human neural systems and extraordinary
prediction capability, have become a promising tool for testing these sorts of
hypotheses in swift and nearly costless computer simulations. The overarching
goal of this project is to develop a neuroscience-inspired, DNN-based deep
learning framework for emotion inference in real-world scenarios by
synergistically integrating neuron-, circuit-, and system-level mechanisms.
Recognizing that the state-of-the-art DNNs are centered on bottom-up and
feedforward-only processing, which disagrees with the strong goal-oriented top-
down modulation recurrence observed in the physiology, this project aims to
enrich DNNs and enable closer AI-neuroscience interaction by incorporating goal-
oriented top-down modulation and reciprocal interactions DNNs and test the model
assumptions and predictions on neuroimaging data.

To meet these goals, the project aims to develop a brain-inspired goal-oriented
and bidirectional deep learning model for emotion inference. Despite the great
promise shown by todayâ€™s deep learning as a framework for modeling biological
vision, their architecture is limited to emulating the visual cortex for
face/object/scene recognition and rarely goes beyond the inferotemporal cortex
(IT), which is necessary for modeling high-level cognitive processes. In this
project, we propose to build a biologically plausible deep learning architecture
by integrating an in-silico amygdala module into the visual cortex architecture
in DNN (the VCA model). The researchers hope to build neuron-, circuit-, and
system-level modulation via goal-oriented attention priming, and multi-pathway
predictive coding to 1) elucidate the mechanism of selectivity underlying
preference and response to naturalistic emotions by artificial neurons; 2)
differentiate fine-grained emotional responses via multi-path predictive coding,
and 3) refine the neuroscientific understanding of human neuro-behavioral data
by comparing attention priming and temporal generalization observed in
simultaneous fMRI-EEG data to the computational observations using our brain-
inspired VCA model. This project introduces two key innovations, both patterned
after how brain operates, into DNN architecture and demonstrate their superior
performance when applied to complex real-world tasks. Successful execution of
the project can lead to the development of a new generation of AI-models that
are inspired by neuroscience and that may in turn power neuroscience research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.