* 2318661
* EAGER: Breaking the walls down: Understanding the role of cell wall components in root growth regulation under water deficit conditions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Laurene Tetard, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 222,576.00

The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the changes in cell wall
composition and cell wall mechanics that allow maize primary roots to maintain
growth under water limited conditions. Limited water availability is a major
environmental factor constraining plant development, in turn adversely affecting
plant performance and crop yields. One of the prominent responses of plants to
water limitation is the maintenance of root growth, enabling access to water
from deeper soil profiles. Substantial changes in cell wall composition are
implicated in root growth maintenance under water limitation. However, due to
technical challenges, the molecular and physiological mechanisms involved in
root growth maintenance under water limitation remain unknown. Such
understanding is critical for improving crop productivity in normal and
stressful environments and for sustainable bioenergy production. This research
integrates biochemical and biomechanical information from sub-cellular to organ-
level responses of root tissues to decipher the functional role of cell wall
components in regulating root growth. Successful completion of these state-of-
the-art studies will provide proof-of-concept for quantitative analyses of plant
cell walls exhibiting different compositional and functional characteristics.
This multi-disciplinary approach will enable the identification of design rules
for the interactions of different components within the cell wall matrix and
their impacts on plant growth and morphogenesis under normal and stressful
environments. The fundamental knowledge and the technological advances developed
through this project will ultimately enhance agricultural productivity under
normal and stressful environments by allowing predictions about how plants,
especially crop plants like maize, will respond to climate change. The project
will provide interdisciplinary training and mentoring for a graduate student at
the University of Central Florida, an Hispanic-Serving Institution, and at least
two undergraduate researchers, contributing to workforce development.

Maize primary and nodal roots preferentially maintain growth under water stress
conditions, compared to shoot tissues that show growth inhibition. Within the
primary root growth zone, the apical region completely maintains cell elongation
and growth even under severe water stress, whereas the basal region shows
reduced cell elongation and growth deceleration. These spatially differential
responses are associated with changes in cell wall yielding properties and
potentially changes in cell wall composition. The overall goal of this project
is to elucidate the changes in cell wall composition and wall mechanics that
enable primary roots to maintain growth under water stress conditions. The
specific objectives are to first reveal the differential cell wall compositional
changes occurring within the growth zone of maize primary roots grown under
water limitation compared to well-watered primary roots, and subsequently to
assess the mechano-chemical changes occurring in the cell walls of the growth
zone of primary roots under water stress to correlate them with cell wall
extensibility and root growth. Integration of cell wall compositional analyses
with biochemical and biomechanical studies from sub-cellular to organ-level
scales will enable deeper understanding of plant growth under normal and water
limited conditions. This multi-scale approach will unveil how components
interact within the cell wall matrix and how they impact cell expansion and
plant growth under water stress conditions. In the long-term, knowledge from
these studies will pave the way to selectively alter cell wall components to
promote stress-responsive growth in plants and optimize them for sustainable
food and energy production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.