* 2318495
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Plasma-Assisted Dehalogenation of Persistent Halogen-Containing Waste Streams
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Angela Violi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2027
* USD 425,000.00

The “take-make-dispose” model for the utilization of halogen-containing
compounds has polluted the planet’s water, soil, and air resources. The strong
carbon-halogen bonds resulting from halogens being potent oxidants have resulted
in a contamination challenge with a daunting legacy. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),
which were globally banned 30 years ago to close the Antarctic ozone hole,
persist in the atmosphere. Additionally, there are over 9000 poly- and
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) currently contaminating rainwater worldwide,
and polyvinylchloride (PVC) plastics account for more than 50% of chlorine found
in municipal waste. Today, xenobiotic organohalogen compounds are pervasive:
PFAS-contaminated water is consumed by 200 million Americans and PVC is the
primary contributor to the nation’s annual dioxin burden, surpassing that of any
other industrial product. To address this legacy contamination challenge, a step
change solution is required, one that surpasses the limited scope of current
thermochemical technologies. In this project, plasma-assisted dehalogenation is
proposed as a disruptive solution to this challenge. The project focuses on the
use of non-equilibrium plasmas for the degradation and recycling of halogen-
containing waste and holds enormous potential for improving human health and
preserving the environment. This convergent research project will provide unique
opportunities for interdisciplinary STEM education and training and prepare a
diverse pipeline of students and researchers to become the next generation of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers. Planned outreach activities involve
the development of hands-on activities for K-12 programs, with a focus on at-
risk and often underrepresented students. The effort involves partnerships with
industry to further technological development and activities that raise
awareness among local communities about the pervasive presence of halogen-
containing compounds and the associated health and safety challenges they pose.

The goal of the research is to probe at a mechanistic level plasma-assisted
dehalogenation reaction chemistry and to use these insights to develop
innovative processes that make possible recycling of reaction products or the
full mineralization of haloginated components. Non-equilibrium plasma refers to
a partially ionized gas operating at near ambient temperatures, where only the
electrons possess kinetic energies high enough to enable the production of
short-lived reactive species which act as initiators for chain reactions of
various substrates. This convergent research program leverages the PIs’
expertise in chemical reaction engineering, plasma science, chemical modeling
and theory, and environmental engineering to establish a plasma dehalogenation
model that will be used to design a reactor for plasma-assisted dehalogenation
of waste streams with a focus on PFAS and PVC as two testbed cases. The
successful completion of this research will lead to new fundamental scientific
insights and engineering solutions contributing to a broader framework for
dehalogenating a wide range of waste streams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.