* 2318652
* ECO-CBET: A Convergent Approach to the Rational Design of Controllably Degradable Polymers using Sustainable Nanocomposites and Biodegradable-Additives
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Ryan Sullivan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,699,966.00

Petroleum-derived polymers, or plastics, play a vital role in everyday life.
Unfortunately, they can be difficult to recycle, and plastic waste that enters
the environment resists degradation by natural processes. The researchers aim to
tackle the critical challenges of plastic waste and pollution by understanding
and modeling plastic degradation processes. This knowledge will be instrumental
in developing alternative plastic products specifically designed to minimize
their environmental impact. To achieve their goal, the researchers plan to
develop innovative methods for depolymerizing existing commodity plastics and
incorporating environmentally-friendly filler materials, including graphene
oxide and proteins. Natural metal salt catalysts will facilitate these
processes. The plastic degradation products will be characterized in real-time,
and advanced computer simulations will be used to understand the degradation
processes. The project centers on a learning and optimization cycle, where
knowledge gained from polymer synthesis and modification, real-time analysis,
and modeling inform the design of novel plastics with desirable properties. The
convergent research approach leverages the team's expertise in polymer,
analytical, and environmental chemistry and molecular simulation. Furthermore,
the researchers will engage in educational outreach activities to promote
environmental science, polymer chemistry, and recycling awareness.

Polymers derived from petroleum feedstocks have many important applications, but
their environmental persistence and inefficient recycling methods pose
significant waste management challenges. This project focuses on developing
nanocomposite materials from commodity plastics using two approaches: (1)
incorporating graphene oxide and (2) introducing protein fillers. The
researchers will explore novel catalytic methods involving metal salts to
degrade commodity polymers, facilitating the synthesis of nanocomposites. To
evaluate the potential of these nanocomposites as replacements for existing
plastics, the team will analyze the materialsâ€™ thermomechanical properties,
permeability, and degradation characteristics. To assess the environmental
impact of the materials, the researchers will conduct a detailed molecular-level
analysis of the plastic degradation products, polymer interfaces, reaction
kinetics, and produced micro/nanoparticles. Additionally, they will use
molecular simulation to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms, optimize
polymer modification reaction conditions, and enhance the performance of these
novel materials. The ultimate project objective is to understand polymer
degradation processes through sophisticated analytical methods and leverage this
knowledge to create superior polymer nanocomposite alternatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.