* 2318883
* ATD: Fast Bayesian Anomalies Detection in Dynamical System Time-varying Parameters
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shihao Yang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to advance the field of dynamical system analysis by creating
a sophisticated statistical framework to detect anomalies in dynamical systems
characterized by ordinary and partial differential equations. Focusing on
applications like multi-locale disease spread and geospatial physical dynamics,
this system will serve to identify critical changes in systems quickly and
accurately. The project has significant implications for scientific discoveries
(e.g. physical systems), public health (e.g. infectious diseases), natural
disaster prediction (e.g. weather models), and hidden threat detection (e.g.
seismic wave in earth). It promotes the progress of science, advances national
health welfare, and assists national defense by detecting anomalies and thus
improving decision-making processes in these crucial areas. Through
collaborations with industry partners and government agencies, the utility of
this system will have direct real-world applications. Moreover, the project
places a strong emphasis on education and diversity. It will provide
opportunities for students at all levels, particularly focusing on supporting
women and minorities in the fields of mathematics, statistics, engineering, and
data science, thereby further enhancing the national prosperity by nurturing
future generations of STEM professionals. The project's core objective is to
construct a fast Bayesian method based on Gaussian processes for efficient
parameter estimation and anomaly detection in time-varying dynamical systems.
This method, which overcomes the limitations of traditional numerical solver for
ordinary differential equation (ODE) inference by constraining Gaussian
processes on the manifold of ODE solutions, allows for drastic computational
savings and resolves theoretical incompatibilities between Gaussian processes
and ODEs. Change point detection, or identifying significant shifts in time-
varying parameters, will be executed using a full Bayesian approach, an
iterative hierarchical clustering method, or a two-step approach. Notably, the
scope of this project extends to high-dimensional ODEs. The anticipated
contributions of this project include the development of statistical tools
capable of detecting changes in time-varying parameters in complex systems, thus
pushing the boundaries of current ODE parameter inference research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.