* 2318261
* Collaborative Research: An Equitable, Justice-Focused Ecosystem for Pacific Northwest Secondary CS Teaching
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jonah Firestone, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2027
* USD 17,802.00

The University of Washington, Central Washington University, Western Washington
University, Whitworth University, and Washington State University will bring
together leaders of pre-service programs, Computer Science Teachers Association
(CSTA) chapters, Educational Service Districts (ESD), CTE directors, community
organizations, and researchers to realize justice-focused secondary CS education
in Washington, Oregon, and Idaho. School districts across the country need more
secondary computer science teachers, especially those who share the identities,
values, and lived experiences of the students they teach. However, pathways for
preparing and supporting computer science teachers are only just emerging, and
many are struggling to recruit promising teachers into the profession and retain
them long term. This project seeks to serve students and teachers who are women,
African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and/or disabled, specifically by
creating pathways into computer science teaching for teachers with these
identities. This project will create a consortium of emerging pre-service
programs across the Pacific Northwest to address, strengthen, and mature
computer science teaching pathways in four ways: 1) organizing and sharing
information about teaching pathways, 2) identifying and resolving key barriers
to pathways that aspiring teachers face, 3) supporting computers science teacher
community building in partnership with new and existing computer science
teachers association chapters, and 4) supporting administrative leaders who
manage and grow these pathways.

The CSforAll High School Strand project’s approach is to build an evidence-based
networked improvement community, which deeply engages stakeholders across the
region to identify opportunities for change, develop sustainable cross-
institutional coordination practices, and use research as one tool of many to
inform approaches to change. Research will particularly focus on answering 1)
who is and isn’t informed about CS teaching pathways, and why; 2) what barriers
aspiring teacher with identities marginalized in CS face in pursuing CS teaching
careers; 3) how community gatherings amongst teachers with marginalized
identities can support teacher retention; and 4) how solidarity amongst teacher
education administrative leaders can support sustainability of pathways. These
questions will be posed across urban and rural divides, helping to inform how
values, communities, and state politics shape equitable access to computer
science education in secondary schools across the Pacific Northwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.