* 2318489
* Design &amp; Development: Colorado Science and Engineering Inquiry Collaborative
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Angela Bielefeldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2026
* USD 418,531.00

It is important to design, develop and investigate educational programs to
support the development of interests and skills in engineering for advancing
technology needs in the 21st Century. This project, Design & Development:
Colorado SCience and ENgineering Inquiry Collaborative (SCENIC), will meet these
needs through the development of engaging, hands-on air and soil quality
environmental engineering curriculum and an associated outreach infrastructure
to support rural Colorado middle and high school students’ learning and
engineering identity development. These inquiry-based curricula will be
developed and refined in Colorado science classrooms at rural K-12 schools by a
collaborative partnership between high schools students, University of Colorado
Boulder (CU) students and faculty as well as high school teachers and local
community partners. The curriculum will integrate CU environmental monitoring
equipment into science and/or engineering classrooms to allow middle/high
schools students to investigate environmental issues in their own community,
with the support of college students pursuing engineering degrees. Results of
the rural high school students’ inquiry projects will be presented to members of
local communities at an event at the end of the school year. Throughout the
project, a team of CU researchers will investigate the process to understand how
students begin to identify with engineering, what is working about the
collaborations and where improvement is needed for the following school year.
This project contributes to research in the formation of engineers including an
understanding of how students are formed into engineers, how to transform the
system to better develop engineers, and how to provide a roadmap for others to
develop similar initiatives.

The proposed design and development project would investigate and refine an
educational infrastructure for supporting engineering and science learning and
identity formation in an outreach program in twelve rural Colorado high schools.
Design-based research will both inform the refinement of the materials and
approach for supporting high school student inquiry, and advance our fundamental
understanding of the underlying processes and mechanisms that support
engineering identity formation. The research questions are: How do aspects of
the outreach program’s educational infrastructure support rural high school
students’ participation in and identification with engineering and science? How
does conducting locally relevant environmental monitoring contribute to rural
students’ engineering and science identity development? SCENIC integrates
university engineering faculty and student mentors with rural high schools via
on-line, interactive curriculum and in-person visits to support high school
students in carrying out educationally impactful local environmental monitoring
projects. University undergraduate and graduate engineering students enroll in a
two-semester course that prepares them to mentor the high school students.
Environmental monitoring pods and other educational resources and interactive
support mechanisms will be iteratively improved via design-based research. The
project will advance knowledge regarding the adaptation of cutting-edge
university research tools for environmental monitoring into high school
classrooms to impact engineering identity development. SCENIC’s university-
supported curriculum and mentoring will impact rural students, school districts,
and local communities. Results will be disseminated through symposiums at the
rural high schools where students showcase their work, peer-reviewed
publications, local and national conferences, and through curriculum published
in the NSF-supported TeachEngineering Digital Library. Publications and
conference sessions will explicitly target both research audiences and
practicing teacher audiences at both K-12 and higher education levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.