* 2318987
* Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment: Orbitrap Fourier Transform Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Environmental and Climate Research.
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Gagnon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,236,369.00

The specific aim of this project is to acquire an Orbitrap Isotope Ratio Mass
Spectrometer (IRMS) at the University of Washington (UW) which houses a multi-
user laboratory facility specializing in stable isotope ratio measurements.

The university laboratory currently contains five gas-source IRMSs that measure
hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, sulfur, and nitrogen isotope ratios from a variety of
chemical species after conversion of those species to a low molecular weight
gas.

Current applications of stable isotope measurements are highly varied and
include temperature reconstruction from ice cores and sediment cores, proxies
for paleo atmospheric oxidant abundance from ice cores, endangered orca food web
reconstruction, provenance of illicitly trafficked pangolin scales, and
elucidating the co-evolution of life and oxygen in the atmosphere.

New developments in Orbitrap mass spectrometry, however, have made this
instrument sensitive enough for isotope ratio measurements of intact molecules
with no need to convert them to a low molecular weight gas before isotopic
measurement.

The researchers will use the Orbitrap IRMS to test several specific scientific
hypotheses on the topics of paleo atmospheric chemistry, co-evolution of oxygen
and life in the mid-Archean, and the specific mechanism of carbon-carbon bond
forming processes within metabolites. All three of these projects cannot be
achieved with traditional gas-source isotope ratio mass spectrometers due to
their mass resolving limitations and the need to convert species to a low
molecular weight gas.

Given that Orbitrap IRMS is an emerging technology, expansion of its utility and
scientific application is planned beyond the initial research projects for which
Orbitrap IRMS may transform what can be potentially learned from isotope ratio
measurements in a variety of fields and enable researchers to answer more
complicated scientific questions.

The potential Broader Impacts are mainly focused on the scientific applications
of the new instrumentation across a wide array of scientific undertakings across
six departments and three colleges. Even so, several undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in cutting edge Orbitrap IRMS technology thereby
enhancing their professional opportunities. Furthermore, this instrumentation
will enhance the University of Washingtonâ€™s active participation in programs
promoting opportunities in education and research (UW ADVANCE Program, the
Pacific Northwest Louis Strokes Alliance for Minority Participation) and its
connection with K-12 students and faculty in Seattle schools and rural and
tribal communities across the state.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.