* 2318027
* EFRI ELiS: Desiccatable living cell-based sensors to monitor pollutants and pathogens in built environments
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

The sense of smell is amazingly versatile. Birds and insects can sense and seek
out specific flowers. Hounds can follow scent trails that are hours and days
old. Even humans can detect about 10,000 different odors. Current sensing
technology, in comparison, is poor at detecting and discriminating between
different odorants. Environmental monitoring would benefit greatly from a
dramatically improved odor sensing technology. The objective of this project is
to create an artificial “e-nose” technology based on engineered biological
cells. These cells will emit fluorescent signals when compounds are detected. In
addition to monitoring the safety of human environments, a general-purpose
e-nose would have a range of applications including food safety, non-invasive
medical diagnostics, and health monitoring; detecting explosives and illicit
drugs; and mapping agricultural pests. Ethical issues will be assessed in public
engagement exercises with focus groups.

The research will utilize an insect cell line expressing an odorant receptor and
a GCaMP reporter for Ca2+, giving a fluorescence signal upon odorant binding.
The cell line will be able to be desiccated and rehydrated, while retaining
functionality. Desiccation addresses the problem of the impracticality of device
storage that has prevented wide-spread deployment of cell-based sensors.
Beginning with an existing cell line expressing the Drosophila receptor Or47a,
responses to odorants, singly and in mixtures, will be characterized to
understand the requirements for reliable recognition, given biological
variability. Odorant introduction has largely been confined to liquids, so
methods for introducing airborne odorants will be investigated. At least three
new stable cell lines expressing different odorant receptors will be developed
for a prototype array by optimizing the expression system; reliable creation of
new cell lines is required for the large number of array elements needed for an
eventual general-purpose e-nose. The spatio-temporal patterns generated by the
cell arrays to various odors will be complex, posing a challenge for odor
recognition even using machine learning (ML), since there are no ML models that
handle combinatorial interactions and nonlinear dynamical phenomena. The
integration of new ML algorithms will lead to the possibility of implementing
combinatorial coding in an e-nose. A miniaturized optical detection system will
be developed, generating significant knowledge concerning requirements for a
portable device. The project will expand knowledge about how to practically
achieve artificial olfaction from multiple angles: biology, hardware, and data
interpretation; it will also shed light on ethical concerns and community
involvement around engineered living systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.