* 2318696
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CPS: Socially Informed Traffic Signal Control for Improving Near Roadway Air Quality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Daehan Kwak, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 201,312.00

With the rapid pace of urbanization, air pollution has emerged as a pressing
environmental and societal concern in cities worldwide, particularly due to
pollutants directly emitted from vehicles near roadways. This issue poses a
significant threat to the health and well-being of various vulnerable groups,
including children, the elderly, and individuals with pre-existing conditions,
who face heightened risks due to their proximity to major roadways and high-
traffic areas. Therefore, it is crucial to monitor air quality and regulate
traffic in close proximity to roadways to effectively address pollution and
promote the welfare of these affected individuals. One potential solution to
manage traffic and alleviate these challenges is the implementation of traffic
signal control systems, which offer promising prospects in reducing congestion,
minimizing vehicle emissions, and ultimately enhancing the overall quality of
life for residents and commuters in the vicinity. Inspired by this practical
scenario, the primary objective of this project is to develop an innovative
traffic signal control approach that can effectively mitigate the adverse
impacts of air pollution near roadways. This project aims to bridge the critical
gap between cyber-physical systems and social awareness by integrating
innovative machine-learning-based sensing and control techniques with social
requirement specifications. The primary focus is on developing an integrated,
socially informed framework for traffic signal control systems, which
encompasses three main tasks, including (1) developing a low-cost mobile air
quality sensing system for near-road air quality sensing and a spatial-temporal
graph diffusion learning model for traffic sensing, (2) designing a
reinforcement learning-based control model incorporating social requirement
specification and traffic-aided supervision, and (3) implementing a simulation
tool based on real-world data and the correlation between traffic and air
quality. The success of this project holds significant social and technological
implications, as it has the potential to enhance air quality near roadways and
improve the quality of life for nearby residents and travelers. Furthermore,
comprehensive capacity-building, education, and outreach activities will provide
support to underrepresented minorities in computing and foster the development
of research skills and future careers in data intensive fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.