* 2318386
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: SedimentSketch, teaching tool in and beyond the sedimentology classroom to provide equitable and inclusive learning for Hispanic students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Juan Carlos Laya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to serve the national
interest by enhancing the effectiveness of undergraduate geoscience education at
an HSI, Texas A&M University. The project aims to strengthen student academic
experiences through the development and classroom implementation of a novel
intelligent sketch-based tutoring system. SedimentSketch, a visual,
personalized, and dual language tool, will combine new curricular materials and
sketch recognition algorithms to improve student learning through sketching
exercises and automatic, instantaneous feedback. Hispanic student performance
indicators are markedly different from students of other ethnicities, with
Hispanic students consistently having lower GPAs at graduation. The goal is to
improve Hispanic students' GPAs and time to graduation. The proposed
SedimentSketch tool can transform the higher-education geoscience curriculum for
HSIs by enabling geoscience students to interact with the material and receive
helpful feedback instantaneously outside of class and by cultivating a more
inclusive learning environment. An outcome of the SedimentSketch application
will be to help close the gap between Hispanic and non-Hispanic students' GPAs
and improve retention in geoscience courses.

SedimentSketch will be the first teaching tool in sedimentology that provides
novel learning experiences to students as well as the flexibility of remote
access to lab materials. The educational materials will be based on the PIâ€™s
sedimentary rock collections and materials from public sources, e.g., the
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP), and will include videos, games and
interactive exercises. Overall, the project will improve career trajectories for
Hispanic students by enhancing their learning and exposing them to an innovative
tool for hands-on learning activities for real-life scientific and industry
applications of sedimentology. Additionally, SedimentSketch will be a great tool
outside of the HSI environment to accommodate students with special needs,
improve learning and accessibility, and can be used for outreach. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.