* 2318341
* IEP:HSI: Family Centered Innovations
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jose Gutierrez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2027
* USD 985,069.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to improve teaching and
learning experiences in introductory mathematics courses. Despite decades of
student-centered initiatives aimed to improve student success in introductory
mathematics courses, these gateway keeper courses have kept Hispanics and other
groups who are underrepresented in STEM in higher education. Traditional
teaching and learning frameworks and practices in mathematics courses are,
generally, not responsive to the students’ needs. The family-centered approach
to teaching and learning will integrate the expertise of families from the
community into the course curriculum to connect mathematical concepts to the
life of the students and their families. The goal is to validate the students’
family ancestral knowledge, while making the course’s content more relevant. The
project team will partner with A Vehicle of Engagement (AVE) Frontera family
leaders to train mathematics faculty and provide them with the resources and
support to implement a family-centered class project in their course. The family
leaders will visit mathematics classrooms from the partner institution to
inspire, motivate, and support students with their family-centered projects.

The proposed project will utilize a novel Family-Centered Theory of Change with
an intersectionality lens that can help HSI educational leaders reshape their
university’s unique identity, so it reflects the students and families they
serve. The project benefits from the relational partnership between leaders from
an institution of higher education and leaders from a community-based
organization. The community partners’ focus on family and education makes them
an ideal partner to help HSIs promote the advancement of underrepresented groups
in STEM, build institutional-community transformative partnerships, and broaden
participation in STEM at HSIs. The proposed project has the potential to shed
new light on the sense of belonging among Hispanic students and their families
and other underrepresented communities in STEM, if the number of sites is
increased. The researchers are particularly interested in first year students
and their transition into the second and third years in college. To assess the
impact of the revised introductory mathematics courses, a quasi-experimental
design with stratified random sampling and repeated measures will be used to
determine if there is a statistically significant positive difference in the
sense of belonging. The community partner will help broaden participation by
creating a new support group that will serve families/groups that come from
underrepresented regions. In addition, the data collected will be used to create
a blueprint to recommend to upper administration the establishment of an Office
for Family-Centered Innovations to support underrepresented communities at the
local, state, and national levels. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.