* 2318293
* Investigating STEM Identity and Belonging Among STEM-Interested Hispanic Students Participating in a First-Year Experience Course
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Deepika Khilnaney, Lehigh Carbon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project will investigate promising practices
that demonstrate potential to increase the number of Hispanic students earning
degrees in STEM fields. Hispanic students are entering higher education at
unprecedented rates but are enrolling in STEM programs at lower rates than their
peers. This gap may be partially explained through factors such as the lack of
Hispanic representation among STEM professionals and faculty, a lack of
awareness about STEM careers, and persistent financial barriers. This pilot
project at Lehigh Carbon Community College in Pennsylvania will introduce
Hispanic students to STEM fields and careers through the Aspira STEM Track,
offering hands-on activities, guest speakers, group discussions, and peer
mentoring. Through this work, the college will explore the impacts of these
activities on student retention, sense of belonging, and knowledge of STEM
academic and career pathways. Anticipated outcomes include more Hispanic
students will enroll in STEM programs and report a greater sense of belonging
and connection to their chosen field of study.

Lehigh Carbon Community College aims to create a community of mutual support
among 30-40 STEM-interested Hispanic students in the Aspira STEM Track. This
project will make use of a fourteen-week, one-credit hour course where cohorts
of first-year students participate in active learning exercises, such as group
work, data analysis and problem-solving activities including mini labs, to
increase their awareness of STEM fields and careers. Through journaling, group
discussions, guest speakers, and peer mentoring, the program will empower
students to develop a sense of belonging and connection to the STEM community
on- and off-campus. Interventions including scholarships and peer mentoring will
promote equity by providing financial support, mentorship, and connection to
academic resources for students participating in the Aspira STEM Track and
intending to enter a STEM career path. Additional faculty professional
development will increase inclusive teaching practices within the collegeâ€™s STEM
disciplines. It is anticipated that through the Aspira STEM Track: (1) At least
80% of students will be retained in a STEM program from semester-to-semester;
(2) At least 90% of students will report greater understanding of STEM academic
and career pathways; (3) At least 80% of students will report a greater sense of
belonging; and (4) At least 75% of STEM faculty will be educated on inclusive
teaching practices. A meta-analysis of qualitative and quantitative student data
will be completed through the project and will add to the current literature on
Hispanic belonging and STEM identity on-campus. This project is funded by the
HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.