* 2318478
* SCISIPBIO: Maximizing the Value of Sex-Inclusive Research Policies through Analytical Rigor
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Andrew Brown, Arkansas Childrens Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2027
* USD 264,424.00

Historically, preclinical research has focused disproportionately on males. This
bias has limited the progress of science to advance national health and welfare.
In 2016, to encourage inclusion of both males and females in research, the
National Institutes of Health implemented a policy requiring the consideration
of sex as a biological variable (SABV) in all funded studies. Although inclusion
of females in research has improved, sex-based data are often not being analyzed
using rigorous approaches. Our preliminary analysis of SABV-compliant studies
showed that when authors report sex-specific effects, they tested statistically
for such effects only 29% of the time. Instead, claims of sex-specific findings
typically rest on assertion alone. Our previous findings indicate clearly that
the implementation of SABV has not been rigorous and that the process of peer
review of SABV-compliant research needs to improve. False claims of sex
differences can lead to the wasting of resources on ‘differences’ that do not
exist, and to inequities in access to effective treatments. Similarly, false
claims of non-differences can lead to missed opportunities to provide effective
health care for people of all sexes and genders. The intended goals of SABV,
namely to enhance reproducibility and to facilitate sex-based precision
medicine, are not being met. In this project we will determine the impact of
inappropriate analytical approaches on the accurate reporting of sex-specific
effects, identify factors that inform decisions about analytical approaches to
sex-based data, and disseminate tools for designing and evaluating studies that
consider SABV. We will use a mixed method approach that includes analyses of
published journal articles, interviews with scientists, and outreach. We will
conduct a large-scale analysis of the biomedical literature to show how
inappropriate statistical approaches to sex-based data are impacting the
rigorous implementation of SABV. Second, we will conduct semi-structured
interviews with authors of some of those publications to identify the factors
that facilitate best practices. Together, these methods will inform the
development of a workflow for appropriate analysis of sex-based data. Third, we
will make our optimized workflow publicly available and disseminate it widely.
In addition, we will partner with journal editors to develop a simple tool that
can be used by reviewers to evaluate the validity of sex-specific findings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.