* 2318357
* Conference: Building International Scholarship in 4S-Affiliated Journals: A Writing Workshop for Junior Scholars
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Ali Kenner, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,837.00

Building International Scholarship in 4S-Affiliated Journals: A Writing Workshop
for Junior Scholars

The interdisciplinary field of Science, Technology, and Society (STS) has become
increasingly internationalized over the past decade. This is a welcome
transformation and is reflected in a range of institutional changes including in
the content and editorship of the expanded number of journals affiliated with
the largest professional society of the field, the Society for the Social
Studies of Science (4S). However, there remains tremendous potential to further
internationalize the field. Inequities in publishing and mentorship – which
impact historically marginalized scholars in all disciplines – have been well
documented; efforts to eradicate these inequities are crucial given that robust
knowledge production and technology innovation requires barrier-free exchange
and opportunities for all.

To work toward the goal of internationalizing the authorship pool and bringing
STS journals into deeper conversation, a “Publishing in STS” workshop led by a
team of editors at 4S-affiliated journals will be held. This workshop will be
held immediately before the 4S meeting in November 2023, and will focus on
mentoring Early Career Researchers. The workshop will include sessions with the
full group that allow students and junior scholars to hear insights and
experiences from the journal editors, who are also senior scholars in the field.
Topics will include information on the peer-review process and how editors are
working to make the review community more diverse and inclusive; insight on
English language standards and ideas about publishing in multiple languages; and
commentary on resources available for professional development related to
publishing in international contexts. The second day of the workshop will focus
on small- group sessions in which attendees will receive highly-engaged feedback
on a draft article manuscript from the journal editors and from their peers - a
conversation that will continue after the Workshop, as editors follow up on the
progress of attendees and ongoing peer support is encouraged.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.