* 2318658
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: HCC: Buenas - Giving All a Seat at the Table Using Mixed Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Edgar Rojas-Muñoz, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Online learning has become a critical aspect of modern post-secondary education,
with many colleges and universities incorporating both synchronous and
asynchronous online courses into their curricula. These kinds of courses can
increase access to education for students from minority backgrounds, who are
frequently of non-traditional student ages and may often need to travel farther
and have fewer resources for attending in-class learning activities. However,
online learning has not yet reached its full potential, with students reporting
feeling disconnected from their on-campus classmates and instructor. Study
groups are essential to undergraduate education, yet they have been especially
problematic to replicate online. Conventional videoconferencing systems are
inadequate for supporting the dynamic dialogue and good eye contact that are
prerequisite to successful study groups. The Buenas research project will use
mixed reality to develop a format for remote study group interaction that will
allow local and remote students to interact naturally and effectively. Buenas
will allow all students to see each other at their correct relative location and
size, while providing advantages such as intuitiveness, situation awareness,
depth perception, and increased sense of presence. The project has the potential
to advance the effectiveness of small group meetings with hybrid local and
remote attendance, especially for under-represented members of society, and will
involve students from Minority-Serving Institutions (MSI) in research endeavors.

Buenas will use mixed reality headsets to immerse remote students into local
study groups. The goal is to allow local and remote students to interact
naturally, as if all members of the group were co-located. At the local site,
cardboard screens will be placed in unoccupied seats around the study group
table to project video sprites (i.e., life-sized, background-subtracted videos)
of the remote students onto them. At each remote site, a remote student will
visualize the other students’ video sprites in mixed reality, integrated into
their office spaces via virtual floating panels. The Buenas system will be
validated via three user studies. The first study will compare study group
sessions hosted with Buenas against sessions hosted via videoconferencing. The
second study will compare various ways of representing the remote student, i.e.,
with a video sprite showing the person wearing a headset, with a computer
animation avatar, and with a video sprite where the headset is removed through
inpainting. The third study will evaluate Buenas with remote students connecting
from their homes. The project will involve over two hundred students from the
three collaborating institutions, two of which are MSIs

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.