* 2318683
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: RI: Towards Scalable, Resilient and Robust Foraging with Heterogeneous Robot Swarms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yuanxiong Guo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 180,000.00

The project aims to create a highly efficient, resilient, and robust
heterogeneous robot swarm system composed of UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles) and
UGVs (unmanned ground vehicles) for foraging tasks in a large unknown
environment such as search and rescue, agriculture harvesting, and space
exploration. There are three key challenges that hinder the efficiency of
foraging robot swarms in practice. Firstly, while homogeneous ground robot
swarms are efficient, they face limitations in Tsearching for multiple targets
or resources in a large area due to limited sensing and mobility capabilities.
Secondly, machine learning models that determine robot behavior are
traditionally trained on a central server, which is not scalable when dealing
with heterogeneous robots with varying configurations. Finally, sensor
malfunctions and adversarial attacks are likely to occur in robot swarms and can
lead to cascading effects that reduce the robustness and resilience of the
swarm. This project leverages a promising interdisciplinary approach across
robotics, machine learning, and cybersecurity to achieve a scalable, robust, and
resilient foraging robot swarm with heterogeneous robots. The proposed education
plan aims to create new curricula in related fields at both the undergraduate
and graduate levels and engage K-12 students in research through various
initiatives such as robot expo, summer research camps, and workshops. It will
also promote the participation of Hispanic students in research, education, and
outreach activities in the South Texas region. The proposed research explores
the design of heterogeneous robot swarm systems, multiple shortest path
planning, federated learning (FL), and spatiotemporal data anomaly detection.
The research plan consists of three research thrusts. 1) Decentralized multiple
shortest-route planning algorithm will be developed for on-demand UAV sensing.
This algorithm will enable UAVs to efficiently sense and explore interesting
locations along the shortest routes, allowing for timely data collection while
conserving energy resources. 2) Decentralized federated learning (FL) algorithms
will be developed to support privacy-preserving collaborative model training in
the heterogeneous robot swarm. The proposed algorithms allow for the
customization of a model for each robot, making the swarm more scalable and
resilient as the number of robots increases. 3) The sub-trajectory discord based
early anomaly detection module to early detect robot failure/attacks in the
resource constraint environment, preventing the cascading effect in the entire
swarm. The study of anomaly detection will ensure the resilient and robust of
the model learned through FL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.