* 2318597
* CISE-MSI: DP: SaTC: CyIndiBee - CyberInfrastructure for video analysis of individual bee behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jose Agosto Rivera, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 590,000.00

The goal of the CyIndiBee project is to build an innovative cyberinfrastructure
showcasing the use of modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) approaches in the
study of pollinator behavior in the Caribbean. Pollinators are a key part of our
food production system and play a critical role in the life cycle of plants and
their ecosystems. Climate change and other anthropogenic activities are
endangering pollinators and their habitats, causing behavioral changes, and
leading to serious consequences for humans, especially in areas with scarce
ecological diversity. A keen understanding of the complex effects that
environmental changes, contaminants, and other factors produced on pollinator
behavior and their biological mechanisms is needed urgently. This project will
develop new computer vision, software and data analysis tools to expand our
capacity to measure the individual behavior of a large number of pollinators in
order to gather more detailed data over longer periods of time. The
contributions will lead to mature and robust tools for automatic video
monitoring of insects, which can be readily used and deployed in the field. The
project will consolidate the partnership between the Computer Science department
and the biology department at UPR Rio Piedras (UPR-RP), a Hispanic Minority
Serving Institution (MSI). It will integrate undergraduate and graduate student
training into research-intensive activities, thus creating a critical mass of
closely interacting professors and students conducting state-of-the-art
transdisciplinary research. The project will increase UPR-RP's capacity in the
Computer Science field to promote innovation and growth in AI related research.
This project is a first step towards transforming UPRRP into the reference
research center in the Caribbean on the topic of Artificial Intelligence applied
to transdisciplinary research in climate change.

This project will develop an integrated cyberinfrastructure for pollinator video
monitoring that combines (i) new deep learning models for detection and
characterization of bee behavior, phenotype, and identity, (ii) a computational
platform to collect monitoring data and perform behavior analysis with graphical
interfaces usable by both the biology end-user and AI researchers, (iii) tools
for the analysis of long-term individual behavior. The deep learning models
leverage the Vision Transformer architecture to provide powerful pre-training
using Masked Image Modeling on unannotated video data, thus reducing the need
for large annotation efforts when deploying new collection setups. They will
also provide flexibility with an extendable system of trainable query tokens to
extract various types of information (pose, tag, marking, morphology, presence
of pollenâ€¦) from the same latent representations. The computational platform
will integrate a web application for video visualization and behavior
annotation, with interactive dashboards for the analysis of individual behavior
and phenotype, from data collected from long-term video monitoring. These tools
will be applied to individual analyses to recognize patterns of shift-work and
seasonal activity in both marked and unmarked bees. The large-scale analysis
enabled by the new cyber-infrastructure will be demonstrated by the creation of
two new curated datasets: a large-scale honeybee re-identification dataset, and
a foraging behavior dataset combining multiple colonies and foraging trips at
the individual and colony level including the presence of pollen and morphology
of the bees.

This project is jointly funded by the CISE MSI Research Expansion Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.