* 2318546
* CISE-MSI:DP:Real-Time Aerial Imaging with Edge AI
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Renny Fernandez, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to develop an innovative aerial imaging system that
incorporates state-of-the-art artificial intelligence (AI) for real-time data
processing and analysis. This venture is a collaboration between students and
faculty of the Computer Science and Engineering departments at Norfolk State
University who will design, develop, and test a fully functional system capable
of executing tasks such as autonomous and remote-controlled navigation, imagery,
and autopilot. The significance of the project is embedded in its potential to
revolutionize the field of aerial imaging and data analysis, with applications
extending to agriculture, environmental monitoring, disaster response, and more.
By integrating edge AI algorithms and software modules into the system, the team
is set to achieve precise data processing and enhanced decision-making
capabilities. Additionally, the project aspires to enhance diversity and
representation in the field of engineering by providing opportunities for
underrepresented minority communities and women.

This project is designed to develop aerial machine vision by integrating dual-
camera vision and time-of-flight technology into unmanned aerial vehicles. The
amalgamation of these technologies will generate data-rich multispectral models,
enabling the creation of large-scale maps for applications such as crop
monitoring, yield assessment, and weed identification. The project also aims to
construct collaborative systems of unmanned aerial vehicles, optimizing flight
parameters and camera resolution for accurate three-dimensional reconstruction
from aerial images. Furthermore, the project will facilitate edge intelligence
for image processing and decision support, employing deep learning to extract
information from specific segments of a hyperspectral model. This will allow for
rapid and precise decision making, with applications including tree-structure
and leaf-feature recognition from aerial videos. The project will also explore
the implementation of complex algorithms on multicore central processing units
for enhanced performance. Through this project, the team will provide students
with a real-world understanding of the challenges and opportunities of unmanned
aerial vehicles and how they integrate with technologies such as computer
vision, machine learning, and communication protocols.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.