* 2318424
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Cryogen-Free Magnetometer for Investigating Novel Magnetic/Superconducting Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 633,000.00

This award to the University of California, Riverside supports the acquisition
of a cryogen-free magnetometer to support the research of a large number of
investigators in the area of low-dimensional magnetic and superconducting
materials and devices. To the growing campus, the availability of this shared
instrument and the research enabled by it plays a positive role in the
recruitment of new faculty members in several departments in the areas of
quantum materials, solid state chemistry, magnetic materials and spintronics. It
also significantly contributes to the education and training of generations of
graduate students, undergraduate students and postdocs, many of whom are from
diverse and social-economically disadvantaged background, especially for future
employment opportunities in the high technology companies specializing non-
volatile random access memories, hard disk drives, magnetic sensors and
actuators, and biomedical devices.

The MPMS3 SQUID magnetometer is a high-sensitivity, high-throughput, and
cryogen-free magnetometer that is uniquely suited for serving a large number of
users. It impacts a broad range of ongoing research projects at the University
of California, Riverside, including the investigation of new properties in
magnetic and superconducting thin films and heterostructures, new phenomena
arising from proximity coupling at interfaces, and new applications of magnetic
nanoparticles. More specifically, with the unprecedented sensitivity and
acquisition speed, this shared instrument enables the investigations of magnetic
compensation phenomenon in ferrimagnetic thin films, spin-flop transition in
antiferromagnetic thin films, two-dimensional layered magnetic materials,
induced ferromagnetism in topological insulator/magnetic insulator
heterostructures, layered superconducting thin films and heterostructures,
magnetic nanoparticles, magnetic photonic nanostructures, and photo-induced
magnetism in organic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.