* 2318594
* In Vivo Mechanotransduction During Limb Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* James Monaghan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 624,972.00

This award supports a research program to study how cells behave as limbs are
formed. Cells in the body sense and respond to their mechanical environment. The
skeletal system is particularly responsive to mechanical loads; muscles, bones,
and tendons become stronger with increased mechanical demand. This project will
explore how cells sense and respond to the mechanical environment during limb
regeneration in an axolotl salamander. During limb regeneration a mass of stem
cells forms at the site of amputation. The cells grow and turn into cartilage.
The cartilage grows and ossifies, forming functional limbs. Mechanical forces
are critical throughout this process. The mechanisms by which cells sense the
mechanical environment and how they turn the mechanical stimulus into a
biological response will be explored. Understanding how this process works has
broad application, such as developing smart materials that adapt to the
mechanical environment or developing appropriate physical therapies to correct
mechanics and ensure normal growth.

This work will help to elucidate the role of mechanics during limb growth:
mechanosensitive calcium signaling in stem cells and chondrocytes, the
mechanically triggered ion channels involved, the intracellular location of
mechanosensitive yes-associated protein, and the mechanotransduction of the
signal into a molecular response. Because this study uses the axolotl as a model
system of limb regeneration, we will for the first time be able to assess these
processes in vivo and determine the role of mechanics throughout the formation
of a limb. We will also develop techniques for quantifying and visualizing the
molecular response to mechanical signals in whole-mount light sheet images using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, fluorescently labelling the mRNA. This
provides molecular readouts at cellular-level resolution in organ-level images
and preserves the spatial location of the molecules, which then can be
correlated with spatial distribution of the mechanical environment. The workflow
for imaging and assessing 3D molecular images has broad application in other
areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.