* 2318105
* CCI Phase 1: NSF Center for MXenes Synthesis, Tunability and Reactivity (M-STAR)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dmitri Talapin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Greg Collins
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for MXenes Synthesis, Tunability and Reactivity (M-STAR) is
supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division
of Chemistry. MXenes represent the most rapidly growing family of functional 2D
materials, exhibiting great promise in the areas of energy storage, filtration
and separation technologies, medicine, optoelectronics, and composite materials.
Interest in MXenes stems from the fact that these crystalline metal carbides and
nitrides have huge surface-to-volume ratios, robust metallic conductivities and
nearly limitless opportunities for surface functionalization. This makes MXenes
uniquely powerful chemical building blocks for tunable functional materials.
M-STAR will build knowledge and empirical data on how to manipulate and enhance
the optical, electronic and catalytic properties of MXenes by changing the
composition of their 2D MXene sheets and by attaching organic functional groups
to the surface. Activities within this Center will include active engagement
with industrial partners to promote MXene translation, STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) engagement through a cross-disciplinary
rotation of summer schools and workshops, and the development of new activities
for various science festivals and associated with the Chicago Museum of Science
and Industry.

While MXenes show great technological promise in numerous critical industries,
these 2D materials are limited by the types of synthetic approaches available to
make these materials. Additionally, the impact of these functional 2D materials
could be enhanced through an improved understanding of how functional
modifications of MXenes can lead to new electrochemical and catalytic processes
with greater stability and predictability. M-STAR will develop new methodologies
for the direct synthesis of MXenes via chemical vapor deposition and molten
salt-assisted templating. Fundamental studies of MXene reactivity will require
determining the relative reactivities of basal planes versus the edges of
MXenes; this will be achieved by systematically varying the lateral dimensions
of MXene flakes. The structural tunability of MXene compounds will be enabled
through the synthesis of MXenes with organic functional groups covalently bound
to the 2D inorganic sheets, forming hybrid organic-inorganic MXenes. M-STAR will
make connections between the structure/composition of MXene organic and
inorganic constituents with their physical and chemical properties. Fundamental
studies will include examinations of modified MXenes as tunable/adaptable
metamaterials by chemical design. Finally, M-STAR will explore reactivity and
catalysis by MXenes and MXene assemblies in hydrogen transfer reactions, C-C
bond-forming reactions and electrochemical hydrogen evolution. All these
experiments will be integrated with theory, computation, and machine learning
methods to analyze reaction thermodynamics and kinetics, determine material
stability, and predict material properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.