* 2318897
* URoL:ASC: Biosensors for Field Detection of Aqueous Heavy Metals: A Collaboration with Native American Communities
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Gabriel Lopez, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 07/31/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

Socio-economically challenged communities have borne the highly disproportionate
brunt of environmental degradation associated with extractive industries,
especially those associated with production of nuclear weapons and energy
production. Dispersal of toxic heavy metals into natural waterways as well as
agricultural and domestic water sources is accelerating, especially in arid
regions where water resources are scarce. Water users, researchers, and
remediation efforts rely on highly specialized and costly centralized laboratory
facilities to quantify toxic heavy metals in streams, irrigation canals and
domestic water sources. Such analyses are not amenable to home or field-use by
either trained or lay personnel, both of which desire access to easy-to-use,
highly sensitive methods for field-based detection. This award will develop
accessible biosensing systems for convenient detection of toxic heavy metals
without the need for centralized laboratory facilities. In doing so, it will
benefit from end-to-end consultation with water resource management personnel on
critical contaminant sensing needs, efficacy of approaches, and successful
deployment strategies. The dire threat posed by highly toxic contaminants in
these communities provides a compelling context for recruiting students from
some of the most under-represented groups to participate in the research. This
project will provide a comprehensive training, education, and outreach program
to recruit, train, retain, and return indigenous and economically disadvantaged
scientific and engineering talent to benefit their communities.

Decades of uranium extraction have left a toxic legacy of heavy metal
contamination in water sources in Native American and Indo-Hispanic communities
in the arid Southwest. There is a critical need for new technologies that
require minimal technical training and can be used to rapidly screen for the
presence of these toxicants in the home or the field. Over the past 30 years, in
vitro selection methods have been used to generate DNA sequences that bind with
high affinity and selectivity to many heavy metal ion species. These reagents
can form the basis for highly selective biosensors, but they have not yet been
translated for routine application in highly contaminated communities and sites
in the vicinity of highly contaminated abandoned mines. This award will develop
a simple-to-use, yet highly effective, biosensing technologies for field-use
based on these reagents by (i) taking into consideration the guidance from their
ultimate user communities, and (ii) by implementing fundamental understanding
and innovations garnered through a number of previous grants funded under the
auspices of the NSFâ€™s Big Idea to Understand the Rules of Life. This
multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, user-directed research project will
apply the findings and innovations of these previous fundamental research
efforts to develop field-deployable solutions for critical problems of water
security in Native American, minority, and low-resource communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.