* 2318681
* Integrating Spiritual, Moral and Ethical Considerations into Science Communication for Improved Decision Making and Public Action on Climate Science
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Jessica Eise, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2026
* USD 425,000.00

Both national security and citizens’ health and well-being can be effected by
climate-related disruptions to supply chains, production, and infrastructure.
The need to advance climate science is urgent and escalating. Improving public
action on, public support of, and decision making based on climate science
improves if and how we respond to climate challenges. This research explores how
to create enduring change in public behavior to support effective action to
address climate impacts on society. Despite four decades of climate science
communication, we continue to seek adequate public and decision maker action and
decision maker support to substantively address climate challenges. This
research focuses on positive self-efficacy frames (when a person feels empowered
to take action and make an impact) that have been shown to generate engagement
and support for climate science yet have been largely absent from mainstream
dialogue. Specifically, it focuses on moral, ethical, and spiritual concerns,
which though underrepresented have proven to have powerful sway over individual
attitudes and behaviors. The findings of the three studies comprising this
project and their outreach components (multimedia content, white papers, videos,
a website) can empower decision makers, business leaders, and other relevant
leaders and stakeholders to make more informed decisions through targeted
interventions.

This project has three studies that extend over three years. Each study focuses
on a different area that has shown promise for generating enduring change in
environmental behavior. The first study, entitled “Promoting Self-Reflection,”
covers deep engagement. Past research shows that if a person engages in active
thinking on an issue, they are more likely to develop enduring attitudinal
change. This research follows 90 participants based on three different moral,
ethical, or spiritual interventions to support active thinking while applying
periodic surveys to measure progress. The second study, “Retelling the Story,”
looks at mental models. Mental models are our internal schema that influence how
we respond to new situations. This study includes 150 participants’ responses to
different environmental multimedia interventions based on moral, ethical, or
spiritual narratives using surveys and a digital mental modeling tool. The third
study, “Building Infectious Behaviors,” addresses social norms, which are
powerful cycles of collective behavior. This study includes 120 participants and
their practice of environmental self-generative norms informed by moral, ethical
or spiritual positions and includes surveys, written reflections and regular
logging.

This research is supported by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communication
and Impact program and the Social, Behavioral & Economic Sciences Office of the
Assistant Director.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.