* 2318434
* Conference: Scientific Evidence in the Courts: The Sciences' Role in the Promotion of Justice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Theresa Harris, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,923.00

In 1923, the District of Columbia Court ruled that judges have a constitutional
responsibility to assess the reliability of scientific and technical evidence
and expert witness testimony (Frye v. United States), establishing guidelines
for judges to determine what evidence and whose testimony will be presented at
trial or provided to the jury for their consideration. Since this ruling, the
Supreme Court of the United States and Congress have expanded upon and
articulated further guidance for this gatekeeping function (the Federal Rules of
Evidence, 1975; Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 1993; General
Electric Co. v. Joiner, 1997; and Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 1999). However,
the applications of the Frye and Daubert Standards remain inconsistent across
both federal and state courts, allowing for unreliable evidence and testimony to
enter trials, increasing the likelihood of unjust outcomes, such as wrongful
convictions, as well as other violations of constitutional rights. Some experts
suggest that the adoption of the Daubert Standard has also constrained access to
the justice system for litigants from historically marginalized populations,
specifically African Americans. This conference will reflect upon the current
body of research regarding the courts’ application of admissibility standards
and explore the potential challenges to these standards arising from quickly
developing scientific fields such as artificial intelligence, climate science,
statistical modeling, and advances in forensic science. Event speakers and
attendees will assess current practices and identify pathways for improving the
use of credible, trustworthy scientific evidence and expert witness testimony by
federal and state courts going forward.

The conference in Washington, DC, will be an efficient and effective method of
assembling a strategically identified and diverse group of people from across
research disciplines, societal sectors, and geography, to share and discuss
relevant knowledge and its impacts on society at large. The event will bring
together members of both the scientific and legal communities, with government
officials, academics, and representatives of nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) dedicated to improving the United States justice system. The research
that will be presented and discussed in the conference, and the needs for future
research that will be identified, are directly related to improving the judicial
system’s accurate and effective use of scientific evidence and to building
public trust in the judiciary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.