* 2318141
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Sustainable Photoredox Catalysis (SuPRCat)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Garret Miyake, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Greg Collins
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Sustainable Photoredox Catalysis (SuPRCat) is supported by
the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry.
Photoredox catalysis is a type of catalysis that dramatically speeds up chemical
reactions by using light as the primary energy source. Most current systems
incorporate precious metals as photoredox catalysts (PCs), resulting in a more
limited chemical applicability and reduced industrial interest due to the high
costs of precious metals. The goal of SuPRCat is to unleash the potential of
photoredox catalysis by creating new sustainable PCs that incorporate earth
abundant metals at their core; SuPRCat will also establish new understandings on
how to rationally select and use these PCs to best effect. SuPRCat will
investigate techniques for performing multi-catalytic transformations in an
environmentally friendly, single reaction vessel. SuPRCat will encourage
innovation through active engagement with industrial stakeholders. The
development of undergraduate curriculum focused on photoredox catalysis and a
research exchange program across institutions will promote higher education.
SuPRCat will also create and post numerous three-minute videos that describe
SuPRCat topics and promote recruitment of the next generation of “SuPR”
scientists. The mission of SuPRCat is to transform chemical synthesis by
designing powerful, industrially relevant processes using sustainable catalysts
based on organic or earth abundant compounds and the energy from visible light.
The overarching goal of SuPRCat in Phase I is to establish the capability to
rationally design a polymer supported PC system and successfully employ the
system for one-pot, multi-catalytic transformations. SuPRCat will achieve this
fundamental breakthrough by merging the broad collective expertise of scientists
from academia and industry with complementary expertise spanning physical,
computational, spectroscopic, photo-, electro-, magnetic, catalytic, synthetic,
organic, inorganic, polymer, and materials chemistries. SuPRCat will create a
computational and data-driven discovery platform based upon machine learning
that works closely with experimentalists to intelligently search chemical space
and identify new classes of organic PCs, optimize the performance of existing
PCs, and identify corresponding reaction conditions. The team will focus on
developing and understanding closed-shell and open-shell PCs with applications
that include single electron transfer and atom transfer reactions. Systems of
PCs will be merged together into multi-catalytic systems capable of performing
dehydrogenation of alkanes to alkenes, alkane functionalization, and the
synthesis of polar functionalized monomers. The final pillar will be to unify
these multi-component systems into heterogeneous polymer supports for increased
efficiency and recyclability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.