* 2318122
* EFRI ELiS: Engineering Fungal Platforms for Sustainable Biomining and Recovery of Valuable Metals from Electronic Wastes
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Mark Marten, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Critical metals such as nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), and others are necessary
components in batteries and other electronic devices. Demand for these metals is
expected to grow rapidly in the coming decades. Obtaining reliable domestic
sources for these critical metals is needed to support the green economy and
continued national economic development and security. Traditional mining
approaches are energy intensive and generate chemical waste that can harm local
and global environments. Innovative and sustainable methods are urgently needed
to obtain valuable metals from mines and other untapped sources. Used lithium-
ion batteries (LIBs) represent a potentially rich and growing source of critical
metals. The goal of this project is to implement a novel approach to capture and
recover scarce metals from waste LIBs using biofluids from fungi combined with
advanced electrochemical techniques. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) propose to identify efficient metal biomining compounds
using a chemistry model, use metabolic engineering to enhance compounds used for
biomining, and optimize the biomining conditions to develop a scalable process.
Techno-economic and life cycle assessments (TEA/LCA) will be used to determine
which process is economically viable and environmentally beneficial. The
ethical, legal, and social implications of the work will be addressed through
the support of community education and engagement as well as an examination of
ethical and legal issues involving biomining with fungi. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of
fundamental knowledge to advance the use of bioacids to recycle valuable metals
from LIBs for reuse. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of four graduate students
at Johns Hopkins University and one graduate student at the University of
Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC).

A sustainable, bio-based mining technology for metal extraction and recovery is
needed to address the growing need for these metals in electronic devices. The
goal of this project is to enhance the extraction of valuable metals, nickel
(Ni) and cobalt (Co) from used lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), using robust fungal
hosts (Aspergillus spp.). Fungi from the genus Aspergillus secrete bioacids and
other metallophores that can help solubilize metals from solid wastes. Using
models of chemical interactions between fungal metabolites and different metal
ions, bioacids and metallophores will be identified that are effective for
solubilizing Co and Ni. Optimization of fungal metabolic pathways, upstream
bioleaching, and downstream purification (driven by electrochemical stimuli)
will be implemented to maximize metal recovery. In addition, different carbon
sources will be investigated, including lignocellulosics or cyanobacterial
partners, to reduce the cost of bioacid production and enhance process
sustainability. These steps will then be combined into an integrated biomining
manufacturing platform. The biomining approach will be evaluated through techno-
economic and life cycle assessments (TEA/LCA) and the underlying social,
ethical, and legal implications considered to ensure the proposed biomining
platform is environmentally sound, economically viable, and fully integrated
with the local community. The successful completion of this research with
advance the fundamental understanding of the biological and engineering
framework needed to develop biomining systems for the recovery of valuable
metals from electronic wastes. To implement the education and training goals of
the project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to engage with a local
high school, the Baltimore City Community College, and an after-school program,
Adelante Latina, for Latina high school students to provide a summer research
program through an existing Research Experience and Mentoring (REM) at Johns
Hopkins University and UMBC. In addition, the team plans to partner with a local
elementary/middle school and the Johns Hopkins University Office of
Sustainability to collect rechargeable LIBs to be used in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.