* 2318701
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Removing Trust Assumptions from Encryption Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Brent Waters, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 195,257.00

Public-key encryption is the basis for secure communication on the Internet. In
a public-key encryption scheme, anyone can encrypt a message using a user's
public key with the assurance that only the designated recipient can decrypt the
message. In the last 25 years, functional encryption has emerged as a
generalization of public-key encryption to provide fine-grained control to
encrypted data. For instance, one can encrypt a message such that only users
possessing a certain credential can decrypt. While functional encryption has
enabled new capabilities, it does so at the cost of introducing a new trust
model. In public-key encryption, individual users generate their own secret
keys, whereas in functional encryption, the power is vested in a central trusted
authority. If compromised, the attacker gains the ability to decrypt every
ciphertext in the system. The central goal of this project is to develop new
cryptographic mechanisms to reduce the trust assumptions needed to realize the
expressive capabilities of functional encryption. Additionally, this project
seeks to strengthen the network of cryptography researchers in Texas through
semi-annual workshops for researchers and graduate students as well as providing
mentoring and educational opportunities for undergraduates and high-school
students.

The goal of this project is to develop new techniques to reduce the amount of
trust needed in advanced encryption schemes. The primary focus will be on two
different models: (1) a registration-based model; and (2) a multi-authority
model. In the registration-based model for functional encryption, the trusted
key issuer is replaced with an untrusted key aggregator. To join the system,
users register their public key with the key aggregator. The key aggregator is a
deterministic, transparent algorithm whose sole responsibility is aggregating
public keys into a single short public key. This aggregated key then functions
as the public key for the encryption scheme. This project will explore new
avenues for constructing different notions of functional encryption (e.g.,
attribute-based encryption and broadcast encryption) in the registration-based
model. The second main approach for reducing trust is the multi-authority model
where instead of a single trusted authority, there are many independent key-
issuing authorities. In this setting, a single compromised authority no longer
jeopardizes security of the entire system. This project will explore new
approaches for realizing multi-authority encryption schemes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.