* 2318923
* RaMP: Diversifying the National Biology Workforce through New York Transdisciplinary BioSciences (NY-RaMP)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Jill Bargonetti, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,999,998.00

Mentoring the next generation of a diverse scientific workforce is critical to
accelerate innovative science and promote a positive national future. The
research network in New York combines trans-disciplinary biosciences across
academia, industry, and research institutes with many creative minds and a
talented workforce, however senior positions typically lack diversity. Research
professors and trained educators of the Hunter College Belfer Research Alliance
will lead the New York Research and Mentoring for Postbaccalaureates in
Biological Sciences (NY-RaMP) trans-disciplinary program. The mentoring team of
NY-RaMP will provide research and professional development opportunities to
launch the careers of recent science graduates lacking research experience. The
NY-RaMP program will provide high-impact research immersion and education in
trans-disciplinary cell, molecular, and bioinformatics, with a focus on
discovery science. The immersion experiences are for inquisitive recent
graduates who have limited research experience. This program will enable the
selected emerging scholars to be trained by research professors actively
involved in collaborative cell signaling research. Importantly, NY-RaMP will
work to provide the nation with a much-needed diverse trans-disciplinary biology
trained workforce.

The NY-RaMP program provides one-year biology research experiences for three
cohorts of ten recent graduates under the umbrella theme of trans-disciplinary
experimental, computational, and applied biosciences to investigate cellular
signaling. Cross-departmental City University of New York (CUNY) Hunter College
professors serve as the principal investigator (PI), the coordinator and co-PIs,
and the mentors, in collaboration with co-mentoring teams from other New York
state institutions. Together these trans-disciplinary scientists bridge the
diversity of people and science that New York has to offer in scholarship and
workforce development. The program encourages emerging scholars to become
biological thinkers and develop into scientists. The NY-RaMP connects the
selected emerging scholars to the CUNY Brooklyn-based Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory (CSHL) DNA Learning Center for molecular biology and gene-based
orientation boot-camp (in addition to follow-up field trips), to State
University of New York's (SUNY's) leadership and campuses, to the Skirball
Science Learning Center (at Hunter College), to the Cornell Center for Cultural
Humility, to active NY Biology Industry field trips, and to visits to NY-area
Colleges and Universities. This trans-disciplinary inquiry focused program is
designed for engaged collaborative discovery-science for mentors and mentees to
gain deep understandings of cellular signaling in a diverse comprehensive
environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.