* 2318168
* Collaborative Research: Modeling inclusive computational thinking instruction: Video cases for developing teacher knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Quinn Burke, Digital Promise Global
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2027
* USD 308,277.00

As computational thinking (CT) has become a prevalent strategy to introduce
computational tools and practices to learners elementary classrooms, there are
calls to support teachers to embed it in their core instruction (i.e., math,
science, and language arts). To do this requires high quality professional
development that introduces CT to teachers and demonstrates how they can use it
to support teaching and learning within their curricular and pedagogical
contexts. This project uses an innovative video-based professional learning
model to build elementary teachers' capacity for inclusive CT integration.
Central to this model of professional development (PD) is a library of vetted
cases that combine exemplary videos of CT integrated lessons with guided
observations and reflections to prepare elementary teachers to integrate CT
within their own instruction. Michigan State University and national non-profit
Digital Promise are partnering with urban and rural school districts in both
Michigan and Maryland to bring this professional learning to teachers and
support them to develop and teach CT-integrated lessons.

This project has three main objectives: (1) develop a PD approach using a
library of vetted video cases to develop elementary teacher competencies in CT
integration; (2) examine the influence of PD with video-cases on elementary
teachers' knowledge and practice; and (3) investigate the expansion of CT
integration in core subject lessons and its influence on students' computing
identity and learning within core subjects. Working in a research practice
partnership (RPP), researchers collaborate with educators from across four
school districts to co-design both the video case library and professional
development. The districts include 86 elementary schools in Michigan and 13
elementary schools in Maryland, with varying demographics. Initially the project
enlists between 5 and 10 exemplary teachers for video recording and PD
development, and expands to about twice that number in year 2 for a user study.
Subsequently, a larger number of teachers across the districts will be involved.
The project is framed through Design-Based Implementation Research to guide the
research. Using qualitative and quantitative methods, the project examines the
influence of this professional development on elementary teachers' understanding
of CT, capacity to notice pedagogical practices related to CT integration,
including inclusive computing pedagogies, and application of these practices
during the subsequent planning and implementation of CT integrated lessons.
Finally, the project investigates whether integration of CT positively impacts
students' computing identity and learning gains within core subjects. This
project is supported by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.