* 2318665
* I-Corps: A Clinical Decision Support Tool to Manage Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Patients
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Timothy Chung, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a methodology that relies on recent advancements in machine
learning, which have yielded positive results in diagnosis and prognosis of
diseases in patients. There are 6.7 million cerebral aneurysm patients and 2.5
million abdominal aortic aneurysm patients in the United States. Patients that
suffer from aneurysms are likened to having a ticking timebomb that can set off
at any second, causing death or morbidity due to excessive internal bleeding.
Biomechanical and shape analyses from medical images can provide greater insight
into how aneurysms progress with time. However, analyses of medical images are a
significant bottleneck to a clinical workflow, reducing the translation of such
tools into a clinical setting. The proposed technology can reduce the overall
time to extract critical information from medical images, alleviating the need
for computational experts to provide an artificial intelligence-based approach
to striate patient risks. The ability to personalize medicine from various
indices allows clinicians to import information or data points from stress and
shape analyses that are typically inaccessible to non-experts.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an aneurysm prognosis
classifier that will be trained on small aneurysms, creating a robust risk score
for clinicians to decide on costly surgical interventions. The approach will
track changes to determine the shape of the aneurysm and biomechanical indices
from various scans for a single patient at different time points, which will aid
in determining the evolution of the aneurysm with time. A clinician would be
able to decide on surgical intervention risk based on various factors rather
than relying on the maximum diameter criterion and would be able to personalize
patient healthcare management by reducing the surveillance intervals (whereby
reducing overall costs of monitoring).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.