* 2318718
* ECO-CBET: Collaborative Research: Effect of surface-fuel attributes and forest-thinning patterns on wildfire, carbon storage, and advancing forest restoration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Tirtha Banerjee, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2027
* USD 518,389.00

2318717 (Cobian). In recent years, high-severity wildfires have severely damaged
forested mountain watersheds that store carbon, supply western-statesâ€™ water,
and provide many co-benefits. While periodic low- to medium-severity wildfires
are a natural part of western U.S. forests, too much of the area is burning at
high severity owing to excessive fuel loads and a warming climate. Therefore, a
critical goal of forest management is often the introduction of practices
designed to reduce the risk of high severity fires. These practices, known
collectively as forest restoration, involve thinning and removing or masticating
the less-fire-resistant, smaller trees, while leaving larger, more widely spaced
trees. A common restoration approach is applying mechanical thinning followed by
mastication which changes the forest-canopy structure and surface-fuel loading
and characteristics. While it is known that changing the arrangement and density
of trees and other vegetation through mastication affects fire behavior, there
is a lack a quantitative understanding of how attributes of masticated fuels
affect subsequent fire severity. The goal of this project is to develop metrics
of the impact of fuel treatments on fire behavior across a range of spatial and
temporal scales. This project will contribute to improved understanding of how
surface-fuel attributes, resulting from management decisions, influence fire
behavior and severity and thus forest biomass carbon storage.

Mechanical thinning followed by mastication changes the forest-canopy structure
and surface-fuel loading and characteristics. While these changes can impact
fire behavior significantly, their sensitivities to the type and degree of
mastication are not well understood. The three main goals of the study are: (1)
To establish the importance of heterogeneous and multiscale surface-fuel
loadings and attributes, following mechanical fuel treatments, on the
temperature, flame length, and spread of fire as these fuels burn; (2) To
develop and assess predictive tools for wildfire severity and spread in the
forest given these different fuel attributes, under contrasting micro-
meteorological conditions; and (3) To demonstrate carbon-storage and related
benefits from different fuel treatments designed to reduce the occurrence and
impacts of high-severity wildfires. The study will use bench-scale combustion
experiments, field measurements involving controlled burns in thinned and
masticated stands in a mixed-conifer forest, and modeling of wildland fire and
carbon storage. Results from experiments, modeling, and assessment of field-
scale control burns will be used to identify key drivers of fire severity in
ground fuels following thinning. Primary contributions of the study will be
improved understanding of how surface-fuel attributes, resulting from management
decisions, influence fire behavior and severity and thus forest biomass carbon
storage. Results will improve modeling of flame length, fire spread and carbon
balance and storage in the litter, mineral soil, and deeper regolith. This
research will engage decision maker and stakeholder partnerships with
organizations that are advancing landscape restoration, providing much-needed
improvements in projection of how their investments may affect wildfire
severity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.