* 2318706
* Smart Integrated Sustainable Agricultural and Remote Farms (SISARF) with 5G Network for Navajo Nation Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* M. Arockiasamy, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,998.00

The current societal grand challenge is to ensure food, energy, and water
security to meet the needs of the projected population growth in the US, which
is estimated to grow from 330 million to 400 million, and the world population
from 7.8 billion to 9.7 billion by 2050, requiring a 70% increase in global food
production. Sustainable agriculture is critical to Navajo Nation Farm
Communities to meet their needs for food. Agricultural decision support systems
are becoming increasingly popular for translating agronomic and climate sciences
to crops, livestock, and dairy farmers. The Smart Integrated Farm 5G Network for
Navajo Nation Farmers, Ranchers and Communities enhances timely data sharing and
knowledge exchange for coordinated responses to food production threats
including weeds, disease, insect, pest, and weather ensuring profitability and
security for decades to come.

The research develops a flexible, scalable, and efficient cloud-based
architecture and communication infrastructure for Smart and Connected Farms
(SCFs) for the Navajo Nation Community of farmers, ranchers and youth. The
Space-Air-Ground Integrated Network for in-field agricultural data collection
utilizes Remote Sensing Satellite Systems, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, and
Wireless Sensor Network. As participants in agricultural production, Navajo
Nation farmers equipped with smart devices have a better chance to obtain in-
field agricultural data. The research products provide privacy-preserving data
analytics across farms for community-level decision-making; establish community
of practice to facilitate learning and feedback among farmers and scientists,
trusted data and technology acceptance; and demonstrate economic benefit to
SCFs. The project outcomes aid the operations, enhance profitability of socially
disadvantaged Navajo farmers and ranchers and veteran farmers and increase their
knowledge to better utilize United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
programs and services.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.