* 2318252
* AGS-PRF: Elucidating the Channels of Energy Transport and Particle Energization in Collisionless Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Sarah Conley, Conley, Sarah A
* Fellowship Award
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 100,000.00

Understanding the channels of collisionless energy transport in plasmas is a key
step forward in the heliophysics and astrophysics turbulence communitiesâ€™ goal
of creating a model of collisionless plasma turbulence that can predict particle
energization and acceleration rates based on parameter observations at large
scales. Developing this predictive capability is critical to the ongoing efforts
to create a global model of the flow of energy from the Sun, through the
interplanetary medium, and out to the boundary of the heliosphere. To reach
clear understanding of the channels of collisionless energy transport necessary
for achieving this goal, this project will reconcile the existing collisionless
energy transport models and produce a model that is consistent with both fluid
and kinetic plasma theory. This post-doctoral fellowship is led by an early-
career woman PI. The broader impacts include support for the PI in developing
her research, outreach, and teaching capabilities.

In recent years, two major models of energy transport in collisionless plasma
turbulence have been suggested: a fluid model and a kinetic model. Diagnostic
tools for studying each of these models for collisonless energy transfer are the
Pi-D and field-particle correlation (FPC) technique, respectively. Despite
rigorous theoretical footing within their respective limits (fluid and kinetic
theory), the two models appear to be incompatible and it is not clear how the
diagnostic techniques that have arisen from them may be used in concert.
Furthermore, questions have been raised regarding the unknown consequences of
these diagnostics omitting certain terms that may be important for particle
energization (such as the heat flux or ballistic particle motion) and regarding
the contexts (i.e. global vs. local) in which these analysis techniques are
applicable. Reconciling the two models and their diagnostics is critical in
order for the community to arrive at an unequivocal description of the process
of collisionless energy transport and to understand the conditions where global
and local methods can be used in the study of collisionless energy transport. In
the heliosphere, this knowledge informs the flow of resources in both spacecraft
design and simulation development. To this end, this is a timely research
project that will, by resolving discrepancies between the two leading models of
energy transport in collisionless plasma turbulence, (i) elucidate the channels
of collisionless energy transport within the heliosphere, and (ii) clarify the
use of Pi-D and the FPC technique to determine how well these methods capture
system dynamics, both locally and globally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.