* 2318784
* Collaborative Research: Surfzone Eddy Dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Derek Grimes, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 307,226.00

This project will study recirculating flows at the nearshore zone where waves
break, the surf zone. These flows connect the surf zone and the area seaward of
this region (the inner shelf). The study will use mathematical models and
already-available measurements to explore three hypotheses: a) that the
recirculations can be identified from images recorded at the shore; b) that the
recirculating flows can be linked to wave properties (such as the variation in
their directions); and c) that these recirculations represent a non-negligible
portion of the energy transferred to the inner shelf. Measurements consist of
two-dimensional images, flow velocity, and water pressure variations. Artificial
intelligence will help to identify the recirculations in the surf zone. The use
of two-dimensional and three-dimensional mathematical models will help elucidate
the importance of the three-dimensionality of the recirculations. As Broader
Impacts, the study shall improve predictions of rip currents and of the exchange
of properties between the surf zone and the inner shelf. Undergraduate students
will visit a field site to learn about nearshore processes, to observe data
collection methods, and to interact with coastal scientists. Students will then
participate in mathematical modeling studies based on what they learn on the
field. This project will support two MS students at UNCW, one female PhD student
at WHOI, and the development of a surfzone science and safety module for a local
youth educational summer program (MarineQuest).

This project will study the hydrodynamics and turbulent kinetic energy
associated with the generation of eddies by short-crested breaking waves at the
surf zone. The study will use models, numerical and analytical, and in-hand
observations to explore three hypotheses: a) that the surfzone eddies can be
determined from remotely sensed images; b) that the velocity and vorticity of
these eddies can be linked to the directional spread and the gradients of a
rotational forcing; and c) that eddy ejections dominate the dissipation of
surfzone eddy-kinetic energy. Available observations are derived from remote
cameras (2D surface imagery), current meters, and pressure sensors. Machine
learning will be used to identify the surfzone eddy fields. Comparison of 2D
(Funwave-TVD) vs 3D (SWASH) models will determine the 3D effects associated with
the eddy ejections to the inner shelf. As Broader Impacts, the study shall
Improve predictions of rip currents and the exchange of properties between the
surf zone and the inner shelf. Undergraduate students will visit a field site to
learn about nearshore processes first hand, to observe modern data collection
approaches, and to interact with coastal scientists. Students will then
participate in numerical modeling studies based on what they have learned on the
field. This project will support two MS students at UNCW, one female PhD student
at WHOI, and the development of a surfzone science and safety module for a local
youth educational summer program (MarineQuest).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.