* 2318275
* NNA Incubator: Collaborative Research: Indigenous-led Strategies for Co-Productive and Convergent Arctic Research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 43,800.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, addresses important societal challenges, and engages internationally
and with local and Indigenous communities.

There is increasing recognition of the need to ethically and equitably engage
Indigenous Knowledge to address the pressing global challenges facing our planet
and society. To support this goal, a collaborative team of Indigenous scholars
and scientific researchers will create an innovative engagement process,
designed and led by Arctic Indigenous Peoples, to inform the goals of the Fourth
International Conference on Arctic Research Planning (ICARP IV). This decadal
planning process, first held in 1995 at Dartmouth and culminating in a fourth
conference in 2025 in Boulder, will set global research priorities for the
Arctic region through 2035.

Initial planning activities will bring together Arctic Indigenous Knowledge
holders to explore the practical implementation of utilizing Indigenous
Knowledge in Arctic research efforts. The goal will be to consider short,
medium, and long-term benefits of this approach for Arctic Peoples, science, and
broader society and to identify strategic opportunities for implementation.
Next, the project will support an Indigenous-led initiative to provide input
into the ICARP IV process and the development of a mechanism that allows for
ethical engagement of Indigenous Knowledge within Arctic research planning and
implementation. The anticipated result is the development of more Indigenous-led
strategies for researchers, universities, funders, and partner organizations in
the Arctic. The aim is to actively support the stewardship of Indigenous
Knowledge, as well as the rights and well-being of Arctic Indigenous peoples and
communities. Finally, the project will synthesize lessons learned from leaders
in Arctic co-production knowledge research, ongoing efforts and outcomes of co-
produced research, and other institutional efforts that aim to be more inclusive
of Indigenous Knowledge. It will also develop an evaluation framework to track
and assess progress and impact of these efforts, applicable to both national and
international Arctic research initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.