* 2318808
* Collaborative Research: CMOS+X: A Device-to-Architecture Co-development and Demonstration of Large-scale Integration of FeFET on CMOS for Emerging Computing Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kai Ni, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 239,999.00

In the new era of AI, modern computing electronics are facing tremendous
challenges when a large amount of computing tasks, e.g. robotics, AR/VR,
autonomous driving, require supports of gigantic computing models and enormous
computing workloads. Such demands have dwarfed the capabilities of existing
electronic hardware. As CMOS technology approaches 1 nm node, it is obvious that
the conventional technology scaling will soon run out of steam to meet the ever-
growing demand of computing power. To continue the Moore’s law, HfO2 based
ferroelectric field effect transistor (FeFET) is one of the leading candidates
with benefits of combined nonvolatility, high energy efficiency, and
compatibility with CMOS. While many device-level developments have been
performed on FeFET, one of the hindering factors is that the device’s
development is often performed at small scale without high-level integration
with CMOS technology, which is necessary to deliver a complete integrated-
circuit (IC) solution for supporting the modern computing tasks. To overcome the
limitation of existing developments, this proposal will develop cross-layer
techniques from device to circuit and architecture enabling large-scale
integration of the highly promising FeFET device with standard CMOS technology.

This project will perform full-stack developments from device to architecture
for the integration of CMOS and FeFET technology targeting emerging computing
applications. Fabricated FeFET with CMOS at advanced technology nodes at a large
scale will be used to demonstrate the proposed techniques. More specifically, we
will perform the following developments. At device level, improved process for
integration between nFeFET, pFeFET and CMOS will be developed allowing better
technology fusion of the FeFET and CMOS devices; At design methodology, a joint
device-circuit collaborative design flow will be developed to tailor the FeFET
technology towards the need of emerging computing applications such as AI;
Furthermore, novel circuit and architecture utilizing FeFET as both memory and
computing devices will be developed to exploit the features of FeFET and its co-
existence with CMOS technology; Finally, demonstrations on complex processors
and accelerators for emerging applications, with joint CMOS and FeFET technology
will be delivered to showcase the benefits of the emerging device integrated
with CMOS. The integrative approach and demonstration of CMOS and FeFET fusion
will manifest the system perspective of FeFET devices and establish a solid
foundation for the future FeFET developments especially for the emerging
computing tasks. By integrating the advanced semiconductor technology with
emerging computing tasks, the proposed projects provide strong educational
materials and opportunities for students to learn the multi-disciplinary
developments of modern computing techniques and microelectronic devices. Both
course materials and workshops on frontier semiconductor and computing
techniques will be developed to provide solid training to the society while also
promoting diversity and inclusion to college STEM education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.