* 2318221
* Stratocumulus As a Gravity Wave Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brian Mapes, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 717,310.00

The atmosphere is full of internal gravity waves, something like the waves you
can see on a water surface but occurring at every altitude in the sky. These
myriad overlapping internal waves have many wavelengths, and many depths, and
many propagation speeds, depending on what are their many sources. Sources
include wind shear, clouds and storms, wind blowing over mountains, and little-
understood larger-scale shudders that can emanate from jet streams and other
wind features. At the crest of a wave, air may saturate and form a visible
cloud. You can often see short waves (less than a few km wavelength) in the sky
as striped cloud patterns. Longer waves (100 km or more) are experienced more as
periodic pulses of sky cover in time, but they can be seen from satellite images
as parallel stripes or belts or arcs of enhanced and reduced cloudiness. These
stripes are coordinated with waves of motion, drawing together and spreading
apart the individual cloud features which we can track in animations. In low
cloud (stratocumulus) decks, which are especially common over the cool parts of
the ocean, these waves are especially obvious, and easy to measure, track, and
gather statistics about from satellite imagery alone. These statistics of very
direct camera measurements will tell scientists a lot about the nature of the
often-mysterious wave sources, wave propagation pathways, and the nature of how
waves modulate individual cloud particles, and cloud features or cells. The
project will also illuminate wave effects on the cloud deck as a whole. For
instance, a very deep cloud thickening event can lead to precipitation and thus
a long-lasting sky clearing, while even modest amplitude waves drive the cloud
cover toward 50% in otherwise overcast or clear skies. These deck-scale net
effects may be important to Earth’s heat budget, as clouds reflect sunlight.
With the massive quantities of satellite imagery now available in computer
archives, this project will be able to elucidate wave seasonality and even look
for trends in waviness or wave characteristics across the decades.

To measure these waves, the project will work with image pairs over
stratocumulus areas, tracking features or texture elements with Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV) software while simultaneously computing brightness differences
in time. The horizontal velocity measured by PIV is mostly advective (motion
downwind), but spatial gradients in velocity are informative. Where cloud
features converge and brightness increases, especially in periodic elongated
zones that can be tracked across many satellite image frames, a rising wave
crest can be inferred, and the properties of its wave train can be estimated. In
some cases, a clear source can be identified (like a hurricane), but in many
cases the source may be far away or unclear, hypothesized to include subtle
advective nonlinearities in the wind field. The project will seek to automate
and optimize wave identification algorithms (PIV, optical flow), and to extend
the technique to infrared imagery (with lower resolution and dynamic range) for
nighttime identification, to minimize spurious identifications, etc. To engage a
community of expertise, the project will focus initially on well-studied recent
situations such as field campaigns. As the algorithms are improved, they will be
deployed to ingest many decades of satellite imagery archives. The result will
be datasets of waviness, to be shared for community as well as project staff
efforts to characterize and understand the sources, properties, and impacts of
these mysterious but ubiquitous cloud-modulating wave phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.