* 2318301
* Collaborative Research: HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Developing a Wastewater-based Epidemiology Student Training and Education Program at CUNY
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Olga Calderon, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2028
* USD 152,838.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to establish a wastewater-
based epidemiology training program at The City University of New York to
respond to declining minority student retention and graduation rates in STEM.
These declines hamper workforce development in industries clamoring for STEM
talent and ultimately U.S. competitiveness in emerging technologies. The project
will train students with wastewater-based epidemiology technologies and
competencies, preparing the next generation of workers to face challenges posed
by emerging infectious diseases. It is hypothesized that inspiring community
college students with career prospects in an emerging technology, such as
wastewater-based epidemiology, and providing academic, research, and social
mentoring from role models that they can identify with will improve student
retention, graduation rates, and career success. The program will generate
interest in wastewater-based epidemiology as a career option, thus enhancing US
pandemic preparedness. The program will also have ripple effects in different
areas of society, such as water management, healthcare, public recreation and
health, regulatory policy, science education, and economic mobility for
graduates of the program and their families. By participating in the training
program, students will be well-positioned for high-paying jobs in the public and
private sectors or for graduate school.

The specific aims of the project are: Aim 1- Advance the effectiveness of STEM
education and workforce development programs, activities, and outreach through
evaluation and assessment; Aim 2- Attract and train the Nationâ€™s future STEM
workforce through multiple pathways to educational and career opportunities; Aim
3- Increase participation of underserved and underrepresented groups in STEM
education and workforce development programs, activities, and outreach; and Aim
4- Inspire community engagement in STEM education programs and activities to
provide meaningful wastewater-based epidemiology learning opportunities for
students and educators. The evaluation will include the use of surveys,
interviews, observations, and career tracking to determine the impact of the
program on students. The combination of pedagogical activities and hands-on
experiential education, including internships and job training, will provide
students with opportunities to commence STEM careers following graduation. The
results of our work will be disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, and through CUNY internal networks. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.