* 2318720
* ECO-CBET: GOALI: Condensing water from the air for building dehumidification and decarbonization using thermo-responsive desiccants
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Brandon Wilcox, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,669,674.00

2318720 (Shuang). Managing the humidity of buildings is essential for
maintaining occupant comfort, reducing defects in moisture-sensitive
manufacturing (e.g., semiconductors), and preventing foodborne pathogens in food
preservation. Existing Heating, Ventilation, and Air-conditioning (HVAC) systems
rely on either cold surface condensation or hygroscopic materials as desiccants
to remove moisture from air. However, this is an energy-inefficient process due
to the low-temperature setpoint essential for sufficient moisture condensation
and the extra energy required to overcome significant enthalpy of vaporization
in dehumidification. Currently, humidity control in buildings alone is
responsible for 600 million tons of CO2 annually. Hence, efficient air
dehumidification represents an excellent opportunity to reduce energy use and
greenhouse gas emissions to facilitate the sustainability and decarbonization
movement and counteract climate change. The vision of this convergent project is
to initiate and establish high-efficiency dehumidification systems that directly
condense water from the air through collaborative and interdisciplinary efforts
in building sustainability, thermal transport, civil engineering, and chemical
engineering. This fundamental research promoting more efficient building
dehumidification will directly benefit national health and national
manufacturing. Furthermore, the research is closely integrated with
interdisciplinary environmental research training for college students and
early-career scientists, which will benefit the STEM workforce.

This project pursues energy-efficient dehumidification utilizing Thermo-
Responsive (TR) desiccants with temperature-dependent adsorption
isotherms—benefiting from the thermo-responsive switchable hydrophilicity below
and above the Lower Critical Solution Temperature (LCST)—and high adsorption
capacity. In addition, the thermo-responsiveness of TR desiccants breaks
traditional desiccants’ fixed affinity to water, which allows for the release of
water in liquid form and avoids the high energy requirements of water
vaporization in traditional desiccants during the regeneration. The project will
(1) develop durable TR desiccants with tunable LCSTs and optimum temperature-
dependent adsorption isotherms for different dehumidification conditions, (2)
improve the heat and mass transfer rate of TR desiccant wheels by optimizing the
design parameters through modeling and experimental validation, (3) develop
techniques to remove the adsorbed water in liquid form, and (4) evaluate the
efficiency of the TR desiccant wheel in the dehumidification system by
performing a hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) experiment. The proposed TR desiccant
wheel with temperature-dependent adsorption isotherms leads to low regeneration
temperatures and the potential to bypass the heat of evaporation. The unique
property of desorbing the adsorbed moisture in the liquid form during the
regeneration saves up to 6x energy compared to traditional approaches in HVAC
application, which saves up to 30% carbon emission. Moreover, condensed water
from the air can be collected and used to alleviate water scarcity in building
operations in arid climates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.