* 2318425
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-R: SBP: RUI: Differences in Co-authorship across a Global Landscape: The Role of Network Structure in Scientific Productivity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kjersten Bunker Whittington, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2026
* USD 181,177.00

This research looks at whether the collaborative context affects scientific
outcomes differently for scientists in different categories, focusing on the
generalizability of network theories. Understanding the reasons for
disproportionate representation in top positions and different career
development patterns is important because science is increasingly a team-based
enterprise. Theories about how scientists collaborate often assume that everyone
benefits equally from their connections with others, but knowledge production is
influenced by status and identity in interactive contexts. This research adds to
our understanding of how knowledge is created and shared in global collaborative
science communities. It also tackles important issues related to the ongoing
efforts to increase participation in STEM fields.

This research adopts a network analytic approach using a large-scale
bibliographic database. This database is a comprehensive source for citation
information that allows for the construction of unbounded co-authorship networks
that include intra- and inter-disciplinary co-authorship ties across time and on
a global scale. In a set of three inquiries, the researchers examine differences
in benefit from resource-rich collaborative ties, through cumulative advantage,
and from tendencies toward homophily (status) in collaborative activity over
time and during the peak COVID-19 pandemic period. The project also tackles an
unresolved puzzle regarding the innovative value of research specialization
alongside collaborative brokerage and the interaction effects of specialization
and brokerage on innovation and the generation of “good ideas”. This work has
implications not only for scholars of science, but also for the development of
science and innovation policy that seeks to bolster the engagement of all
scientists in the production of science knowledge and the development of new
innovations. Sustaining the career development and collaborative relations of a
talented and diverse workforce has implications not only for equitable outcomes
in science, but also for national and international economic and social
prosperity.

The project is co-funded by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communications,
and Impact program, the Human Networks and Data Science research program, and
the Science of Broadening Participation program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.