* 2318614
* Investigating the volatile evolution and decompression rate of high-intensity basaltic eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Esteban Gazel, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2026
* USD 348,300.00

Knowledge of the driving factors in generating highly explosive volcanic
eruptions has been mostly focused on felsic (evolved melts high in silica)
eruptions. Nevertheless, mafic (less evolved melts high in magnesium) eruptions
of similar explosivity intensity have yet to be studied, even though mafic
volcanism is the most common type of volcanic activity on Earth, and they could
also trigger devastating societal and environmental impacts. This project aims
to improve understanding of mafic volcanism by reconstructing the chemical
evolution and volatile budgets from melt inclusions, small droplets of melt
trapped during crystal growth that preserved the history of the most explosive
mafic eruptions in the geologic record. This study will provide insights on the
timescales over which mafic magmas ascend to erupt explosively, which can be
used to inform eruption response efforts and forecasts. The research team will
collaborate with the U.S. Geological Survey’s Hawaiian Volcanic Observatory
(HVO-USGS) to disseminate knowledge among global volcanic monitoring and risk
assessment agencies. The work will also broaden the global use of geochemical
techniques in volcano monitoring and response by supporting a module in the
Center for the Study of Active Volcanoes (CSAV) summer course. This project will
support graduate and undergraduate students through training in different micro-
analytical techniques at Cornell and HVO, and their applications to understand
eruptions. Results from this project will be incorporated into Earth Materials
and Volcanology courses at Cornell. Finally, this project will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education by establishing collaborations between
Cornell University, HVO-USGS, the University of Manchester, LDEO-Columbia
University, the University of Auckland, Caltech, and Syracuse University.

High-intensity explosive eruptions (sub-Plinian, Plinian, and ultra-Plinian,
with a volcanic explosivity index of 6+) result in global environmental effects
and have great potential for devastating societal impacts. Among these
eruptions, mafic eruptions are the least studied and represent a critical end-
member urgently needing further investigation. Of particular interest is the
determination of their magma decompression rates (dP/dt), as this parameter
plays a crucial role in setting the style of volcanism in the eruption dynamics
for basaltic magmas. This project will study the volatile evolution and
decompression of basaltic Plinian to sub-Plinian eruptions. These eruptions
represent some of basaltic volcanism's most catastrophic and least understood
end-members. Reconstructing their eruption histories will address the following
questions: 1) What is the record of pre-eruptive conditions and degassing that
characterizes basaltic Plinian eruptions? To accurately constrain magmatic
conditions, the evolution of volatile saturation and degassing before and during
the eruption, and decompression pathways, the team will use olivine-hosted MIs.
2) What are the decompression rates of basaltic Plinian eruptions? Estimates of
magma decompression rates for the proposed eruption case studies need to be
improved or constrained indirectly using numerical models, experiments, and
crystal textures. This work aims to complement the volatile evolution history
with two petrological tools based on time-dependent chemical reactions: volatile
diffusion across olivine-hosted embayments and concentration gradients of H+ in
olivine crystals. 3) Do high-intensity mafic eruptions display a correlation
between decompression rate and eruption magnitude? Current data suggest low and
mildly explosive basaltic eruptions show a clear positive correlation between
decompression rate and eruption magnitude. However, these data are not available
for higher-magnitude eruptions. This project will answer this question with new
decompression rates studies supplemented with literature data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.