* 2318197
* Conference: Third US School and Workshop on Theory and Applications of TDDFT
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Carsten Ullrich, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This award is funded by contributions from Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program of the Division of Materials Research and the Chemical Theory, Models,
and Computational Methods program of the Division of Chemistry.

This award supports participation of students in the Third US School and
Workshop on Theory and Applications of Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory
(TDDFT), which will take place at Rutgers University-Newark from June 29, 2023
to July 8, 2023. TDDFT is an efficient and formally exact way of describing the
dynamics of interacting many-body systems, and has become the method of choice
for calculating excitation energies and optical properties of complex molecules
and a broad range of materials. The school, which will be held during the first
week, will involve the participation of 35 students and 8 instructors. Students
will learn the fundamentals of TDDFT via theory lectures and gain hands-on
experience by learning to use state-of-the-art TDDFT codes. The workshop to be
held during the second week will involve invited presentations on cutting edge
developments and applications of TDDFT from some of the leaders in the field as
well as junior scientists. The conference will allow students to learn about the
foundations and applications of TDDFT from experts in the field, facilitate the
exchange of ideas between junior and senior researchers, and serve as an
opportunity for creating new collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.