* 2318094
* Contact-Free Actuation Enabled by Acoustic Metasurfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ognjen Ilic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This grant will fund fundamental research on the remote and contactless
actuation of objects with acoustic waves. Motion control and manipulation of
objects present universal challenges in science and engineering. Conventional
actuation mechanisms often require physical tethers or onboard energy sources,
which can be cumbersome in practical applications in robotics, materials
assembly, bioengineering, and biomedicine. Actuation by the radiation pressure
of waves, such as acoustic waves, can be entirely contactless, but current
techniques are limited to small, subwavelength objects. To overcome these
limitations, this project will exploit the interaction of acoustic waves with
engineered structures known as metasurfaces. The main idea is to envelop objects
with surface patterns that are deliberately designed to control the momentum
change of the actuating wave, that is, to control the direction and intensity of
actuation, enabling to remotely move, steer, and manipulate these objects. The
scientific research will be tightly integrated with education and outreach
activities including hands-on demonstrations designed to broaden participation
and expose students to science and engineering at the intersection of
metamaterials and robotics.

The technical objective of this project is to develop a foundational
understanding of metasurface-controlled contactless dynamics. By utilizing
metasurface patterns, it is possible to control the radiation pressure with high
fidelity and high resolution at each location along the objectâ€™s surface. The
objective of this research is to develop a bidirectional, forward and inverse,
models that map between the desired object dynamics and metasurface patterns. By
combining wave-physics analysis and finite-element simulations, this project
will identify new metasurface topologies that are suitable as building blocks
for contactless actuation. Modeling efforts will be supported by the fabrication
and characterization of metasurface structures and tabletop experiments to
demonstrate their dynamical behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.