* 2318924
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Climate extremes and migration in Madagascar: Towards an integrated monitoring and modeling for mitigation and adaptation
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Andrew Bell, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 05/31/2026
* USD 161,187.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary projects to identify and understand how climate-
related events, both slow and rapid onset, are linked to human migration and
mobility.

The CHAIN project, focused on a case study in Madagascar, includes agent-based
and multi-hazard modeling to fill gaps in our understanding around climate
driven migration. The investigators will use multiple approaches to build a
cohesive data set to address four specific, well-defined, gaps in the
literature. By doing so, the project team will also develop cost-effective
methods for quantifying and then modeling migration, in a multi-hazard
environment. Importantly, the project aims to characterize migration to inform
adaptation and policy responses. These goals will be accomplished via four
interconnected work packages, with intentionality and theory informing the
connections the team prioritizes. The work packages include: (1) remote sensing-
based estimates of migration, (2) physical models, (3) measuring the migration-
multi-hazard environment nexus; and (4) agent-based modeling. The research team
includes researchers from France, Madagascar, Sweden, UK, and USA, and draws on
several expertise to accomplish their goals: environmental physics and
geography, climatology and environmental sciences, development studies, applied
development economics, policy evaluation, and behavioral and other social
sciences. The team also includes six stakeholder organizations and by including
“knowledge-brokering” workshops throughout the project the team demonstrated
their commitment to the co-production of knowledge. This collective skillset is
critical for the team to develop integrated human-centric approaches and better
understand complex relationships among the many factors influencing
migration/mobility and its relationship to climate hazards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.