* 2318196
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Using Peer-Enhanced Blockchain-Based Learning Environments to Promote Student Engagement and Retention
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Daniel McCloskey, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 699,909.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to increase the sense of
belonging, retention, and research participation of Hispanic and other students
historically underrepresented in STEM by revising the traditional lecture format
of Introduction to Psychology (PSY100), the largest introductory STEM-focused
course in this institution. Black and Hispanic students that enroll in PSY100 at
the College of Staten Island drop or fail this course at a higher rate compared
with that of White and Asian students. Peer-led team learning (PLTL) approaches
have been shown to reduce equity gaps in STEM courses but are not typically
amenable to large-format lecture courses such as PSY100. This project will
leverage technological advances in blockchain, artificial intelligence, and
machine learning to: 1) adapt the PLTL model to a large lecture course, and 2)
show students, in real-time, how the work they do for course requirements
translates to real-world employment-related skills. These peer-enhanced
blockchain-based learning environments (PEBBLEs) are expected to reduce equity
gaps and remove barriers to student retention and graduation.

This project will recruit peer-leaders, customize a student-focused application
for skills mapping, and implement PEBBLEs in multiple sections of PSY100, with
enrollment of over 1000 students across two HSIs in the City University of New
York. This project is expected to lead to a significant decrease in the number
of students who drop or fail this course, compared to students in the
traditional format course. Expected outcomes of this project also include
decreased attrition, increased research participation, and higher graduation
rates of students who participate as peer-leaders, compared to other psychology
majors. Finally, consistent with peer learning implementation in other STEM-
focused courses, the most pronounced improvements are expected to be among Black
and Hispanic students. The project aims to develop a "PEBBLE in a box" solution
that can be easily adapted by other disciplines and other institutions. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.