* 2318745
* Engaging the Public with Solar Eclipses Through Mini-Grants
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Kevin Marvel, American Astronomical Society
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 374,671.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using upcoming solar
eclipses to advance the public understanding of science. Two major solar
eclipses are coming to North America: an annular solar eclipse on October 14,
2023, and a total solar eclipse on April 8, 2024. These events provide excellent
opportunities for science education and outreach to students, teachers, and the
general public. The investigators will operate a "mini-grants program" to
support geographically broad efforts to engage people in the excitement of the
eclipses and the science surrounding them. This effort will be based on a
similar mini-grants program (supported by NSF Award DUE-1564535) that the
investigators ran for the total solar eclipse in August 2017. The activities
supported by those mini-grants reached approximately 29,000 members of the
public.

Using groundwork laid by the American Astronomical Society's (AAS) Solar Eclipse
Task Force (SETF), the investigators will advertise the mini-grants program
widely and invite short proposals from nonprofit organizations (primary and
secondary schools, colleges and universities, public libraries, community
groups, etc.) to engage local communities in educational activities and citizen
science associated with the eclipses. Proposals might include, for example,
building Sun-Earth-Moon models to explain the geometry of the eclipse,
constructing pinhole viewers or other safe observing equipment, hosting
observing events, or providing professional development for teachers. A major
priority will be projects that will reach a diverse array of individuals,
especially individuals from groups historically underrepresented in STEM. The
mini-grant proposals will be reviewed by a committee of experts (primarily from
the SETF), and approximately 40 mini-grants (the majority under $5,000) will be
awarded. The mini-grant recipients will be required to collect data on the
participants in their projects and to participate in a systematic evaluation of
the impact of the projects. An SETF member will be assigned to each mini-grant
recipient to serve as a liaison, and the mini-grant recipients will participate
in a forum following the eclipses to share the results of their projects.

This award is co-funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) in the
Directorate for STEM Education (EDU), the Division of Astronomical Sciences
(AST) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), and the
Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences (AGS) in the Directorate for
Geosciences (GEO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.