* 2318064
* The Wind River Elementary Computer Science Collaborative: Supporting Culturally Responsive-Sustaining Computer Science Education in Indigenous Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kathryn Rich, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2026
* USD 647,311.00

Wyoming is home to the Wind River Reservation, where both the Eastern Shoshone
and Northern Arapaho people live. Alongside the urgent need to increase access
to computer science education for their students, the Eastern Shoshone and
Northern Arapaho people place a high priority on teaching and preserving their
cultural traditions, reflecting both strong community values and a response to
historical injustices. In response to these district priorities and interests,
three school districts with elementary schools on the Wind River reservation
have formed a research-practice partnership with the American Institutes for
Research, Wyoming Department of Education, BootUp Professional Development, and
Partner to Improve, called the Wind River Elementary Computer Science
Collaborative. This project builds on prior research in which the project team
developed elementary computer science projects and lessons that integrated
history, language, and culture of the Eastern Shoshone and Northern Arapaho;
provided professional development for elementary teachers and paraeducators; and
studied implementation of elementary computer science projects. With buy-in and
support from school, district, and tribal leaders, the Collaborative will
promote the sustainability of elementary computer science and develop resources
to support other districts in adopting successful processes for teaching
Indigenous studies through computer science.

The project will directly serve three Indigenous student-serving elementary
schools, 18 teachers per year, six administrators, up to 18 high school student
mentors, and 400+ elementary students. The proposed activities are (a) to expand
the Collaborative to include more elementary teachers and incorporate high
school, near-peer mentors; (b) to support forms of teacher collaboration that
have been critical in the Collaborative's work to date; (c) to further engage
the Wind River community through ongoing communication to tribal and school
leadership and family engagement events; and (d) to conduct research.
Specifically, the research will investigate how teaching Indigenous studies
through computer science relates to and expands an existing framework for
culturally responsive-sustaining computer science pedagogy and to assess whether
and why teachers participating in the collaborative show increased self-efficacy
for teaching computer science and whether and why students experiencing
Indigenous studies instruction through computer science develop computer science
identities that feel compatible with their Indigenous heritages. This project
aims to produce generalizable knowledge about models of professional development
and implementation at the intersection of Indigenous studies and computer
science education. These models will enrich the field's understanding of how
frameworks for integrated instruction can be applied to increase the cultural
relevance of computer science education for Indigenous students, and the results
inform future research-based approaches to increasing the cultural relevance of
computer science education for other groups traditionally underrepresented in
computer science. The project advance knowledge about how teaching Indigenous
studies through computer science can support positive identity development for
elementary students and high school mentors. This award is supported by the
Computer Science for All: Research and RPPs program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.