* 2318420
* Incubator Grant: Partnership to Advance Prediction of Noise Impacts on Arctic Marine Wildlife
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* John Hildebrand, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 164,961.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment and social systems, and addresses
important societal challenges, builds significant educational opportunities, and
engages internationally and with local and Indigenous communities.

Underwater noise caused by human activities poses a threat to marine wildlife
and is a significant global environmental concern. However, sources of
underwater noise, such as marine shipping and energy production, are vital
components of the global economy. In the Arctic, marine mammals, fish, and other
wildlife potentially impacted by underwater noise also provide invaluable
subsistence, cultural, and community benefits to Arctic residents. Shipping and
industrial development are projected to increase substantially in Arctic waters,
with differing noise sources and environmental concerns across specific regions
creating a growing need to fill gaps in understanding and prediction of noise
impacts. Research on impacts of underwater noise is especially limited in Arctic
waters where access to animals and habitat are more restricted by the extreme
environment. However, local and Inuit residents possess incomparable experience
and expertise about ecosystems, animal behavior and seasonal movements, and how
to safely access and observe wildlife in the Arctic marine environment. Through
this NNA-Incubator Grant, we will develop partnerships for convergent research
guided by local and Inuit knowledge, leadership, and expertise in two Arctic
regions to answer questions regarding impacts of noise on marine mammals and
fish species vital to Arctic social and natural systems.

The goals of this project will be accomplished by leveraging existing long-term
passive acoustic monitoring projects in two locations in the Canadian Arctic.
Research partnerships and a collaborative framework will be co-developed through
connecting the US anchoring institution with a local hunters and trappers
organization in Nunavut, the regional Inuit government in Nunatsiavut, and a
Canadian-based nongovernmental organization focused on community-based
conservation. The project will involve periodic in-person meetings, community
engagement with summary follow-up, and a synthesis phase. All outputs will be
the result of equal partnership and collaboration between Inuit and project
partners from outside the Arctic. Activities at every stage will be carried out
through co-mentorship between local, regional, and international collaborators
and participants. Along with co-development of noise impacts research and long-
term monitoring, specific plans will be developed for dissemination and broader
impact activities. Our aim is to ensure that the results of the research are
shared in a timely manner with resource managers, decision-makers, community
members, and the public. The success of this project will yield the additional
benefits of developing a broad local, regional, and international collaborative
framework focused on building place-based, community-based research and long-
term ecological monitoring applicable to other locations in the Arctic and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.