* 2318013
* Conference: 2023 CO2 Assimilation in Plants from Genome to Biome Gordon Research Conference: May 6-12, 2023:  Tuscany Il Ciocco, Via Giovanni Pascoli, Lucca (Barga), LU, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Asaph Cousins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 16,260.00

This award supports registration expenses for participants in the May 2023
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on CO2
Assimilation in Plants: Photosynthetic Efficiency in a Changing Climate, which
explores the dynamics of carbon exchange between photosynthetic organisms and
their environment. This area of active research is of critical importance to
predicting how photosynthetic organisms respond to variable environments,
managing natural ecosystems for biodiversity, productivity, and carbon storage,
and promoting food and energy production for a growing world population.
Photosynthesis research is an inherently interdisciplinary field, requiring
basic scientific advances in many disciplines within plant, algal and microbial
biology, coupled with efforts to integrate knowledge across molecular, cellular,
organismal, and ecosystem scales. A major theme of the 2023 meeting will focus
on obtaining a better understanding of how carbon dioxide uptake by plants will
respond under current and future climate scenarios. The GRC and GRS bring
together diverse and early-career scientists with senior scientists in the field
to discuss cutting-edge research, and participation of early-career scientists
from under-represented groups will be supported with the award. The GRC and GRS
also foster collaborations among scientists from academia, industry, and
government agencies that will guide and support photosynthesis research into the
future.

This Gordon Research Conference focuses on integrating fundamental scientific
knowledge of carbon assimilation, source-sink relationships, and photosynthetic
efficiency to better understand physiological mechanisms that underlie plant
responses to biotic and abiotic factors and to link these traits to productivity
and carbon storage at the global scale. These topics will be explored in
relation to evolutionary mechanisms that led to novel plant innovations,
modeling approaches to scale responses from cellular to ecosystem levels,
metabolic feedbacks that link carbon dioxide assimilation to other physiological
and developmental processes, and leveraging photosynthesis research to improve
plant productivity. The subtheme for the 2023 GRC and GRS, Photosynthetic
Efficiency in a Changing Climate, encompasses these fundamental scientific
problems. This theme was chosen to highlight scientific questions to encourage
collaborative, innovative approaches to solving global challenges associated
with climate change, carbon storage, and food and energy security. The themes of
the GRS and GRC were chosen to highlight key scientific questions, stimulate the
exchange of ideas within a diverse scientific community, and encourage
collaborative, innovative approaches to solving these global challenges.
Attendees will be able to participate in professional development activities,
including a GRS career panel discussion exploring diverse career paths in plant
science and the GRC Power Hour which addresses diversity and inclusion in the
scientific workplace.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.