* 2318814
* Label-free Detection of Opioids in Liquid Using Zinc Oxide Nanophotonic Sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,541.00

Illicit drug abuse has become another major national health crisis since the
Covid-19 pandemic started, due to long period of quarantine at home with
significantly reduced social interactions. In 2022, U.S. drug overdose deaths
hit the highest level in history: nearly 110,000 people died from drug overdose
according to US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The top overdose
drugs are opioids, cocaine, psychostimulants, and methadone. Mixing multiple
drugs can also cause drug-drug interactions which may increase the risk of
death. The current drug detection apparatuses typically require time-consuming,
laborious sample preparation procedure and trained staff. These detection
methods are not suitable for monitoring and profiling the current drug overdose
crisis en masse. This project aims to develop a high throughput, label-free and
portable sensor that can quantitatively detect multiple drugs (opioids, cocaine,
psychostimulants, and methadone) in a liquid sample via a single test. The
samples can be collected in the diverse forms of biofluids such as saliva,
urine, sweat and blood. Successful development of this automatic, accurate,
point-of-care platform will greatly simplify and accelerate the drug screen
process.

The main module of the sensing platform consists of a silver (Ag) or gold (Au)
nanoparticle decorated Zinc Oxide nanorod coated silica nanofiber matrix
(Ag/AuNP-ZnONR-SNF nanosensor). Machine learning algorithm will be incorporated
to achieve the automatic, quantitative analysis of multiplex detection of the
drugs without trained expertise. The objective of this project will be achieved
by accomplishing the following three research tasks: (1) Development and
characterization of the nanosensor material to experimentally demonstrate the
feasibility of surfaced enhanced plasmonic sensing of drugs using the device.
The device is fabricated by electrospinning of the silica nanofiber as the
supporting matrix, hydrothermal growth of the ZnO nanorod coated on the silica
nanofiber, and Ag and Au nanoparticles synthesized by UV irradiation or seed
mediated growth method, respectively, on the surface of the ZnONR-SNF matrix.
(2) Optimization of the sensing performance, including the sensitivity, limit of
detection (LoD), repeatability and stability of the sensor by tuning the
geometries, dimensions, and structure of the nanomaterials-based sensing module
with respect to different biofluidic samples. (3) Development of machine
learning (ML) algorithms using prior-embedded deep neural network models trained
by many data samples obtained using our sensor to identify and quantify multiple
drugs from different sample sources. The successful implementation of the
algorithm will allow for an accurate, automatic, quick, and multiplex detection
of the drugs. This project will provide new methodologies and data to address
the challenges in understanding and monitoring the current drug overdose crisis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.