* 2319203
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of SAXS/WAXS/GISAXS/GIWAXS instrument with versatile, controlled sample environments
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hongcai Zhou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 846,986.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art X-ray instrument for scattering studies of a wide range of
polymer, ceramic, and hybrid organic-inorganic materials to meet the research
and teaching needs of the Texas A&M University, regional academic institutions
in TX, South Central US, and industrial collaborators. The X-ray instrument
enables continuous monitoring of materials nanostructure on the scale from 0.1
to 300 nm upon exposure to diverse environmental conditions (e.g., temperature,
humidity, controlled gaseous environments) and subjected to external stimuli
(e.g., mechanical deformation, light). The capabilities of this advanced
instrument provide critical information on the structure-property-function
relationships and enable rational design of next generation systems related to
self-assembly, conductivity, mechanical adaptivity, and rheological behavior,
impacting the areas of healthcare, energy, transportation, nutrition, and
consumer products. The instrument is housed in the TAMU Soft Matter Facility
(SoMF), a multi-user facility that serves users from academia and industry in TX
and other states. The X-ray instrument enhances research and education at
participating minority-serving institutions in TX and South Central US as
undergraduate and graduate students use the new instrument and disseminate their
results through the user workshops. The knowledge gained through these
experiences is incorporated into courses, enriching education across campuses.

The X-ray instrument features high-throughput, large-field-of-view imaging
capabilities, the ability to collect wide-angle and small-angle scattering data
in transmission and grazing incidence modes, and is equipped with a large sample
chamber and a number of in situ stages that allow control of the chamber
environment for the investigation of the effects of external stimuli on the
sample (mechanical loads, applied fields, sample swelling, or chemical reaction
to vapors). The imaging module provides a ten-micron resolution enabling X-ray
transmission imaging of the hierarchically structured multicomponent materials
and then focusing on selected regions for X-ray scattering measurements to
enable measurements of materialsâ€™ structural evolution under different
environments and stimuli. The research instrument is essential for the
development of next-generation polymers and nanocomposites, organic-inorganic
hybrid materials, cementitious sustainable infrastructure materials, as well as
inorganic materials for energy storage and optoelectronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.