* 2319442
* IMR: MM-1C: Fine-grained Network Monitoring via Software Imputation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Maria Apostolaki, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Computer networks are an essential component of the computing infrastructure
that drives numerous products and services in modern society. Network monitoring
is essential for detecting malicious activities, troubleshooting, and managing
the resources of a network. However, accurate monitoring is notoriously
expensive or even infeasible, due to hardware limitations. Network operators use
sampling, i.e., they monitor the network less frequently to save on resources.
However, sampling makes network management more challenging as it can hide
important insights or miss certain events. This project will develop innovative
technologies to build a software component, namely a Telemetry Imputation Layer
(TIL), that will work atop the networking hardware to improve the accuracy of
monitoring. TIL has the potential to revolutionize network management, where
network operators will have access to monitoring of unprecedented quality,
thereby facilitating more secure, reliable, and performant networks. At a high
level, TIL is analogous to image super-resolution in which low-resolution images
can be turned into high-resolution ones. For images, super-resolution is
possible thanks to the correlations among neighboring pixels and the underlying
structure of the images. For network monitoring, the imputation is possible due
to the existence of physical constraints and of correlations among the monitored
time series.

This research involves solving interdisciplinary challenges that require
knowledge of systems, networking, machine learning (ML), and formal methods
(FM), to facilitate advances in network monitoring. First, this research will
develop an ML model that recovers fine-grained monitoring data from coarse-
grained measurements, precisely enough to perform known network management
tasks. To this end, the research will investigate different ML models and
training pipelines to avoid common ML pitfalls such as lack of generality,
overfitting, and data scarcity. Next, this research will develop FM techniques
and a logic-based model that connects network operations and monitored
measurements via constraints. Using this model, the project will provide the
means to answer network management queries using fine-grained network data that
are consistent with given scenarios and coarse-grained measurements. Finally,
this project aims to develop methods that combine the ML and FM techniques for
network imputation in order to benefit from both the existence of data and
knowledge in the networking domain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.