* 2319421
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1B: Automating Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing of Campus Network Traffic Logs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Donald Brown, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 221,916.00

Internet measurement data serves a critical role in enabling innovations in
fields such as networking and cyber security monitoring. However, such data
often contains sensitive user information, which cannot be shared publicly and
is only accessible to a limited number of trusted researchers with established
collaborations with data owners. This limitation hinders the reproducibility of
research results and the use of collected data by the research community. This
project develops a systematic approach to facilitate data sharing of campus
network traffic logs from the University of Virginia (UVA) and Virginia Tech
(VT) with the broader research community. The projectâ€™s novelties are (i) data
anonymization: automating the discovery and anonymization of sensitive data in
network traffic logs and (ii) data sharing: modularizing the data access through
a privacy-preserving framework. The project's broader significance and
importance are (i) expanding the number of researchers who can use the campus
network traffic logs from UVA and VT, as well as serving as a pointer for
sharing Internet measurement data by other campuses and networks; (ii)
curriculum development to engage graduate and undergraduate students for
research activities on the campus network logs.

Specifically, the project (i) develops an extensible and adaptable model to
identify Personal Identifiable Information (PII) to anonymize in structured and
semi-structured network logs in an offline setting, fine tune the model based on
historical logs, and transition the model to a tunable service capable of
supporting live data feeds and offline repositories; (ii) modularizes varying
levels of data access based on research needs and constructs a privacy-
preserving framework with differential privacy to provide provable privacy
guarantees to restricted levels of data access; and (iii) integrates the
privacy-preserving framework back into data anonymization to achieve dynamic
anonymization based on usage patterns. This project deploys and evaluates the
proposed approach directly on the UVA and VT traffic collection pipeline in a
practical real-world setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.