* 2319445
* Investigating Lithospheric Heterogeneity of the North American Craton with Multiple Seismological Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiaotao Yang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 235,547.00

The relatively stable cores of the Earth’s continental lithosphere, referred to
as cratons, are considered “stable” tectonic features that are generally
resilient to destruction and recycling. This resilience does not mean that
cratons are not deformed by tectonic proceses. Globally, within the interior of
cratons, there are a large number of local subsidence, uplifts, and breakups
that form basins, mountains, and rifts. These tectonic features are also
localities of important mineral and petroleum resources, as well as earthquakes.
Despite the scientific and societal importance of cratons and their associated
tectonic features, it is unclear how these features form and how cratons survive
the long (billions of years) history of tectonic evolution. This project will
examine the seismic signatures within the North American midcontinent by
constructing multiple types of seismic models. These seismic models will provide
constraints on the tectonic mechanisms that have modified the North American
cratonic lithosphere. This project will support graduate and undergraduate
students in seismic data analysis and interpretations. By working with the
outreach office at Purdue University, this project will create an educational
video series on the geology and tectonics of the Midwest U.S., which will be
accessible to the public.

Cratons are normally considered “stable” tectonic features generally resilient
to destruction and recycling. This thought has become increasingly questionable
with recent observations from geophysical imaging, geological surveys, and
geodynamic modeling that support significant structural and compositional
modifications of the cratonic lithosphere. This project will construct multi-
type seismic models of the North American cratonic interior with multiple
methods, including full-wave ambient noise tomography, plan-wave migration
receiver functions, and seismic anisotropy analysis. With the new structural
constraints, this project will systematically evaluate four previously proposed
end-member scenarios for the evolution of the cratonic lithosphere. The result
of this project will shed light on several fundamental questions in Earth
sciences: 1) what are the processes that modify stable cratons? 2) why and how
did cratons survive the long history of tectonic events? And 3) how do pre-
existing structures influence later deformation? The outcome of this project
also has important implications across geoscience disciplines studying
continental evolution, such as seismology, geology, geomorphology, petrology,
and geodynamic modeling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.