* 2319734
* RaMP: Native American Capacity Building to Explore Biological Systems Resilience: Weaving Traditional Ways of Knowing with Western Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Erica Crespi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

A fundamental question in biology is how are molecular, physiological,
ecological, and ecosystem system resilience interrelated – network patterns that
are common or divergent across systems and scales. This question is especially
urgent in the face of accelerating climate change and other human perturbation
to biological systems. The overarching goal of this research is to transform the
social, cultural, and intellectual fabric of academia by creating a network
connecting universities with local tribes and building a collaborative framework
around shared values and scientific goals that engages Indigenous knowledge
systems in equitable, non-extractive ways. This project provides a framework for
the development of a suite of projects addressing many levels of biological
resilience in systems relevant to Tribal partners and builds intellectual and
cultural relationships that will integrate subdisciplines in biology and
different ways of knowing. This project’s Indigenous RaMP postbaccalaureate
mentees will engage in respectful, relational, reciprocal, and responsible
projects developed with Tribes, mentors, and co-mentors to meet Tribal needs.
This work will honor and uphold Indigenous knowledge by fully engaging Tribal
nations and people at every step of project development. Ultimately, this
project will lay the groundwork for land-grant institutions in the US to honor
and uphold Indigenous knowledge by fully engaging Tribal nations and people at
every step of project development so Indigenous systems can be applied together
with Western knowledge systems to shed new light on biological systems
resilience.

This work will intertwine Western scientific approaches to learning about
biological systems resilience with Indigenous knowledge to train mentees in the
Indigenous paradigm of “two-eyed seeing.” Further, employing Indigenous research
methodologies in the project will enable participants (mentees, mentors, and co-
mentors) to explore the cultural theme of Tribal nation building in academia.
Within this program, there will be full integration of Tribal sovereignty and
self-determination and a spirit of community and public leadership that aligns
with long-term decision making. The project will support ~30 post-bac mentees
who identify as Native American/Native Alaskan/Indigenous. Mentees will be
supported in developing scientific, professional, and cultural skills that will
position them to pursue further education or STEM activities in and with tribal
communities. Biological systems of study will range from the molecular to the
landscape and ecosystem scales, including mechanisms of salmon hatchery
resilience, long-term agroforestry disease resistance, and the impacts of soil
health and stewardship on tribal food sovereignty. Engaging in Tribal research
capacity building, can serve as a model for the process of interaction between
Tribes and universities. Finally, understanding the properties of resilient
human-ecological systems is of urgent importance in our rapidly changing world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.