* 2319131
* FMitF: Track II: Cybolic: a symbolic execution technique and tool for analyzing CMake build scripts
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* ThanhVu Nguyen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2025
* USD 97,242.00

CMake is a well-known, platform-independent software build automation tool. When
build issues arise, developers often have to manually analyze CMake scripts to
determine how files or libraries are built. This manual process is both error-
prone and time-consuming. This project will develop Cybolic, a formal method and
tool to analyze CMake. The novelties of the project are the automated and
scalable algorithms enabling Cybolic to be practical and useful for developers.
The project's impacts are that the open-source Cybolic tool will improve the
debugging and build process of software relying on CMake and will benefit users
who currently have to manually analyze CMake scripts.

The project will build the Cybolic as a symbolic execution technique that
transforms CMake code into logical formulae representing build conditions, which
are mappings of conditions over build options for files and compilation flags.
These build conditions can help developers in many tasks, such as finding orphan
code sections, files, or compilation options that are never used and determining
what patches or code changes affect a compilation configuration. This project
will focus on (i) making Cybolic scale to large and complex CMake-based
projects, (ii) applying Cybolic to detect real-world build issues, (iii) and
integrating Cybolic with popular Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) such
as Visual Studio (VS) Code to improve its usability and adoption. The findings
from this project will be used in the investigatorâ€™s courses and mentoring and
outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.