* 2319401
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Synthesis and Verification of In-Memory Computing Systems using Formal Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Sumit Jha, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 08/31/2027
* USD 250,000.00

This project is a collaborative effort that brings together expertise in formal
methods, machine learning, computer-aided design, and fabrication of in-memory
computing systems. The main goal of the project is to create formal methods that
can synthesize neural networks in the memory of the computer and also prove
their correctness. The project pursues tasks that include the verification of
neural networks accelerated using analog in-memory computing (IMC) and the
synthesis of hybrid analog-digital IMC for neural networks using formal methods
and machine learning. The project demonstrates these innovations using in-field
fabrication of IMC systems. The effort creates new algorithms for enabling the
deployment of robust AI models on emerging in-memory hardware technologies that
may be more prone to errors than traditional CMOS technologies. The project
would also allow the training of neural networks with reduced power consumption.
This is particularly important given the larger adoption of AI and the need to
train more and more powerful neural networks. The endeavor enables several other
contributions to the research community, including enhancing the reliability of
neural networks on in-memory circuits, increasing diversity in computer
engineering and computer science, and fostering interdisciplinary collaboration
across formal methods, machine learning, and hardware design.

The project focuses on advancing formal methods to tackle real-world challenges
encountered in emerging in-memory computing systems. By leveraging recent
innovations in machine learning and formal methods, the project synthesizes
crossbars for neural nets using decision diagrams, neural nets, and
reinforcement learning. It verifies bidirectional digital IMC circuits before
demonstrating such in-memory computing systems through fabrication. This effort
expands our understanding of the capabilities and limitations of in-memory
computing systems and creates innovations in fields such as in-memory computing,
formal methods, and artificial intelligence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.