* 2319962
* CICI:TCR:CAREFREE:Cloud infrAstructure ResiliencE of the Future foR tEstbeds, accelerators and nEtworks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Cyberinfrastructure in the form of cloud computing has become the main workhorse
for accelerating modern scientific exploration, discovery, and advancement.
Several research clouds are available and give scientists from diverse research
domains access to significant new cyber-infrastructure approaches that are
unavailable through commercial cloud offerings. Like their commercial cloud
counterparts, the scientific workloads running on these systems require
security, and the scientists using these cutting-edge systems wish to preserve
the integrity and confidentiality of their data and programs. In addition, they
expect robust system availability without worrying about disruptions caused by
attacks. Since these testbeds offer bare metal resources to support systems
research they have an increased attack surface (in comparison to commercial
clouds), which makes them less secure. As a consequence, the goal of this
project is to secure scientific cyberinfrastructures (in the form of next-
generation cloud systems) that include network-attached accelerators.

This project aims to develop the next-generation resilient cloud infrastructure.
The research investigates cyberinfrastructure security from a cross-layer
perspective by focusing on both networking and hardware accelerators. Its
complementary research thrusts build on the Open Cloud Testbed. This
experimental testbed is isolated from public networks and is an ideal platform
for addressing security issues where attacks can be launched, identified, and
mitigated. This research has three thrusts. First, it identifies advanced attack
strategies leveraging vulnerabilities associated with the network layer. Second,
it defines and explores three classic security concerns; confidentiality,
integrity, and availability; which can be compromised by an adversary leveraging
hardware accelerator vulnerabilities. Third, it explores efficient and scalable
defense solutions with a co-design strategy for hardware/software/network.
Collectively, it integrates these cross-layer defense solutions with the
existing infrastructure and develops benchmarking for evaluation and transition
to other research cyberinfrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.