* 2319183
* Structure-Property Relationships of Anion Vacancy Plasmonic Metal Oxide Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rajesh Sardar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 455,740.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Science and technology thrive on the discovery of new materials with unique
optoelectronic properties. Nanosized materials commonly referred to as
nanoparticles are in the forefront of modern scientific research because of
their ever-expanding applications, specifically in energy storage and conversion
for a sustainable future. With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Rajesh Sardar and
his group at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis will expand the
scientific understanding of metal oxide nanoparticle synthesis via colloidal
synthetic methods. Because these nanoparticles contain oxygen coupled in a
unique manner with non-toxic metals, the research allows for highly tunable and
environmentally friendly nanoparticle compositions. The unique combination of
shape anisotropy and surface chemistry of these nanoparticles will be optimized
to enhance their optoelectronic properties directed towards highly advanced
electronic devices and catalysts. The project aims to train underrepresented
minority students through mentored research, and integration of research results
into the university level graduate and undergraduate courses. The scientific and
communication skills of students at every level will be enhanced through multi-
faceted collaboration between scientists from universities and national
laboratories, as well as mentoring and workshops.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The discovery of new functional materials with unique optical and electronic
properties will allow rational design of optoelectronic devices with better
performance. This project supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the NSF’s Division of Materials Research aims to synthesize localized
surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)-active metal oxide nanoparticles where LSPR
properties are generated from oxygen vacancies (anion deficiencies) in the
stoichiometric inorganic lattice that leads to free (conduction band) electron
density as high as in plasmonic noble metal (Au and Ag) nanoparticles. These
anion deficient metal oxide nanoparticles are expected to produce strong
electromagnetic field enhancement and hot electrons that are most desirable for
various light-driven applications. This project seeks to understand the
structure-property relationships of ligand-passivated nanoparticles.
Specifically, the project (1) synthesizes LSPR-active, targeted anisotropic
shaped nanoparticles via seed-mediated growth approaches, (2) performs
spectroscopic and microscopic analyses, along with theoretical calculations to
understand the mechanisms that control the shape and desired composition of such
nanoparticles, and (3) utilizes organic passivating ligands to control and
achieve substantially enhanced optoelectronic properties with unique abilities.
As a part of the broader impact activities, graduate and undergraduate, along
with underrepresented high school students will develop research skills through
mentorship and workshops. Additionally, research outcomes will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as disseminated at national and
international meeting, and peer-reviewed publications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.