* 2319551
* Collaborative Research: ATD: Geospatial Modeling and Risk Mitigation for Human Movement Dynamics under Hurricane Threats
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yujie Hu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 255,000.00

Hurricanes pose a significant threat to coastal states. In recent years, the
high frequency of hurricane threats has severely impacted the livelihood of
people and the economic activities of impacted regions. As a hurricane
approaches diverse stakeholders need to make timely decisions. For example,
should a business shut down for a few days, accounting for both safety risks and
revenue losses? Or should a community evacuate its residents when there is still
large uncertainty about the hurricane's trajectory? Where should public
resources such as policing and commodity supplies be allocated, in case of a
need for mass evacuation? This research leverages the information in the human
dynamics data, collected from mobile phone geopositioning and vehicle traffic
monitoring, and develops state-of-the-art statistical and geospatial models to
enable data science-driven decision-making. The output of this research will
provide useful data science toolboxes for improving the effectiveness of
disaster prevention and relief efforts.

On the methodologies, this project aims to harness the information in multiple
flow datasets, and use statistical and geospatial modeling to address the
following component tasks. The first component focuses on demand prediction and
surge detection in the traffic flow network during a hurricane evacuation. This
task will develop a temporal flow network model, quantify the traffic change
rate, and identify the important spatiotemporal covariates that influence the
demand. The second component focuses on the dynamic optimization of evacuation
flows and demand dispersion. This task will combine the power of statistical
prediction for the evacuation demand, combinatorial optimization on flow
maximization, and optimal transport to disperse excess demand to significantly
improve the efficacy of directing traffics away from hurricane-impacted regions.
The third component focuses on quantifying the impacts on economic activities
using cellphone tracking data during the hurricane preparation and post-
hurricane restoration periods. This task will quantify the economic dependency
graphs and their changes under hurricane threats, and find out the sub-
populations at large economic risk due to shutdown.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.