* 2319884
* RAPID: Naturalistic effects of landmark scientific reports on public beliefs and attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Brendan Nyhan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,997.00

The effects of scientific evidence on the public's beliefs and attitudes are not
well understood. In general, prior research suggests that exposure to scientific
information is likely to shift people's factual beliefs but may not have
corresponding effects on people's opinions or policy preferences. This study
considers the landmark reports of the International Panel on Climate Change.
IPCC reports attract enormous attention, but little experimental evidence exists
about their effects on public opinion. This study evaluates the effects of
exposure to the report with the goal of resolving longstanding puzzles about the
effect of scientific evidence on beliefs and attitudes regarding polarizing
issues and how these effects vary by the quantity of evidence to which people
are exposed. The new knowledge will contribute to improving communications
regarding climate change.

This study consists of a multi-wave experiment centered around the release of
the March 2023 IPCC report. Some participants receive an incentive to read the
IPCC report and news coverage of it in the period after its release, while other
participants are encouraged to consume unrelated information. The study also
examines exposure to IPCC news and information in anonymized online behavior
data provided by a subset of participants. This component of the research links
beliefs and attitudes concerning climate change both to the experimental data
regarding exposure to the IPCC report and to other online behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.