* 2319918
* NSF/BIO-DFG: Tuning Microtubule-Actin crosstalk to control Mitotic Fidelity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Linda Wordeman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 488,281.00

Microtubules are relatively long cellular polymers that continuously grow and
shrink in a dynamic yet controlled manner. They are also responsible for
segregating chromosomes with perfect fidelity during cell division. Previously
it has been found that measurable disturbances in dynamic microtubule growth
that do not superficially appear abnormal will promote intermittent errors in
chromosome segregation through an unknown mechanism. As everyone who owns a car
knows, intermittent defects are the most challenging to diagnose. However,
strong preliminary evidence indicates that these small changes in microtubule
assembly may temporarily promote the delivery of molecules to the cell outer
cortex that interfere with the mitotic spindle’s ability to position itself in
space. This, in turn, increases the rate that cells make errors during cell
division. Describing this biological phenomenon will prove important to
understand the regulation of growth and development in both plants and animals.
The Broader Impacts of the work includes its intrinsic merit as all dividing
eukaryotic cells employ microtubes for division. Moreover, errors in the process
can result in a variety of human maladies. Additional activities include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students in research methods and
incorporation of the research into an existing course.

This project will employ high resolution live imaging, atomic force microscopy
and actin reporters to catch mitotic spindles “in the act” of temporarily losing
spatial positioning during controlled experimental alteration of microtubule
growth rates. A custom method of quantifying attachment errors using super-
resolution expansion microscopy will be employed to directly correlate the
number of segregation errors commensurate with spindle orientation. The project
includes developmental systems to determine the extent to which these
mechanisms, initially described in cell culture, are utilized during normal
development and in the establishment of tissue architecture.

This collaborative US/German project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) where NSF funds
the US investigator and DFG funds the German partner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.