* 2319080
* IMR: MM-1C: An Extensible Platform for Asking Research Questions of High-Speed Network Links
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zakir Durumeric, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,795.00

Over the past decade, network speeds have increased dramatically, outpacing the
tools that both researchers and operators used for understanding and securing
networks. Beyond volume, Internet traffic itself has also fundamentally changed
— most traffic today is encrypted and relies on cloud infrastructure or content
distribution networks. Visibility into Internet traffic is critical for
understanding performance characteristics, troubleshooting operational issues,
performing Internet Measurement Research, and answering fundamental security
questions. Many tools have been proposed for regaining network visibility, but
few have seen widespread adoptions due to fundamental limitations in the types
of questions they were capable of asking. Rephrased, proposed tools were fast,
but could not accommodate the complex questions that researchers and operators
need to ask in practice.

This project builds an open source network measurement platform that is
specifically designed to allow asking complex, real-world questions of networks,
as defined by a broad set of researchers and ISP operators. The platform runs on
general purpose (x86) servers and allows users to subscribe to subsets of parsed
network traffic needed for their analysis. In contrast to prior work, the
platform is not constrained to a custom query language, but instead builds on
the flexibility, performance, and security provided by the Rust programming
language. The project’s success will enable researchers to more easily pursue
Internet Measurement and Security research as enable operators to better
understand and secure their own networks. To ensure the platform’s long term
usability, the research team will additionally partner with external research
groups to understand the diverse set of operational constraints present in
production networks and to deploy the measurement platform in those
environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.