* 2319694
* RaMP: STEGG-INTERACT: Southeast Texas Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics INTEgrative Research and Collaborative Training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Rebecca Zufall, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,999,247.00

This project will develop a research and mentoring program for post-
baccalaureates as part of the Southeast Texas Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics
network to support INTEgrative Research And Collaborative Training (STEGG-
INTERACT). To address barriers that prevent many undergraduate students from
pursing scientific careers, this project will provide 30 post-baccalaureates (10
per year for three years) with a collaborative research experience with faculty
and graduate students at universities in Southeast Texas. Post-baccalaureates
will carry out mentored research, be trained in technical skills, participate in
a professional development program, and learn about scientific career options.
The mentored research will focus on understanding biological interactions, such
as those among molecules within cells, between males and females within
populations, and across species in ecological communities. The research will
provide valuable insights into how biological interactions affect the evolution
of populations and species. The project will increase participation by members
of groups that are under-represented in evolutionary biology, and science more
generally.

STEGG-INTERACT will address two important deficiencies in evolutionary genetics,
the incorporation of biological interactions into current understanding of
evolutionary biology and the limited representation of under-served groups in
the field. Specifically, there are many unresolved questions about how
intracellular processes evolve, the role of organismal interactions on
population dynamics, and the relationship between trophic interactions and
evolutionary processes. STEGG-INTERACT post-baccalaureates, graduate students,
and faculty will carry out collaborative research to address these gaps in our
knowledge using theory and modeling, population genetic approaches, and
comparative and phylogenetic methods. To help accomplish these goals, the post-
baccalaureates will receive training in technical skills, including
bioinformatics and computational biology. STEGG-INTERACT will broaden
participation in evolutionary biology in part by building relationships with
minority-serving institutions. In addition to the technical skills, post-
baccalaureates will receive training in scientific communication, research
ethics, and career preparation. STEGG-INTERACT will also train faculty in
evidence-based mentoring practices, facilitate the institutionalization of
mentoring compacts, and promote Individual Development Plans. This will support
new models for training inclusive, culturally aware mentors who can work with
trainees from diverse backgrounds. By participating in a diverse, supportive
community of researchers, each cohort of STEGG-INTERACT post-baccalaureates will
develop STEM identities and self-efficacy in science to broaden participation in
evolutionary biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.