* 2319339
* Equipment: Acquisition of an EEG/eye tracking co-registration system to identify neurocognitive mechanisms of reading
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Kappenman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 154,395.00

This Major Research Instrument award supports the acquisition of
electroencephalography (EEG) and eye tracking equipment to be used as a single
neurocognitive “co-registration” instrument located at San Diego State
University (SDSU). Co-registration permits the simultaneous measurement of brain
activity recorded from the scalp and eye movements made during reading (and
other visual tasks) with millisecond temporal resolution. The ability to co-
register eye and brain measures recorded simultaneously is a relatively recent
innovation that enhances understanding of the link between cognitive processes
indexed by both eye behaviors and neural activity. Co-registration of EEG and
eye-tracking is methodologically and conceptually challenging, and utilization
of this equipment by SDSU researchers helps advance this technology by applying
different paradigms (e.g., reading, visual search) and including diverse
populations (e.g., deaf readers; aphasic patients). In addition, the research
helps develop best practices for co-registration studies and promotes the use of
this new technology in other labs. Through ERP Boot Camps led by SDSU faculty,
SDSU students as well as students and faculty from other institutions whave the
opportunity to learn the basics of how to use this equipment. The research
projects conducted using this instrument also broaden the participation of
under-represented groups in science and engineering by including deaf and hard-
of-hearing students in the research and training. In addition, SDSU is a
Hispanic-Serving Institution, and many of the students trained in this new
technology are LatinX, ChicanX, or Hispanic.

Skilled reading is deceptively complex – it involves an overlapping series of
incredibly intricate, precisely timed, neural processes that unfold at a rapid
rate. Understanding these processes advance our knowledge of the underlying
mechanisms that are critical to the ultimate goal of skilled reading
comprehension. A key question addressed with the co-registration system is how
parafoveal word processing in deaf readers is impacted by the enhanced attention
to the visual periphery that has been documented for deaf adults. The co-
registration system enables the use of natural sentence reading paradigms to
identify how changes in the distribution of visual spatial attention in deaf
readers effects the extraction of semantic and syntactic information from the
parafovea and whether reading comprehension ability modulates these effects. The
results of this research provide a translational foundation for pedagogical and
remediation approaches to improve reading abilities in both deaf and hearing
individuals. Other research projects include the investigation of how temporal
delays in language processing (e.g., lexical access) impact sentence
comprehension impairments in individuals with aphasia and investigations of
covert and overt attentional mechanisms that impact how emotional stimuli drive
distraction in real world contexts for people with psychopathology (e.g.,
anxiety, depression, and schizophrenia).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.