* 2319855
* RaMP: Research opportunities and access for diverse scientists (ROADs) in extreme dryland environments
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Elizabeth Walsh, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,998,993.00

This project establishes ROADs (Research Opportunities and Access for Diverse
Scientists) to STEM careers aimed at postbaccalaureates who had limited
opportunity for research experience as undergraduates. It will provide the next
generation of global change scientists with transformative research training and
professional development, and embed them within a diverse professional network.
Postbaccalaureates will engage in cutting-edge science spanning questions
focused on dryland environments of the Arctic and deserts. These understudied
environments are often identified as being the most sensitive to climate
variability, land use change, and other human activities. Many of these changes
have a capacity to alter the Earth System within the lifetime of our trainees
and can be tackled only by training the next generation of global change
biologists in these ecosystems. Participants will become data-savvy global
change scientists, strong collaborators, effective communicators, and
interdisciplinary leaders of the future.

Postbaccalaureates engage in research focusing on identifying biological and
biogeochemical responses of dryland environments of the Arctic and deserts to
global change at multiple levels of biological organization from genes to
macrosystems, while having an extensive support team of mentors and peers. A
year-round research project with UTEP and other academic or other professional
mentors will be in two focal areas: (1) populations and species [mal]-adaptation
to rapidly changing environments, and (2) shifting ranges of dryland species and
communities. Other programmatic components include professional development
workshops and seminars, and network events to ensure a successful transition of
ROADs trainees to graduate school or STEM positions in government or industry.
Network partners include representatives from academic institutions, government
agencies, industry, and education. Trainees will also benefit from peer
mentoring to help them navigate research activities, mentor-mentee relationships
and post-program plans, including graduate school or positions in industry,
agencies, and non-governmental organizations. The project mentors will serve as
a model approach focused on the postbaccalaureate experience for other Minority
Serving Institutions to support a diverse next generation of STEM professionals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.