* 2319428
* explOration of Astronomy by Kentucky Students (OAKS)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Nathan De Lee, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2025
* USD 222,148.00

A new research and education partnership in astronomy called OAKS (explOration
of Astronomy by Kentucky Students) will be developed to improve access for rural
minority students to opportunities in astrophysical research across the Kentucky
Commonwealth. The partners are rural serving institutions such as Moorehead
State and Berea University, and the astrophysics research departments of the
Northern Kentucky University and the University of Louisville. The program will
pilot a substantive and sustainable partnership spanning Kentucky to provide
personalized mentoring, financial and academic support to KY undergraduates,
plus the resources and opportunities to further their research and engage with
the astronomical community on a national level. This will help to lower barriers
to access such as finances, the hidden curriculum of academia, and familiarity
with the basic tools of research.

Professional astronomers are dispersed throughout the state in small physics
departments but have banded together in the Kentucky Area Astronomical Society
(KAAS). Under the KAAS umbrella, faculty have organized shared summer online
classes on specific astronomical topics and the Kentucky Area Meeting. OAKS will
build on these collaborations to support early student research, including a
first project, a first presentation at a professional meeting and a first paper.
Kentucky has some of the poorest counties in the continental United States and
substantial numbers of students from these backgrounds are attending university
at one of its state schools, often as the first in their family. Such students
are the primary target of the program. This project is jointly funded by the NSF
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.