* 2319661
* Collaborative Research: DOE/NSF Workshop on Correctness in Scientific Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2023
* USD 19,991.00

The DOE/NSF Workshop on Correctness in Scientific Computing (CSC) will be held
on June 17-18, 2023, as part of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (PLDI 2023). PLDI 2023 will be one of 14
leading computer science conferences taking place simultaneously as part of the
ACM Federated Computing Research Conference (FCRC) in Orlando, Florida. Several
stakeholder communities, for example, theory, programming languages design and
implementation, computer architecture, high-performance parallel and distributed
computing, and supercomputing, will be in attendance: thus, the location of this
workshop at FCRC. The website for the workshop is
https://pldi23.sigplan.org/home/csc-2023

While improving performance of scientific computing systems continues to be
important, there is growing awareness that ensuring correctness of these systems
is a major challenge. To address this challenge and to provide novel ideas and
perspectives, the workshop brings together experts from among the areas of
numerical methods, scientific computing, formal methods, high-performance
computing, compilation, testing, static and dynamic program analysis, computer
architecture, and error analysis. Beyond discussing latest advances and
technical accomplishments, the workshop will inform DOE and NSF of important and
groundbreaking future research directions pertaining to correctness in
scientific computing.

The workshop's impacts include broadening participants' perspectives and
providing a venue to form new collaborations. Furthermore, a post-workshop
report describing the most important and promising research directions will be
made available to the broader research community, to inspire research in those
directions. Ultimately, such research will lead to a new set of robust solutions
to correctness problems in scientific computing, leading to higher quality
software and computing systems, and greater confidence that these systems are
producing correct results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.