* 2319260
* ATD: Dynamic Modeling for Extreme Event Prediction with Uncertainty Quantification with Multi-panel Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rong Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

The ability to predict extreme geopolitical events is crucial for national
security and foreign policy decision-making in a rapidly evolving world. A
reliable and effective prediction system for this purpose must also provide a
quantification of prediction uncertainty to support informed decision-making. In
this project, the investigators aim to construct an advanced and comprehensive
prediction system based on statistical models that interpret the dynamic
relationship between multiple event series at multiple locations. The
sophisticated statistical prediction system with quantified uncertainty has
numerous real-world applications in various threat detection and risk assessment
scenarios, such as cybersecurity, network activity monitoring, weather pattern
forecasts, epidemics tracking, and others. The ability to effectively predict
and assess potential threats will help organizations make informed decisions to
ensure safety and security. This project will provide early-career students with
valuable, interdisciplinary research experiences, offering a unique opportunity
for growth and development. The investigators are committed to promoting
diversity and inclusion in STEM fields, and will actively seek to recruit
students from groups that are historically under-represented in science and
engineering. A comprehensive project website will be created for project papers,
reports, presentations, and links to relevant resources, providing a centralized
repository of information and resources. The projectâ€™s outcomes, including the
developed methods and software, will be widely disseminated for public use.

The investigators will develop a dynamic matrix factor model for count series,
which leverages a generalized linear factor model to reduce dimensionality and
the dependence of the latent factor process to make forecasts. They also will
develop a generalized matrix autoregressive model specifically tailored to low
dimensional series (e.g., regional special events). The recently introduced
repro-samples approach for irregular inference problems are used to assess model
uncertainty. Given the complexity of the data, combining different models that
better predict different parts of the data is beneficial. Two model averaging
schemes are used by combining predictive distributions and dependent p-values,
both of which come with uncertainty quantification. This leads to a warning
system that predicts the likelihood of an extreme event occurring, as measured
by a confidence level. The overall framework and methodology can be easily
applied to other fields requiring prediction-based surveillance and monitoring.
The resulting framework and methodology will have a profound impact on other
fields of statistics, including high-dimensional statistics, statistical
analysis of matrix and tensor data, modeling large panels of dependent data,
statistical inference of irregular problems, predictive inference, fusion
learning, and more. It will significantly advance statistics and data science
research in general and provide new insights into data-driven decision making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.