* 2319512
* Conference: Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM: The NOBCChE Annual Conference
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tyrslai Williams, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 97,650.00

This award, jointly funded by the Divisions of Chemistry, Division of Material
Science, Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM HBCU-UP, and the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Programs, supports Professor Tyrslai Williams-Carter and
Professor Renã AS Robinson on behalf of the National Organization for the
Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) to
support students in chemistry, chemical engineering, or related disciplines to
attend the organization’s annual conferences. Diversifying the chemical
enterprise is a national challenge and priority to strengthen the nation’s
workforce and for the US to remain globally competitive. The NOBCChE annual
conference provides opportunities for underrepresented students in chemistry,
chemical engineering, and related disciplines to be exposed to career
opportunities, share their research progress and findings, access a network of
professional mentors and training, and learn the latest cutting-edge research in
their disciplinary areas.

This project addresses questions around the importance of an organization such
as NOBCChE, and its annual conference on providing support for underrepresented
groups to matriculate in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics). The project will evaluate over three years how effective its
annual conference is on the scientific identities of undergraduate and graduate
students that participate in conference activities. Additionally, the project
will evaluate the impact of the conference sense of belonging in STEM for the
students and will measure outcomes of the proposed activities on STEM employment
and education. The project team and NOBCChE organization are committed to
diversifying the STEM workforce and ensuring underrepresented groups have the
necessary resources to be successful in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.