* 2319108
* Retention and generalization of cross-sensory recalibration in hand perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Hannah Block, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2026
* USD 533,890.00

Learning a new motor skill involves complex interactions between how we perceive
the world around us and how we perceive the parts of our body. For example,
learning to use a computer mouse involves linking a cursor on a screen to the
brain’s representation of the hand. This project will examine the processes
underlying such changes in body representation, how changes are retained over
time, and how they generalize to other contexts. This is particularly important
for any application that involves modification of the body representation, such
as when using prosthetic devices or moving in virtual reality. For example, the
results should provide a basis for training technicians in industrial, military,
or medical settings to operate a telerobotic interface so that the learned
changes in body representation remain stable over time and so the operator can
quickly adapt when in an untrained activity. The investigator will also empower
students to explore STEM careers: a free virtual summer camp, “Girls with
Nerve,” will be offered to high school girls from a large and diverse school
district in Indianapolis, along with in-person laboratory visits during the
school year that are open to all students.

Changes in the brain’s representation of the body during skill learning have
been little investigated, compared with changes in the movement itself. An
important innovation of this project is to test changes in body representation
using both body position sense (proprioception), which arises from sensors in
the muscles, and visual signals, which arise from viewing one’s own moving body.
Integration of sensory signals from multiple sources (multisensory integration)
is a fundamental property of the brain. Through a series of reaching and
perception experiments, the researchers will determine the multisensory factors
that contribute to the updates in body representation that are important for
skill learning. Results will inform a theoretical framework of sensorimotor
control that accounts for both multisensory perception and motor learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.