* 2319593
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1A: Scalable Statistical Methodology for Performance Monitoring, Anomaly Identification, and Mapping Network Accessibility from Active Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* George Michailidis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 199,999.00

This collaborative project aims to develop and implement new statistical
methodology for the detection and mapping of various aspects of delays and
bandwidth quality in computer networks. Part I of the project will develop the
so-called extreme delay tomography, where network links experiencing extreme
delays or congestion will be identified. The goal is to do so by using only end-
to-end measurements from the perimeter of the network without observing all
links directly. Part II of the project will focus on combining multiple data
sets and measurements to build a state-wide and potentially nation-wide map(s)
of broadband accessibility at the resolution of a US-census block.

The project brings together researchers from the University of Michigan, the
University of California, Los Angeles, and Merit Network, with expertise in
network tomography, statistics of extremes, and network measurement research.
One core goal is to utilize and develop new theory on statistics of extremes
that can be used to detect and identify anomalous delays in the network from
end-to-end delay measurements. This will expand the fields of statistics,
network tomography, and provide novel tools for situational awareness and
quality of service. The second core activity of the project will contribute new
statistical methodology for integrating multiple observational data sets with
existing demographic covariates for the purpose of mapping broadband access.
This research activity will contribute to the fields of data integration and
transfer learning.

The broader impacts of the project will be manifold. The direct impact of the
research will be on: (i) Developing novel practical tools for network
situational awareness and security; (ii) Mapping the broadband availability that
will aid in understanding and identifying priority goals for public policy and
also in addressing social disparities due to the broadband gap; (iii) The
project will engage graduate and undergraduate students and thus contribute to
training of the next generation of network measurement researchers and
statisticians. The outcomes of the project will have a broader impact on the
fields of statistics and network measurement research through novel theoretical,
methodological, and algorithmic developments, data products and software. The
latter will be disseminated to the broader research communities through journal
publications, conference presentations and open-source software.

An account of the research goals, achievements, and landmarks will be made
publicly available on https://www.merit.edu/initiatives/#activeresearchprojects.
This address will maintain pointers to data products, research reports,
presentations, and events related to the sponsored research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.