* 2319929
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Advance Undergraduate Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shivani Ahuja, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 424,691.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Reed College is acquiring a 400 MHz
NMR spectrometer equipped with a broadband probe to support the research of
Professor Miriam Bowring along with colleagues Shivani Ahuja and Gonzalo
Campillo-Alvarado. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of
synthetic chemistry, biochemistry, and catalysis. In general, Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all
levels in the Chemistry Department at Reed College and enables increased diverse
representation of high school teachers and students through established outreach
programs.

The award of the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing undergraduate
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as mechanistic
organometallic catalysis, metal ion transporter proteins, and synthesis of
molecular sensors. Specifically, the instrument impacts research focused on
understanding new mechanisms in synthetic organometallic chemistry of a platinum
methyl complex and a bimetallic iridium-ruthenium catalyst. Additionally, the
instrument enables the characterization of small molecule binders of bacterial
ATP-binding cassette transporter proteins. Other investigations include
characterizing the supramolecular confinement of petrochemicals using dynamic
crystalline frameworks for sensing and separating complex chemical mixtures. In
response to global helium supply challenges, the acquisition of this instrument
includes a superconducting magnet with a low loss cryostat reducing the
institutionâ€™s consumption of helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.