* 2319569
* Collaborative Research: URoL:ASC: Microbiome-mediated plant genetic resistance for enhanced agricultural sustainability
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Lori Hoagland, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2028
* USD 314,560.00

Agricultural plant production provides humans with some of our most basic needs
including food, fiber and shelter. Yet conventional agricultural practices cause
damage to ecosystems and undermine their capacity. Greater pathogen pressure and
drought stress associated with climate change add to this challenge by reducing
crop yields. Breeding plants to recruit beneficial microbes from the environment
conferring disease resistance and stress tolerance has been proposed, but the
research community has lacked a coordinated effort to develop and critically
evaluate this approach. This URoL project will develop and study crop varieties
that enhance agricultural sustainability by assembling microbial communities
that enhance resistance to major current and emergent biotic and abiotic
stresses. The research will be conducted in three widely grown crops: wheat,
tomato, and poplar. New knowledge and genetic material will be widely shared to
enable rapid adoption by breeding programs and producers around the world. In
focal studies of wheat, collaboration with tribal and non-tribal wheat farmers
in Oregon will foster the co-production of knowledge and build capacity in rural
wheat farming communities. The education program will provide employment and
training to undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral
scholars. Partnerships with Heritage University and Blue Mountain Community
College will help to recruit students from traditionally underrepresented groups
in STEM to our undergraduate summer program. An outreach program coordinated
with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry seeks to improve the public
understanding of plant microbiomes in agriculture through hands-on activities in
museums, libraries, and county fairs.

An emerging rule of life is that plant genetic variation shapes the assembly of
its microbiome. The microbiome in turn affects critical plant functions. This
URoL project seeks to understand and apply these rules to agriculture by
breeding plants to recruit microbial communities conferring disease resistance
and drought tolerance. The first aim is to identify genetic targets underlying
microbiome-mediated genetic resistance to major current and emergent biotic and
abiotic stresses. By testing diverse species – an annual grass (wheat), annual
dicot (tomato), and a perennial dicot (poplar trees) – the project will
investigate the rules governing the relationships among pathogenic microbes,
beneficial microbes, and host genotypes. The overarching hypothesis is that host
genotypes select for disease-suppressive microbes across crops, though specific
molecular, physiological, and ecological mechanisms may differ among systems.
The second aim will test whether genetic targets impacting particular pathogens
are associated with resistance to additional pathogens and to drought stress.
Together, this work will lead to the development of wheat, tomato, and poplar
cultivars expressing microbiome-mediated genetic resistance to important biotic
and biotic stresses. Overall, the contributions of this URoL project will be
wide-ranging, spanning plant breeding and genetics, genomics, plant pathology,
microbiology, microbial community ecology, and transdisciplinary sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.