* 2319012
* Conference: Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases 2023: Celebrating Successes and Challenging Conventions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Matthew Ferrari, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 67,380.00

This award will fund a workshop for graduate students and post-doctoral scholars
on “Communicating Novelty and Controversy in the Ecology and Evolution of
Infectious Diseases.” The workshop will be held in conjunction with the annual
EEID meeting at Pennsylvania State University in May 2023. The experience of the
COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to develop strong relationships and
trust between the research community and these various constituencies before a
crisis. The workshop will be organized around 3 sessions: 1) case studies of
innovation and misinformation in focal pathogens and “gain of function”
research, 2) communicating novelty and risk, 3) tailoring communication to
different audiences. It will focus on skills and strategies for communicating
infectious disease science effectively to varied audiences and settings using
the trainees own research. Doing so will develop individual skills in
communicating science and formalize training in science communication, which can
become standard practice for future cohorts. The workshop will train 30 early-
career scientists in effective communication to broad audiences including lay
public, agency, and policy-makers. Participants will represent a wide diversity
of backgrounds, including students and post-doctoral scholars from groups
underrepresented in STEM. The workshop will provide an opportunity for
networking among junior researchers, particularly those from institutions with
limited EEID research programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.