* 2319775
* Conference: Student Participation Support for the 2023 North American Membrane Society (NAMS) Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Jason Bara, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2024
* USD 29,978.00

This award will provide travel support for 22 U.S.-based undergraduate and
graduate students to attend the 32nd Annual Meeting of the North American
Membrane Society (NAMS). The meeting will be held in Tuscaloosa, AL, from May 13
to May 17, 2023. The NAMS Annual Meeting is one of the premier membrane
conferences in the world, providing outstanding technical sessions across the
full breadth of topics within membrane science and technology. The theme of the
2023 meeting is "A New Era of Sustainable Membrane Innovation, " focusing on the
latest developments and innovations in membrane science geared towards improving
sustainability. This year, two new sessions – “Polymer Design for Membranes” and
“Highly Selective Separations” – have been added to the program. The meeting has
a rich history of engaging undergraduate and graduate student researchers
through targeted technical programs, student networking-mentoring programs, and
recognizing their accomplishments. The goal of this travel support is to extend
these opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate student
researchers who might otherwise be unable to attend the conference.
Additionally, it will provide a platform for students to network with community
leaders and fellow students. Early engagement in a professional society’s
activities will motivate and encourage students to pursue advanced degrees in
their respective fields and develop a healthy and diverse workforce.

The 2023 NAMS meeting will cover various topics related to membrane materials,
processes, and applications. The meeting will feature 23 technical sessions,
daily plenary sessions, a poster session, and abundant unstructured discussion
periods to catalyze new collaborative relationships and research ideas. The
organizing committee is comprised of North American-based researchers, and
invited speakers from academia, industry, and government labs feature
prominently in the program. Historically, hundreds of graduate students
participate in the NAMS meeting and engage in unique professional development
and training opportunities. This award will extend such opportunities to a
cohort of U.S.-based undergraduate and graduate students with the intention of
growing and retaining a diverse community of membrane scientists and engineers.
All undergraduate attendees will be paired with senior graduate student mentors
who will serve as meeting guides and support an immersive experience. The
program's effectiveness will be assessed through surveys and observation of
student outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.