* 2319168
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: The Phlox framework for verifying a high-performance distributed database
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Joseph Tassarotti, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2027
* USD 249,867.00

Distributed databases, such as Google's Spanner and Amazon's DynamoDB and
Redshift, are the foundation of many distributed applications and help
application developers handle complex issues including concurrency, crash
recovery, replication, and consistency in the face of network partitions.
Building these infrastructure systems, however, is challenging and error-prone,
and the cost of bugs is high. This project aims to demonstrate the feasibility
of formal verification to handle sophisticated distributed databases, so as to
eliminate entire classes of bugs that can lead to application errors and
outages. Specifically, this project will develop a prototype distributed
database called vDDB, along with a new verification framework called Phlox,
which will be used to formally specify vDDB and verify its correctness. vDDB
will incorporate sophisticated optimizations seen in real systems, such as
multi-version concurrency control, read-set validation, leases, etc. A key
challenge in verifying vDDB lies in handling many different types of non-
determinism. For example, a transaction that might normally commit may be forced
to abort because some server crashed, or a network outage happened, or other
transactions happened to run just before it and made conflicting changes to
shared data. All of these forms of non-determinism are difficult for proof
developers to reason about, and a central theme in Phlox is to use a proof
technique called prophecy variables, which resolves future non-determinism once
upfront, instead of forcing developers to consider many possible executions as
the program runs.

This project has two primary related benefits. The first comes from building
more reliable distributed systems. Distributed databases are the foundation of
many distributed systems, helping application developers handle concurrency,
availability, and fault tolerance, yet their complexity leads to subtle bugs
that cause outages. Being able to formally specify and verify their correctness
will improve their reliability and could avoid some of the outages that have
occurred with unverified systems in the past. The second comes from educating
systems engineers about the use of formal methods to specify and verify the
correctness of their implementations. This project includes the development of
new tutorials and lab assignments for verification of distributed systems that
will be taught in classes at MIT and NYU, as well as the continued organization
of the annual New England Systems Verification Day that brings together systems
verification researchers and practitioners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.