* 2319245
* Determining metabolic carbon incorporation rate in fish carbonates and its implications for the global carbon cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Amanda Oehlert, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,459,657.00

The Earth’s carbon cycle is linked by processes that transfer carbon between the
ocean, atmosphere, living organisms, and sediments. Carbonate mineral production
in the ocean connects these important carbon pools and is a key process in the
global carbon cycle. Marine fish release significant amounts of carbonate
minerals and organic carbon to the oceans each year. Yet the role of marine fish
in the global carbon cycle remains poorly understood. To better understand this
role, this project will study carbonate minerals produced by several species of
marine fish, including deep sea and open ocean fish species. Results from the
study will improve estimates of the amount and composition of carbonate that
marine fish produce each year. The project is expected to provide essential new
insights about the interactions between the oceans, marine fish, and the global
carbon cycle. This project supports the work of an early career female
scientist. Education opportunities include hands-on training for two PhD
students, 3 Masters of Professional Science Student Interns and several
undergraduate researchers. Graduate students will receive in-depth training on
science writing through a week-long workshop with a professional writer.
Scientists associated with the project will host workshops with high school
students and teachers. Teaching materials and scientific results will be shared
through open-access online repositories, annual outreach events, social media,
as well as professional conferences and publications.

Marine bony fish were initially estimated to contribute 3-15% of global new
carbonate production in the oceans each year, making fish a fundamental
influence on the oceanic alkalinity budget and Earth’s global carbon cycle.
However, technological advancement has shown that global fish biomass is likely
to be significantly larger than previously appreciated, and the impact of this
increased fish biomass on global carbonate production rates has yet to be
evaluated. Significant knowledge gaps regarding the composition of fish
contributions coupled with uncertainty regarding production magnitude currently
preclude their inclusion in fully coupled carbon-climate models. This project
will address these knowledge gaps by refining production rate estimates and
conducting detailed compositional analyses of carbonate minerals
(ichthyocarbonate) produced by several species of marine fish, including fast-
swimming epipelagic and mesopelagic species. Scientists involved in this study
will conduct a series of controlled experiments to constrain production rate
under varying environmental conditions and will employ a stable carbon isotope
mass balance to define the origin of carbon in ichthyocarbonate, including
dietary carbon and dissolved inorganic carbon in seawater. The study will
provide scalable relationships between metabolic rate, ichthyocarbonate
production rate, and the incorporation of dietary carbon into ichthyocarbonate.
The study will use an interdisciplinary approach to enhance understanding of
carbon cycling between the atmosphere and the oceans driven by marine fish.
Broader impacts of this project include support for an early career female
faculty member, training of future STEM workforce in three degree tracks, and
the development of science-aligned educational materials that will be
disseminated to high-school students and teachers through workshops, the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) repository, as well as annual events hosted at
the university, including Diversity in Marine Science Day and Women in Marine
Science Day.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.