* 2319369
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1C: Methods for Active Measurement of the Domain Name System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mark Crovella, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 51,846.00

This project will investigate techniques for measuring the contents of the
Domain Name System (DNS) toward the goal of producing a comprehensive census of
all record types. The project will focus on developing methods for generating
domain names that will be used in queries of the global DNS. Strategies for name
generation that will be considered include making use of underutilized data
sources and machine learning techniques including Large Language Models. New
metrics and a system called EverDNS will be developed to evaluate the
effectiveness of the name generation methods by sending high-speed queries to
the DNS from different Internet vantage points.

The first component of this project will investigate techniques for assembling
the largest-feasible collection of domain names that will be used as targets to
query the global DNS. The second component will assess these techniques by
developing EverDNS, which will include a prototype data collector and a
centralized controller. EverDNS will build on state-of-the-art DNS measurement
tools and augment their methods to capture the greatest amount of information
within a limited measurement budget. This project will deliver new insights
about how to assemble a comprehensive census of the DNS and new data sets for
research that will be made available to the community.

The techniques created by this project will enable generation of data sets that
will advance scientific understanding of the DNS. It is expected that the
insights gained through this research will enable methods for ensuring a more
robust, manageable, and better performing DNS. Given the critical role of DNS in
the Internet, this project has the potential to positively impact society as a
whole. New materials for networking and data science courses will be developed
as a direct result of this project. Research results will be disseminated by
publishing in respected academic conferences and workshops, and all software and
data artifacts will be made available to the community.

The project webpage will be hosted at https://everdns.github.io The webpage will
include an overview of the project, project participants, updates on latest
results and publications. It will also include all software and data artifacts
developed during the project. The webpage and associated repositories will be
available on github on an on-going basis after the conclusion of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.