* 2319637
* Investigations of Concentrated Salt and Acid Solutions Using Ultrafast Nonlinear Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Fayer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2026
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Fayer of Stanford
University is developing sophisticated ultrafast spectroscopies to study the
dynamics and structure of solvated ions and protons. Salt and acid solutions are
common in nature and important in technological applications. The challenge in
directly investigating ions in water is that the ion/water dynamics occur on
exceedingly short time scales, trillionths of a second, or a billion times
faster than a camera shutter speed. Professor Fayer and his students will
advance ultrafast infrared and visible spectroscopic methods and use them to
study concentrated salt and acid solutions. Their discoveries will enhance basic
knowledge of important ion/water systems and lead to better understanding of
complex electrolytes, such as those being developed for use in batteries for
energy storage. In addition to the direct scientific impact through the sharing
of information and technologies with academia, government laboratories, and
industry, the project will provide research opportunities for the next
generation of top scientists and contribute to the Nation's science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce.

The Fayer group will employ ultrafast infrared nonlinear spectroscopic methods,
particularly two-dimensional infrared (2D IR), polarization selective pump-probe
(PSPP), and ultrafast optical heterodyne detected optical Kerr effect (OHD-OKE)
experiments to probe highly concentrated salt and acid solutions. The salt
solutions are frequently referred to as “Water in Salt”. They have far too few
water molecules to fully solvate the ions, e.g., one ion pair for four water
molecules. The acid solutions will also have very high concentrations. In the
acid solutions, hydronium replaces the cation found in salt solutions. While
hydronium is a cation, it can change its identity to a water molecule by
transferring a proton. The salt and acid solutions are composed of extended
ion/water networks rather than hydrated ions. The experiments will be conducted
as a function of ion concentration and temperature. In addition, the differences
between monatomic and polyatomic ions and the effects of their relative sizes
will be investigated. The methods mentioned above are a set of interrelated
tools that will be used to examine different aspects of the same systems,
enabling a fundamental understanding of the relationships among dynamics,
structure, and bulk properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.