* 2319994
* Collaborative Research: SOTERIA: Satisfaction and Risk-aware Dynamic Resource Orchestration in Public Safety Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Eirini Eleni Tsiropoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,002.00

Public Safety Systems (PSS) deal with victims, first responders, and emergency
control centers (ECCs) that coordinate the rescue missions during and aftermath
of a disaster. Currently, there is limited understanding of how humans make
decisions to utilize personal and shared resources in the wake of disasters;
moreover, the existing models are mostly qualitative. Limited information
availability in disaster scenarios and resource uncertainty in PSSs pose two
major challenges: (1) how to achieve the victims’ satisfaction accounting for
their risk-aware (autonomous) decision-making characteristics about dynamic
resource orchestration? and (2) how to design a resilient disaster response
system incentivizing the victims’ participation in crowdsourcing? The innovative
SOTERIA project addresses these challenges by proposing a novel behavioral
decision-making model that captures humans’ decision-making characteristics
under risk, stemming from uncertain availability of resources. It introduces a
new field in game theory, called Satisfaction Games that aims to satisfy the
victims’ minimum service requirements rather than maximizing their overall
satisfaction, addressing the resource management problems in PSSs. A novel bio-
inspired Disaster Response Network (DRN) is also proposed that mimics the
inherent robustness of biological networks of living organisms, to support the
victims’ participation in reliable crowdsourcing, while the truthfulness and
quality of the collected information are evaluated based on the newly invented
Bayesian Prospect Theory. The proposed methods and the system will be evaluated
using real-world field data.

The SOTERIA project will create new distributed control, optimization, and
scalable resource management techniques in PSSs. The novelty lies in the
integrated approach to efficiently managing resources considering human behavior
and Tragedy of the Commons phenomena about shared resources, thus enhancing the
victim’s satisfaction instead of utility maximization. To deal with incomplete
information about resource availability, the proposed reinforcement learning
techniques will enhance the victim’s decision-making capability in real time.
Research outcomes of this project have tremendous potential for supporting ECC
activities and saving peoples’ lives and infrastructures during and after
disasters, by designing robust situation-aware disaster response networks and
advancing state of the art research in Prospect Theory, Tragedy of the Commons,
and Satisfaction Games. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students and the research findings will be disseminated via a project website
and high-quality publications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.