* 2319243
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Towards Verified Robustness and Safety in Power System-Informed Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Ren Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 09/30/2027
* USD 370,440.00

Neural Networks (NNs) have revolutionized the way we operate and manage modern
power systems, providing remarkable solutions to modeling complex non-linear
relationships and performing pattern recognition tasks using abundant data
collected by state-of-the-art monitoring sensors. Despite the promising
advantages, the efficiency and reliability of these models can be negatively
impacted by noisy or biased power measurements and the unpredictability of
renewable energy sources. The NN-based models are further complicated by their
inherent non-linear, high-dimensional nature and vulnerability to adversarial
attacks. Recognizing the risks associated with empirical methods that lack
formal robustness guarantees, especially in a field where model failures can
lead to disastrous real-world consequences, this project seeks to enhance the
security and reliability of power systems by optimizing the cutting-edge NN
verifier (alpha, beta-CROWN) tailored to the characteristics of modern power
systems. The resulting improvements aim to provide power grid operators with
safe, dependable tools to operate the power systems. Moreover, this project also
intends to support education and research initiatives, encompassing the fields
of machine learning and power system, for both bachelor's and master's degree
students.

With a vision to bridge the existing gap between the power systems and the
robust neural network verification techniques, this project is divided into
three thrusts. In Thrust I, the project will extend the applications of NN
verifiers to topology-aware power systems, examining different scenarios that
include complete and incomplete verification on various model structures and
adjusting branch and bound heuristics accordingly. Thrust II will enhance the
effectiveness of current NN verifiers by incorporating power system static and
dynamic constraints and further improve verification efficiency through
certifiable training. Lastly, in Thrust III, the project will develop specially
designed verifiers for power systems to serve as a novel tool for sensitivity
analysis-based power system planning. This last component incorporates
verification approaches for the first time, utilizing explainable Artificial
Intelligence within power systems. Collectively, these research efforts will
revolutionize peopleâ€™s understanding and application of formal robustness
verification techniques to power systems, ensuring the security and
dependability of modern power networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.