* 2319441
* WoU-MMA: Bridge, The Next Generation: a postdoctoral fellowship program in multi-messenger astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Arnold Burger, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,412,322.00

A research and education program will build capacity and institutionalize
astronomy at Fisk University in the area of multi-messenger astronomy. The
program will work within the structure of the current Fisk-Vanderbilt
Master’s-to-PhD Bridge Program (FVBP) to incorporate a new postdoctoral
fellowship program designed to train future leaders in multi-messenger astronomy
and to provide first-hand experience of the inner workings of the Bridge model.
As an improvement on the current mentoring structure for students and
postdoctoral fellows, the team also proposes to pilot an individualized wellness
mentoring program which focuses on the particular early-career needs of groups
underrepresented in STEM. During the course of the grant, the new postdoctoral
fellows will help establish astronomy courses to be taught on the Fisk campus to
help further the goal of institutionalization of astronomy at Fisk. With ample
mentoring, team-based research training and non-traditional professional
development, these fellows will be well-equipped to become faculty and to
implement inclusion programs of their own.

Multi-messenger astronomy (MMA) is a relatively new field of research, which
involves observational and theoretical studies of astrophysical objects that are
sources of detectable electromagnetic radiation, the traditional “messenger” of
astronomy, along with either gravitational waves, subatomic particles, or both.
MMA is a convergent area of research that requires expertise from data
scientists, mathematicians, physicists, engineers, astronomers, and computer
scientists, and which, in the context of this work, provides opportunities to
form and foster new collaborations among a broad set of domain experts at Fisk
and Vanderbilt. MMA is an emerging field whose discovery space is enormous
because there is now an entirely new way to gather information from the
universe. Over the course of the grant, the team, including the postdoctoral
fellows, will specialize in research related to black hole theory, simulations,
and observations. With relatively few people trained specifically in multi-
messenger astronomy, there is an opportunity for Fisk to become a nexus of
expertise in a new field. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.