* 2319547
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Kermadec Trench --- Residence time, spatial gradients, and insights into ventilation
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Steven D'Hondt, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 10/31/2026
* USD 529,364.00

This project will conduct the first physical oceanography survey of a deep ocean
trench, focusing on spatial gradients and potential mechanisms of hadal
ventilation in the Kermadec Trench. The observations will be made using two
unique and complimentary 11 km depth-rated free-falling systems – the Hadal
Water Column Profiler and the Deep Autonomous Profiler – to examine patterns and
potential mechanisms of trench ventilation. Observations will include the first
direct measurements of hadal turbulent microstructure, the first depth profiles
of velocity, and the first examination of physical or biological water column
gradients along the length of a trench.

The field observations consist of multiple collocated deployments of two unique
and complimentary 11 km depth-rated instruments. The Hadal Water Column Profiler
measures temperature, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, horizontal current
velocity, turbulent microstructure, and sideways looking 200 kHz bio-acoustic
backscatter. It also has a video camera and a small trace metal-clean water
sampler. The Deep Autonomous Profiler measures temperature, conductivity, and
dissolved oxygen, and has a downward looking camera and twenty-four 10-liter
bottle water sampler.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.