* 2319129
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: JUST GROW: Co-designing justice-centric indicators and governance principles to intensify urban agriculture sustainably and equitably
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Melva Trevino Pena, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2026
* USD 428,143.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
develop and employ new transdisciplinary approaches to address sustainable
consumption and production as a socio-technical system to help inform decision-
making for sustainable, resilient, and just systems of consumption and
production.

The project focuses on the role that city regions and urban agriculture can play
in sustainably intensifying agricultural production to meet global food needs in
the 21st century. Greater investment in localizing city region food
systems—combining food production in cities and their peri-urban
landscapes—promises to shorten supply chains and reconnect producers with
consumers, improving socio-ecological sustainability and resilience. Sustainable
urban agricultural intensification is likely to entail greater use of
technologies that decouple food production from environmental constraints
including seasonal climates and available land base. Proposed technological
systems range from capital-intensive approaches such as vertical farms, which
fully control the growing environment, to more knowledge-intensive approaches
such as urban agroecology that balance environmental modification with crop
diversity and agronomic adaptation. While knowledge of the relative resource
requirements, environmental footprints, and productivity of these production
systems in terms of energy and land-use intensity, life cycle impacts, and yield
are being investigated, this study will focus on comparatively evaluating the
equity and justice implications of different pathways toward a sustainable city-
region food system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.