* 2319475
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the role of terrane accretion on the evolution of indenter corner fault systems, an example from the eastern Himalaya
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Paul Betka, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 265,694.00

The collision of continental tectonic plates produces some of the highest
topography, deepest sedimentary basins, and highest potential for large
earthquakes on Earth. To explain how these unique plate boundaries evolve,
geologists commonly simulate a collision between a rigid tectonic plate that
collides with and indents a weaker tectonic plate. Recent observations from the
eastern Himalaya and Alaska instead suggest that indenting plates in nature are
not entirely rigid, particularly when they contain pieces of crustal blocks
accreted from prior collisions in the geologic past. This implies that active
fault systems may also deform (and generate earthquakes) within the indenting
plate as well as the indented plate, changing the way geoscientists understand
plate boundary faults within continental collision zones. This project will
study the complex tectonic setting of the eastern Himalaya, a natural laboratory
for testing the hypothesis that prior accreted terranes fundamentally change the
active fault systems at the margins of a collision zone. This research will
address three Grand Challenges outlined in a 2018 NSF Community Vision Document
for Tectonics research and will strengthen international ties between US
scientists and researchers at multiple Indian universities and research centers,
as well as a local non-governmental organization promoting public scientific
literacy. This project will further facilitate knowledge transfer between US and
international partners by conducting a formal interlaboratory comparison of
analytical methods, co-organizing two workshops for US and Indian undergraduate
students, and developing K-12 educational outreach. This project will also
support two early career faculty and promote the full participation of two
graduate and two undergraduate students who will be recruited through programs
designed to broaden participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in
the geosciences.

Orogenic syntaxes are regions of high crustal strain that accommodate the
transition from convergence to strike-slip motion at the margins of an indenting
plate collision. For several decades, Tectonics research has focused on strain
partitioning within the indented plate of a collision zone, this focus has
neglected the important influence of strain partitioning within the indenting
plate, and in particular, the role of sliver terrane accretion on the evolution
of indenter corner fault intersections. Observations from both the eastern
Himalayan and Alaskan orogens suggest that the accretion of sliver terranes
along transform faults flanking collision zones can lead to a ‘double collision’
where a once-stable fault intersection changes into an unstable triple junction,
altering the kinematics of indenter corner fault systems and the pattern of
upper plate deformation. To evaluate the broader influence of terrane accretion
on collisional orogenesis, this 3-year project will reconstruct the kinematic
history of a triple junction in the eastern Himalayan indenter corner. This
project focuses on the kinematic history of the Noa Dihing Fault, a key
structure at the center of the eastern Himalaya indenter corner that juxtaposes
the Indian-Eurasian collision zone with the subduction zone between Indian and
the Burma Terrane, as well as the Burma-Eurasia transform zone. This project
will constrain the late Cenozoic kinematic history of the Noa Dihing Fault
through a combination of field mapping, zircon U-Pb geochronology, fault
kinematic analysis, and thermo-kinematic modeling of apatite fission-track,
zircon fission track and 40Ar/40Ar thermochronology in the Noa Dihing Fault
hanging wall. Testing this hypothesis that sliver terranes concentrate strain
within continental indenter corners will help to explain differences in
structural style between indenter corners in the same tectonic setting (e.g.
differences in the curvature between the eastern and western Himalayan indenter
corners) and also relate similarities between indenter corners in different
tectonic settings (e.g. southern Alaska and the eastern Himalaya). This is a new
way of thinking about indenter tectonics and could provide a complementary
perspective that builds further helps to link research in Alaskan and Himalayan
orogens.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.