* 2319939
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a High-Resolution Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer with Diverse Inlet and Ionization Capabilities for Chemical Analyses
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xin Cui, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 540,737.00

This award is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). It supports the acquisition of
instrumentation for ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with high-
resolution quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-qToF) by
Mississippi State University, strengthening the research instrumentation
infrastructure in Mississippi. High-resolution mass spectrometry is a critical
instrumental technique for the characterization of new synthetic chemical
species and is a sensitive method for detecting and characterizing low-
concentration species, for example in biological and environmental samples.
Twelve research groups in the Department of Chemistry are identified as users
and the instrument will also be available to other researchers from across
campus and beyond. In addition to supporting research activities, the instrument
will also be used for educational activities, including training of student
researchers and incorporation into laboratory courses.

The new instrument will ensure that researchers at Mississippi State University
continue to have access to state-of-the-art high-resolution mass spectrometry
required for the characterization of novel syntheses and reaction monitoring.
Several projects will make use of this aspect of the instrument, with examples
including characterization of heterobimetallic complexes for
hydrodenitrogenation processes relevant to production of cleaner fuels,
characterization of catalysts and reaction products aimed at performing organic
transformations in sustainable solvents like water or ethanol, and
characterization of catalysts and reactions aimed at improving stereo- and site-
selective functionalizations and transformations relevant to pharmaceutical
manufacture among other applications. The new instrument has excellent
sensitivity and is coupled to an ultra-high performance chromatography
instrument, allowing for analyte species to be measured in low-concentration
and/or complex matrix samples. Examples of research that will benefit from these
aspects of the instrument include characterization of the adsorption and
decomposition of polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) with modified biochar and the
characterization of ionic liquid degradation products that may be relevant as
emerging environmental contaminants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.