* 2319434
* Collaborative Research: A hydrological seesaw and its effect on alkalinity dynamics in estuaries along a climate gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xinping Hu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 08/31/2026
* USD 569,663.00

The main goal of this project is to learn how changes in freshwater conditions
in shallow estuaries affect how much alkalinity, or acid-neutralizing capacity,
the sediments produce or consume. It is hypothesized that a reduction in
freshwater runoff will reduce alkalinity production in sediments via
respirational processes that do not require oxygen; and during extreme drought,
reduced compounds, for example reduced sulfur, produced from the above processes
can be oxidized and generates acids. This project will examine three estuaries
along the northwestern Gulf of Mexico with different amounts of freshwater
inputs. One of the estuaries that experiences large freshwater runoff changes
will be studied in more detail. The objective is to unravel the connection
between these changes and the buildup and breakdown of reduced sulfur in the
sediments. Additionally, the impact of these processes on the alkalinity of the
water column will be assessed. This study will measure water column alkalinity
changes and benthic fluxes, examine sedimentary record for historical changes,
and conduct modeling to tie field measurements together. Researchers from both
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi (TAMU-CC) and Texas A&M University at
Galveston (TAMUG) will work on this project. The team includes two early career
scientists. Two graduate students, one from each campus, will use this project
to develop their research. Results from this project will be used in classroom
instructions as well as outreach activities. These activities include expanding
the curriculum for an ongoing NSF National Research Traineeship program at TAMU-
CC as well as developing a teaching module for Sea Camp at TAMUG, the latter
serves elementary school students.

It is known that electron acceptors other than dissolved oxygen can be used by
microbes to respire organic carbon in nearshore sediments when the latter is
absent. As a results, reduced sulfur is produced and preserved along with
organic carbon preservation. However, the rate of this preservation is not
constant and is subject to the amounts of nutrients and terrestrial organic
carbon that rivers deliver. The results of this study will shed light on the
role of hydrological conditions in nearshore alkalinity production and
consumption. The findings will also be applied to other coastal regions in the
face of decline in freshwater runoff. In addition, the model developed in this
project can be used in a wide variety of applications in coastal research and
management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.