* 2319137
* EAGER: Impact of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) on Engineering Education Practices
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) are affecting almost all aspects of the
engineering profession. Recent developments in Generative AI (GAI) and the
popularity of technologies like Grammarly, ChatGPT, GitHub CoPilot are changing
the way that engineers communicate, design, code, and teach, creating
efficiencies and potentially new opportunities, particularly for marginalized
individuals for whom GAI technologies can lower barriers. Given the potential
impact of these technologies on the engineering profession, it is imperative
that engineering educators are both aware of GAI and able to use it productively
for teaching and for engineering education research. This project will explore
the impact of GAI technologies on the engineering research and teaching
community while developing and evaluating methods as well as resources for
supporting the adoption and integration of these technologies in research and
teaching practices. Through this, the project will support the formation of
future engineers and workforce development. In addition, given that the use of
GAI is also giving rise to novel ethical challenges that need to be addressed,
this work will also evaluate how engineering educators can use GAI responsibly.
Whether in research, for data analysis and writing, and idea generation, or in
teaching, for planning lessons or exercises. By helping the engineering
education community embrace GAI in optimal ways this project will allow diverse
stakeholders to take advantage of GAI. Findings from this project will be
leveraged by educators to improve engineering education research and teaching
with broader impact on the preparation of current and future engineers.

Through a combination of literature review and online data collection and
analysis, the project will identify how engineering education research and
teaching can potentially incorporate GAI based applications. The following
specific research questions will guide the project: 1) How is GAI currently
being used for research and teaching in related fields, such as computing and
STEM education, and what are the implications for engineering education? 2) What
is the current awareness of GAI among engineering educators in relation to their
research and teaching activities? 3) What use cases and scenarios can assist
with effective and responsible use of GAI for engineering education research and
teaching? To address these questions, collaborative co-design workshops with
researchers and educators will be undertaken. Through these workshops, scenarios
for the use of GAI within engineering education will be developed and evaluated.
As a next step, researchers and instructors will be asked to incorporate the
scenarios into their workflow so that their usability and utility can be further
assessed. Using the feedback provided by the users, the project will create and
freely disseminate a set of scenarios and guidelines designed for those who do
engineering education research or teach engineering. Through this project, the
community will also benefit through opportunities for dialogues and debates
related to the use of GAI in engineering education. This work will lay the
foundation for building socio-technical infrastructure essential for
facilitating effective and responsible use of GAI within engineering education.
Given the potential for GAI to shape engineering education, this project can be
the first iteration of a potentially larger project. Finally, the project will
also contribute by identifying barriers to the use of GAIs and related
technology and how that might restrict the goals of more inclusive engineering
education and outline guidelines for responsible and ethical use of the
technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.