* 2319234
* Understanding the conditions and content of face learning underlying race perception biases
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Fabian Soto, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 07/31/2026
* USD 503,000.00

People are bad at recognizing faces when they belong to people from another
race, tending instead to group them together (“they all look alike to me”), in
what is known as the other-race effect. Such racial biases in face perception
play a role in a number of problems in society. For example, more than a third
of wrongful convictions involve misidentification of suspects for another race,
and implicit racial biases that have been linked to the other-race effect lead
to discrimination in the legal, medical, and educational systems. The evidence
clearly shows that we learn the other-race effect from experience with some
faces but not others, but scientists don’t know how that learning happens and
its effects in perception.

This project’s goal is to understand what types of experiences lead to
development of the other-race effect, and how those experiences modify how we
perceive faces. We approach this goal by testing people using computer-generated
faces and races, including new artificial races. Generating faces this way
allows us to precisely control all their relevant features (for example, shape
of the eyes, nose, etc.) and the experience people have with them. We also
measure people’s face perception with high precision and use mathematical
modeling to formalize our hypotheses. Knowledge gained from this project leads
to a better understanding and measurement of the other-race effect, setting the
stage for the development of training procedures to eliminate it.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.