* 2319669
* RaMP: Woods to Water (W2W) for Training the Next Generation of Ecologists and Natural Resource Managers
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Arial Shogren, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Deana Erdner
* 01/31/2028
* USD 2,976,918.00

Sustaining biological diversity and ecosystem services requires that future
generations learn to understand and maintain connectivity between terrestrial
and aquatic ecosystems. Maintaining ecological connectivity promotes ecosystem
resilience in a changing climate, which is particularly important in the
Southeastern United States (SEUS) —one of the most ecologically and biologically
diverse regions of the US. Experience-based learning can help early career
scientists understand critical linkages between terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. However, opportunities for experience-based learning in the SEUS are
frequently limited by a lack of access to public lands and insufficient field
and classroom training opportunities. The lack of hands-on educational
experiences disproportionately impacts students from groups that are
historically underrepresented in ecology and natural resources, and reduces the
overall diversity of the workforce. The Woods to Water (W2W) program provides a
mission-driven, hands-on approach that focuses young people's attention on
global climate change to help develop a generation that can find solutions. By
providing training in standardized methods and data science, W2W will add 30
field-trained ecologists to the workforce, increasing diversity, equity,
inclusion and accessibility in ecology.

To achieve this goal, W2W will provide training opportunities with an immersive
cohort- and field-based program in terrestrial and aquatic settings. W2W
leverages training with NSF’s National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and
the Jones Center at Ichauway (JCI; a non-profit research station) to train
postbaccalaureates in key field techniques that link water, carbon, and nutrient
fluxes among ecosystems —a key signature of ecological connectivity. W2W RaMP
mentees will receive training in two SEUS NEON Domains: the Ozarks complex, with
three pairs of terrestrial and aquatic NEON field sites, including the
northwesternmost range of the threatened longleaf pine ecosystem; and the
Southeast, with two sites in JCI’s expansive longleaf pine ecosystem. W2W
participants will gain immersive experience through training modules and hands-
on experience with both NEON and JCI. Participants will interact with
scientists, technicians, and researchers working in and around these sites. The
program will dovetail classroom, field, laboratory, and independent research
approaches to provide comprehensive ecological field experiences, and
participants will gain knowledge, skills, and self-confidence in field research.
W2W cohorts will have opportunities to present and publish their research and
obtain professional credentials as certified ecologists. For participants, this
program will facilitate transition into the ecological workforce. For the
discipline of ecology, the program will diversify the ecological sciences, and
support the need to expand our understanding of environmental systems in the
face of a changing climate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.