* 2319405
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Modified two-photon microscope with high-speed electrowetting array for imaging voltage transients in cerebellar molecular layer interneurons
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Victor Bright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 475,000.00

The research project aims to develop a revolutionary microscope for studying the
brain's neural activity. By combining expertise from engineering, physics, and
neuroscience, the multidisciplinary team is working on a high-risk, high-payoff
endeavor to overcome the limitations of existing imaging techniques. The
investigators are focusing on genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVIs) to
capture fast neuronal firing and subthreshold voltage changes. The innovative
approach combines two-photon microscopy with electrowetting adaptive optical
microprism technology, enabling selective excitation and imaging of groups of
neurons at high rates. This advancement has the potential to unlock crucial
insights into brain function and lead to breakthroughs in treating neurological
disorders. By involving graduate students, engaging in effective outreach and
fostering interdisciplinary collaboration, the project aims to shape the future
of cognitive science, neuroscience, and education.

Two-photon imaging of intracellular calcium in awake behaving animals has been a
catalyst for unprecedented advances in the understanding of cognitive neural
processes. However, calcium time courses are a noisy convolution of neuronal
spiking with calcium efflux dynamics that hide potentially crucial information
on subthreshold voltage changes and fast action potential firing. In the last
three decades several groups have developed promising new approaches to overcome
this inherent disadvantage by imaging neuronal membrane potential using
genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVIs). Imaging GEVIs by a wide
neuroscience community would provide information that is lost in calcium imaging
potentially yielding crucial breakthroughs in understanding the neural basis of
behavior. However, GEVI imaging has not been adopted widely because it suffers
from low signal to noise ratio (SNR), limited ability to image large ensembles
of neurons and difficult implementation by the scientific community. Here, the
investigators will develop a novel large ensemble GEVI imaging technique and
will apply it to understand the complex process of cerebellar involvement in
rapid decision making. A new approach is proposed for large ensemble GEVI
imaging in which two photon microscopy is coupled with adaptive optical
microprism technology. The result is beamlet excitation of subsets of neurons,
with high imaging rates (500 Hz). The team will continue dissemination efforts
with the technology developed in this project. Finally, the investigators will
endeavor to communicate science to the broader audience through venues such as
the Denver Museum of Nature and Science and CU Science Discovery program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.