* 2319494
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Ocean Dynamics Governing Melt at Glaciers Using Lagrangian Floats
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jonathan Nash, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,263,894.00

The proposed study will determine the physical processes that cause melting at
an Alaskan glacier that ends in a fjord. The study will try to prove whether
recirculating cells and waves below the sea-surface cause stronger velocities
than the flows associated with melting glaciers. The project will develop
instruments that drift in three dimensions, capable of drifting along a fixed
depth or move with a water type. These drifting instruments will be combined
with instrumentation that is fixed at one place and with ship measurements, and
with computer models to decipher the interactions of different three-dimensional
motions at the glacier face; and to resolve the time and space structure of
flows that enhance heat flux to, and melting of, the glacier. Understanding of
these processes shall allow projections of glacier mass loss and resulting melt-
water flux into the polar oceans. As Broader Impacts, the study will help in
global-scale formulations of submarine glacial melting. The Principal
Investigator is an early career investigator, as well as two of the Co-PIs. The
project will support a couple of graduate students.

The proposed work will characterize the processes that drive near-glacier
circulation and submarine glacial melt at LeConte Glacier, Alaska. The
hypothesis is that accelerated glacier melting results from different-scale
recirculations and internal waves at the glacier face that are not included in
standard ocean-model parameterizations of glacial melt; and that these
recirculations and internal wave motions overwhelm the plume velocities. The
hypothesis will be tested via development of microfloats (µfloats) that drift in
3D, capable of drifting along a fixed depth or move with water (an isopycnal
surface). The study will use acoustically tracked Lagrangian µfloats, mooring
and vessel observations, and numerical modeling to elucidate the interplay of:
(1) entrainment and recirculation driven by discharge plumes; (2) internal waves
and their contributions to vertical velocity at the glacier face; and (3) the
spatiotemporal structure of lateral circulations believed to enhance heat flux
to the glacier. These processes shall allow projections of glacier mass loss and
resulting melt-water flux into the polar oceans. High-resolution numerical
simulations will inform deployments and be used to synthesize results. As
Broader Impacts, the study will inform parametrizations of submarine melting.
The PI and two Co-PIs are early career investigators, and the project will
support a couple of graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.