* 2319132
* A Workshop to Share, Explore, Develop, and Evaluate Online Petrology Teaching Resources and Strategies in Varied and Evolving Geoscience Education Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* John Brady, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2024
* USD 38,493.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by bringing together a group of
college faculty with a wide range of experiences and teaching needs to work
together to explore and develop online resources for use in their coursework.
Because many faculty both developed and made considerable use of online
resources when courses were taught remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic, this
is an important time for college teachers to share and build upon those
experiences to make better use of web-based tools and data in teaching. Through
presentations and discussions, the participants will identify and create new
ways to use online resources to improve student learning in their classes. In
the geosciences, some highly interactive web pages have been developed to help
students understand complex topics by building on the positive effects of
student-active learning. On those web pages, students are given control over
graphs and other diagrams so that they can change both the data displayed,
including uploading their own data, and also change features of the display
itself. During the workshop, small groups of participants will design learning
activities that take advantage of online interactive web pages based upon their
collective knowledge and recent web experiences. The resulting activities will
be made available for use by all teachers and students with access to computers.
Outcomes from this workshop will be significant beyond the geosciences, serving
as examples for other STEM disciplines with difficult concepts to teach.

Participants in the workshop will be geologists who teach courses about igneous
and metamorphic rocks and/or combined mineralogy/petrology (earth materials)
courses. Phase diagrams, mineral assemblage diagrams, trace element diagrams,
fractional crystallization models, kinetic models, and other fundamental tools
of petrology are challenging to learn. Recent developments in online resources
for teaching petrology offer new paths to enhance and perhaps accelerate
petrology learning. Web-based tools that bring these diagrams and models alive
with mouseover, slider, and other effects have the potential to facilitate
student learning of these difficult concepts and investigative approaches. A
principal goal of the workshop is for petrology teachers, working together, to
identify and develop new ways to use online resources to improve teaching and
learning. The products of their work will be shared online with other teachers,
following the good example of past petrology teaching workshops documented on
the Science Education Resource Center website. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.