* 2319603
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1A: Measuring Internet Access Networks Across Space and Time
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nicole Marwell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The project addresses the challenge of measuring the performance of Internet
access networks over time, and across different geographic regions. This task
has been a longstanding challenge for researchers, Internet service providers,
and policy advocates. Over the past decade, researchers have made significant
progress in developing techniques to measure the performance of individual
broadband Internet access links using "speed test" tools. Unfortunately, the
existing datasets derived from these tools have limitations that make it
difficult to reliably assess Internet performance over time and across
geographies.

Towards addressing these challenges, this project is developing new sampling
approaches and statistical models that will provide a more comprehensive and
representative view of Internet performance across time and space. Part of this
effort involves the creation of new Internet measurement datasets, which can
ultimately be applied to a range of open questions in both networking research
and Internet policy. The datasets the project will create will ultimately shed
light on how investments in Internet infrastructure impact performance in
specific regions and how performance evolves over time. Given federal
investments in broadband infrastructure and the growing public interest in
bridging the digital divide, the project's approach is particularly timely and
relevant.

From the standpoint of intellectual merit and scholarship, the project brings
together experts from multiple disciplines, including network measurement,
statistics, visualization, sociology, and public policy. The first challenge is
to understand how performance metrics from a single vantage point can be used to
generalize about the performance of an entire access network over time. The
second challenge involves using spatially correlated Internet measurements from
vantage points in broadband Internet access networks to draw conclusions about
Internet performance within and across geographic regions.

The broader impact of the project lies in outreach to community, curricular
development, and policy impact. One of the motivations behind the research is to
investigate whether Internet performance is equitably distributed across
different geographies and neighborhoods within a city. Achieving a comprehensive
understanding of this question is critical for addressing questions of equity in
Internet access. By developing new analysis frameworks as part of this project,
networking researchers and the general public will ultimately gain insight into
the distribution of Internet performance and contribute to efforts aimed at
reducing the digital divide.

The project website at https://internetequity.org/ will serve as a central hub
for sharing project-related resources. The website will publish data, code,
results, emulators, simulators, and other materials necessary for
reproducibility and collaboration. The project team is committed to maintaining
the website to ensure continued access to the project's outputs and facilitate
ongoing research and advancements in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.