* 2319621
* ATD: Resilient Dynamic Autoencoders for Modeling and Predicting Earthquake Threats
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Erichson, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 220,000.00

Large earthquakes generate strong ground motions and tsunamis that may lead to a
significant number of casualties and cause severe impacts on social resilience
in seismically active regions including the West Coast of the United States.
Early warning systems have been developed to mitigate immediate threats by
detecting first-arriving ground motions near an earthquake epicenter and
forecasting the intensity and timing of strong destructive ground motions. To
further improve the efficacy and accuracy of these systems, deep learning
methods have strong potential, but it is crucial to significantly extend the
forecast horizons of existing models. The highly heterogeneous spatiotemporal
nature of the seismic wave propagation poses a fundamental challenge to machine
learning. This project aims to address these challenges by developing resilient
and reliable deep learning methods for forecasting noisy and complex
spatiotemporal ground motion data. The resulting methods and open-source
software tools will have applications beyond seismology, benefiting diverse
scientific and engineering domains including earth, atmospheric, and climate
sciences. Furthermore, the project provides research training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.

The project will primarily focus on advancing deep learning for spatiotemporal
data processing. It will develop practical theory for (i) learning continuous
dynamics, (ii) modeling multiscale structures jointly in space and time, and
(iii) improving robustness of neural networks to natural perturbations in the
input data. Computational deliverables will be neural network architectures for
learning robust latent space embeddings and improved forecasting, which will
account for uncertainties in ground motion data caused by sensor noise and
scarcity in seismic recordings. Both observed and simulated ground motion data
will be used for demonstrating the advantages of the proposed methods. The
technical approach combines ideas from fields such as dynamical systems theory,
seismology, and deep learning. By viewing spatiotemporal data processing and
robustness through the lens of dynamical systems theory, the project aims to
establish a principled framework that will significantly impact a broad range of
scientific problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.