* 2319913
* DREAM Sentinels: Multiplexable and programmable cell-free ADAR-mediated RNA sensing platform (cfRADAR) for quick and scalable response to emergent viral threats
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Xiaojun Lian, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

This project seeks to address a critical public health need: the rapid, precise
detection of viral RNA, the genetic blueprint of many viruses, including the
SARS-CoV-2 virus responsible for COVID-19. The approach is to develop a cutting-
edge tool known as "cell-free reprogrammable adenosine deaminases acting on RNA"
(cfRADAR). This tool functions as a highly adaptable virus detective, designed
to be quickly modified to recognize new or mutating viruses. Beyond its primary
function, cfRADAR is projected to have broader societal impacts. Firstly, it can
significantly improve healthcare outcomes by providing real-time information on
viral prevalence and spread, enabling earlier detection, prompt responses to
outbreaks, and ultimately reducing the risk of transmission. This reliable,
rapid diagnostic tool can enhance our capabilities to prevent, control, and
treat infectious diseases. Secondly, the project will engage in outreach and
educational activities, offering hands-on experiences and interactive learning
for students and teachers at various levels. Therefore, cfRADAR's development
stands to significantly benefit both local and global communities, serving the
national interest by advancing health, prosperity, and welfare.

This project's primary objective is the development of cfRADAR (cell-free
reprogrammable adenosine deaminases acting on RNA), an RNA detection technology
leveraging the properties of adenosine deaminases acting on RNA (ADAR). The
project will tackle six main goals: 1) developing singleplex and 2) multiplex
cfRADAR assays, 3) creating cfRADAR-based logic circuits for group testing, 4)
formulating field deployable lyophilized cfRADAR systems, 5) designing a field
deployable portable analyzer, and 6) validating cfRADAR in an infrastructure-
free setting. The cfRADAR platform offers advantages such as high sensitivity,
reprogrammability, modularity, and field deployability. With its single-target
transcript to multiple sensor molecule editing, cfRADAR possesses high
sensitivity towards low-abundance RNA targets. Its modularity and
reprogrammability allow for the use of Boolean logical gates, offering the
detection of multiple RNA targets simultaneously. The exploration of lyophilized
cell-free reagents and portable analyzers enhances the platform's field
deployment, making it an effective tool for timely response against viral
threats. The project could revolutionize point-of-care diagnosis, group tests,
and biosurveillance by introducing a sensitive, reprogrammable, and scalable
sensing platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.