* 2319198
* Neurally-Inspired Integration of Communication and Cognitive Computation in Hyperspace
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mohsen Imani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2026
* USD 360,000.00

The next generation of communication systems holds the potential to enhance
every aspect of our lives. From enabling seamless global connectivity and
telemedicine advancements to transforming transportation, fostering education
and entrepreneurship, supporting disaster response, and driving economic growth.
However, current computer systems face a challenge where communication and
learning applications operate independently, leading to inefficiencies and
delays caused by the need to coordinate between these separate layers. Merely
improving battery life in mobile devices is insufficient to keep up with the
growing demand for efficient processing, especially considering the rapid
advancements in machine learning. This project seeks to address these
fundamental issues by pioneering advanced technology for communication that
seamlessly integrates channel coding with machine learning. By bringing these
two domains together, we aim to achieve hyper-reliable communication and
efficient machine learning processing. Moreover, we aim to develop future
learning systems that can operate flawlessly even in noisy and unreliable
network environments. This approach has the potential to provide users with the
benefits of neurally-inspired learning models across various network, thereby
significantly enhancing the efficiency and robustness of these systems. In
addition to its technical advancements, this project recognizes the importance
of education, diversity, and broader societal benefits. This project aims to
establish a new exploratory undergraduate research program, fostering early
research scholars who will contribute to the field of intelligent networks and
computing systems. Furthermore, international collaboration will be a key
component, allowing us to engage with global experts and share knowledge to
advance the field as a whole.

This research project presents a neural-inspired network system for robust and
efficient data communication and information processing. It achieves this by
redesigning communication and machine learning using a unified neural
mathematical foundation with high compatibility. The main contributions of our
proposal are as follows: (1) Designing rigorous communication schemes that work
with the high-dimensional representation of transferred data in a mathematically
tractable manner. This communication scheme consists of encoding/decoding
methods that leverage redundant and holographic neural representations to
achieve ultra-efficient and robust data communication. It also provides concrete
network-level simulation and optimization to ensure the desired latency and
responsiveness. (2) Fundamentally merging channel coding and learning by
directly computing over transmitted data, eliminating the need for costly
iterative data decoding. This eliminates the inter-layer overhead between
communication and computation procedures that exists in prior communication
schemes. (3) Designing a hardware platform that offers high parallelism and
efficiency for both communication and computation. The proposed highly optimized
hardware will automatically map applications to FPGA, equipped with a
transceiver module, and leverage the parallelism provided by these platforms.
Our framework will be evaluated using both complete simulation environments and
real-world deployment in communication and application infrastructures. The
prototype will be fully released under an established open-source library for
public dissemination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.