* 2319864
* CICI: RSSD: DISCERN: Datasets to Illuminate Suspicious Computations on Engineering Research Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Scientific cyberinfrastructures (CIs) contain rich and powerful resources to
support a wide range of experiments across the science and engineering research
communities. However, CI resources and the experimental data they generate are
compelling attack targets for cyber threat actors, who may seek to abuse CIs
through activities such as (1) exfiltration or encryption of valuable experiment
data; (2) enlistment of compromised resources into botnets, for purposes such as
denial of service attacks; or (3) illicit non-scientific activities such as
cryptocurrency mining. The DISCERN project (Datasets Illuminating Suspicious
Computations on Engineering Research Networks) seeks to improve the
cybersecurity posture of CIs by producing datasets that capture both legitimate
and illegitimate use of CI resources. DISCERN's primary goal is to produce rich
and diverse datasets that capture many realistic legitimate and illegitimate
usage scenarios, thereby enabling cybersecurity innovations in areas such as
threat detection and workload classification, to better secure the national CI
ecosystem.

DISCERN's methods and datasets are developed through DeterLab, a leading
networking and cybersecurity testbed. DISCERN first instruments DeterLab to
collect data about user activities at multiple levels of abstraction, including
(1) interactions with user interfaces, (2) process, network, and file system
events on platform operating systems and hypervisors, and (3) experimental node
resource usage and internal and external traffic interacting with user
experiments. All data is collected in a privacy-preserving and intellectual-
property-preserving manner to protect users and their research. DISCERN also
captures rich illegitimate use data through deployment of carefully designed
ethical attacks that misuse DeterLab nodes in a variety of realistic misuse
scenarios. All datasets and instrumentation tools developed by DISCERN are
designed to be portable to other scientific CIs, and the DISCERN team engages in
close collaboration with operators of those CIs to promote adoption of DISCERN
tools and enable production of their own CI-usage datasets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.