* 2319610
* Collaborative Research: Evolution and fate of wind-derived internal wave energy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jonathan Lilly, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 242,731.00

This project will study the global distribution of two main ocean properties.
One is the fraction of wind-related energy that propagates into the ocean’s
interior compared to the energy that is dissipated near the ocean’s surface,
referred to as ‘transmissivity’. The second property to study, also related to
wind-induced energy in the ocean, is the fraction of energy that goes into
mixing compared to the total dissipative energy (mixing plus dissipation), also
known as ‘mixing efficiency’. The study will use a high-resolution (order few
meters), process-based numerical model, the ‘wave-vortex model’ to determine the
interaction mechanisms associated with transmissivity and mixing efficiency, and
to calculate them on a global scale. The result will assess the role of wind-
driven oscillations, in the interior of the ocean, on the ocean’s energy budget,
which shall improve models of ocean circulation and climate. The study will
support an early-career female researcher, who will help other junior scientists
improve presentation skills through an annual mentoring program, also sponsored
by NSF (MPOWIR). The project will produce materials for an additional yearlong
mentorship program, as well as enhance educational materials that are
disseminated via a web site.

This study will investigate the global distribution of two parameters related to
wind forcing on the ocean. One global parameter is the “transmissivity,” which
is the portion of wind-related energy that propagates into the ocean’s interior
compared to the energy that is dissipated near the ocean’s surface. The second
global parameter is the “mixing efficiency,” which is the fraction of energy
that goes into mixing compared to the total dampening energy (mixing and
dissipation). The study will use a high-resolution, process-based numerical
model, the ‘wave-vortex model’ to determine the nonlinear interaction mechanisms
associated with the two global parameters, and to calculate them on a global
scale. The result will be a quantification of the role of wind-driven near-
inertial oscillations in the ocean’s energy budget. This quantification shall
benefit ocean-basin circulation and climate models. The study will support an
early-career female researcher, who will help other junior scientists improve
presentation skills through the MPOWIR program. The project will produce
materials for a yearlong mentorship program, as well as enhance educational
materials in a web site.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.