* 2319891
* CICI: UCSS:  Human-Centered Cybersecurity in Robotic Surgery (HCCRS) - Coordinating the Human and Cyber Infrastructure for Cybersecurity
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Jackie Cha, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2026
* USD 599,982.00

Robotic-assisted surgery cyberinfrastructure combines advanced data analytics
and decision making in the cloud with interconnected Internet of Things-based
systems that has brought opportunities for advanced diagnostics, patient
monitoring, and personalized medicine. However, the increased data and resource
sharing enabled by these devices and artificial intelligence in the robotic-
assisted surgery infrastructure has increased vulnerabilities and opportunities
for cyberattacks. In particular, data-integrity attacks that interfere with
critical real-time data can potentially disrupt surgical performance and
compromise patient safety. Existing studies on cyberinfrastructure security in
these environments do not fully consider usersâ€™ cybersecurity awareness and
knowledge or evaluate training and mitigation for cyberattacks. This project
aims to create a Human-Centered Cybersecurity in Robotic Surgery (HCCRS)
framework by integrating data analytics and healthcare human factors to design
new human-centered algorithms to detect, identify, and mitigate cyberattacks in
the robotic surgery cyberinfrastructure. The HCCRS framework will lead to
sustained impact that can be translated to other digital health technologies and
generalized to the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education Cybersecurity
Workforce Framework.

This work addresses the critical gap in cybersecurity for surgical care.
Specifically, the following research aims are studied: (1) identify robotic
surgery cybersecurity perspectives of stakeholders through qualitative research
approaches; (2) design a data-driven human-centered attack detection and
identification framework using Graphical Neural Networks-based impact
quantification and multimodal high-dimensional data fusion techniques; and (3)
develop and validate robotic surgery cybersecurity training materials and an
cyberattack intervention system. This work enhances the performance and
usability of current and future heterogenous robotic surgery
cyberinfrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.