* 2319712
* Collaborative Research: EDGE CMT: A four-dimensional genotype-phenotype map of poison frog skin color
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2027
* Adam Stuckert, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 11/30/2027
* USD 785,315.00

Coloration plays important ecological roles in animals, including mate choice,
thermoregulation, and avoiding predation. However, the understanding of how
animals produce coloration is based on only a few species and large gaps in
knowledge remain. For example, very little is known about how amphibians, one of
the major groups of vertebrate animals, produce their beautiful array of colors
and patterns. This project will leverage recent advances in genomic and
developmental biology to identify the genes that control color and color
patterning in three species of poison frogs that represent some of the most
colorful and charismatic vertebrates. The development of poison frogs as a model
system for the study of coloration will identify key biological mechanisms that
contribute to coloration, and open new avenues of research into genetics of
color in other animals. The proposed research will also train undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in cutting-edge
genomic techniques. Project personnel will communicate research results to the
public using visual displays of live frogs, children’s books written in Spanish,
and a virtual field experience based on scientific field work which will be made
available freely online.

The proposed research will create a four-dimensional genotype-to-phenotype map
of poison frog skin coloration using methods that link color and pattern to
their underlying genetics. Color and pattern phenotypes will be examined using a
combination of computational analysis of images, spectrophotometry, metabolomics
and their genetic underpinnings will be examined using genome sequencing of
several genera, species and populations, genome wide association studies, and
RNAseq. Results will be synthesized using in-situ hybridization to track the
expression of candidate genes over the course of development and spatial RNA
sequencing to track gene expression in specific skin regions of the frogs, both
of which will then be mapped onto images of skin structure obtained using
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Finally, key candidate patterning genes
will be validated using CRISPR. Results will be integrated into a four-
dimensional map connecting genetic variants and spatial gene expression with
phenotypic variation in color, color patterning, and pigment organization, and
visualized using TEM images. This holistic approach, focusing on three
independent origins of spot and stripe patterning, will provide key insights
into general mechanisms underlying color variation in vertebrates. Furthermore,
poison frogs are known for having large, complex genomes, so this work will
provide a guide to future investigators on how to connect genotype to phenotype
in difficult systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.