* 2319044
* Advancing understanding of interannual variability and extreme events in the thermal structure of large lakes under historical and future climate scenarios
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Ayumi Fujisaki-Manome, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 12/31/2026
* USD 519,517.00

The overarching goal is to advance understanding of the North American Great
Lakes thermal variability and occurrence of extreme events in both the
historical period and under future climate scenarios. The project will fill
critical knowledge gaps in how Great Lakes thermal structure responds to climate
change by examining changes in lake surface temperatures and ice cover as well
as how temporal variabilities have changed in the past and how they will
continue to change under future climate scenarios. Advanced understanding of the
role of teleconnection patterns in driving Great Lakes climate variability will
help distinguish between changes related to anthropogenic global warming and
those related to natural climate variability, an important distinction in the
discussion of climate change mitigation. Hydrodynamic-ice simulation results
will be generated for the historical period and under future climate scenarios
for the Great Lakes. Improved understanding of historical and future occurrence
of extreme conditions in Great Lakesâ€™ thermal conditions will benefit decision
making in shipping, fishing, recreational use of the lakes, as well as coastal
management and climate adaptation efforts.

The project will investigate interannual variabilities of ice coverage, lake
heat content, stratification strength and duration, as well as timing and trends
of lake surface temperatures, occurrence of extreme conditions, and how these
variabilities are related to the large-scale atmospheric circulations. Numerical
experiments with a three-dimensional hydrodynamic-ice model will be conducted
with atmospheric reanalysis and the projected future surface meteorology out to
the end-century from select climate model outputs. The historical simulations
will be verified by comparing with the publicly available observational
datasets. Changes in thermal conditions and their variabilities under historical
and projected climate conditions will be evaluated using timeseries analysis,
changes in probability density functions and the Schmidt stability index, and
extreme value analysis. The research will address how extreme events and climate
variability in the Great Lakes change over time and the role of teleconnection
patterns and low-frequency oscillations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.