* 2319157
* ATD: Stochastic Obstacle Scene Problem with Adversarial Agents
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elvan Ceyhan, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Navigation on a network with obstacles is a natural way to model optimal travel
between two locations (e.g., two cities or two inventory storage locations).
This subject is highly interdisciplinary, drawing on operations research,
statistics, probability, optimization, computer science, and graph theory, and
has applications across defense logistics, decentralized control of robot
swarms, autonomous path planning in obstacle rich environments, target tracking
and neutralization, and naval logistics. Despite network (traversal)
optimization having seen some success, there are several basic and applied
research challenges that need to be addressed to enable its widespread use in
practice. Progress in network optimization affects areas such as manufacturing
and logistics analysis, supply chain management, communication networks and
traffic management and many aspects of our daily life. Thus, the development of
faster and better optimization algorithms in network traversal/blocking will
have a direct impact on science and society. This research will also result in
increased collaboration and partnership between academia and industry. Results
of this project will be disseminated through research articles, conference
proceedings, and seminar series. Relevant code will be made publicly available
as open-source software packages. The project will integrate research and
education by teaching special topics courses and organizing seminars for
graduate students and postdocs, with efforts made to support underrepresented
minority, female, and young researchers working on this topic.

The goal of this project is finding optimal or near-optimal solutions to the
stochastic obstacle scene (SOS) problem using spatial network optimization. The
investigator will study two variants of the SOS problem. First is the original
SOS problem, also called the Optimal Traversal Path (OTP) problem), in which a
single navigating agent (NAVA) chooses a cost-minimal path in a space containing
“forbidden regions.” In the second SOS problem (optimal obstacle placement
(OOP), recently introduced by the investigator), an obstacle placing agent (OPA)
inserts obstacles in the traversal window so as to maximize NAVA’s traversal
length. The main goals of this research are to improve heuristic algorithms for
both variants, to introduce new variants, and to study theoretical
underpinnings. The SOS problem setting is quite general and applies to
adversarial agents in a medium where traversal cost is heterogeneous with
possibly untraversable regions. The research objectives of this project are to
(a) extend the SOS problem in various directions, e.g., high dimensional version
and develop potential strategies to improve OTP and OOP algorithms, (b)
introduce and develop the weight constraint versions of both SOS variants, study
the solution strategies and develop a more comprehensive approach to network
traversal optimization/obstruction all from the probabilistic / statistical and
computational points of view, and (c) study the theoretical properties
(including complexity) of the network traversal and obstruction algorithms
together with the characterization of the cost functions for the OTP problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.