* 2319116
* Directional Phase-Resolved Broadband Observations of Breaking Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Leonel Romero, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 712,215.00

Wave breaking regulates fluxes of energy, momentum, and mass across the air-sea
interface, all of which are important for weather and climate. Breaking is
multiscale and highly nonlinear and therefore is not analytically trackable.
Much of our understanding is statistical, built on theoretical constraints and
laboratory, numerical, and field experiments. Despite recent advances, our
ability to predict breaking remains limited, and the directional spread of the
wave spectrum is an important factor that has not been well studied. Recent
studies show that wave-breaking dissipation timescales are not uniform in all
directions, and through non-linear resonant interactions with waves, it
contributes to the directional spread of waves shorter than the dominant
wavelength. This project will measure waves and wave-breaking, including their
spread in both wavelengths and directions, from a fixed tower, in order to
better understand these resonant interactions. The data and code generated will
be available online with open access. Results from this project will be
incorporated into courses in Physical Oceanography and Air-Sea Interaction. The
project will support a graduate student and at least one undergraduate student
will participate in an undergraduate research project. The project will support
the research of a Hispanic investigator, who is a mentor in a pilot program at
UConn serving students of traditionally underrepresented communities. The
results from this study will be used to generate educational material for
outreach activities and events within the local community, including the yearly
event Ocean Week at local elementary schools for 2nd-year students, and the
Young Explorer Science program which provides research and science exposure to
high school students within underrepresented communities of the Groton/New
London area.

The overarching goal of this proposal is to improve the understanding of
directional wave-breaking kinematics and their impact on the dynamics to
constrain and improve spectral breaking dissipation parameterizations and
ultimately improve wave spectral models. Coincident measurements will be made of
the directional energy spectrum and directional breaking kinematics using stereo
infrared and visible imagery from Marthaâ€™s Vineyard Coastal Observatory Air-Sea
Interaction Tower. Observations will be made under a wide range of conditions
including high winds (>10 m/s), misaligned winds, and dominant waves allowing
for a detailed characterization of the two-dimensional breaking kinematics and
dynamics over a wide range of scales. Additionally, the project will
characterize the breaking probability anisotropically; quantify kinematic wave-
breaking onset criterion; analyze the directional energy balance of short
gravity waves; and constrain and improve wave-breaking dissipation
parameterizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.