* 2319279
* ATD: Quantum algorithms for spatiotemporal models with applications to threat detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wenxuan Zhong, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Human dynamics are used to seek comprehension of human behaviors by employing
statistical models. Research has demonstrated that certain human behaviors can
be quantitatively modeled using proxy tools such as social media. The field of
human dynamics has gained significant attention in the realm of security and
defense, not only for its potential to detect anomalies in human behavior but
also for its capacity to mitigate potential catastrophic damage and societal
distress. Despite the pressing need, state-of-the-art computational tools for
studying human dynamics are still lacking. However, classic models alone are
insufficient for capturing the constantly evolving spatial and temporal trends
in human dynamics. Additionally, the computational cost of spatiotemporal models
on classical computers is prohibitively high, posing challenges for real-time
analysis of human dynamics data. Recent advancements in quantum computing have
showcased quantum supremacy, wherein quantum computers outperform classical
computers in some problem-solving. Quantum parallelism, in particular, bypasses
the time/space trade-off associated with classical parallel computing, thanks to
its ability to store exponentially many units of information within a linear
physical space. Moreover, quantum computers possess logic gates that classical
computers lack, enabling faster computations. However, the achievements of
quantum computing in the literature have been predominantly limited to physics-
oriented problems and have not garnered much attention from the data science
community. In this project, our aim is to harness the power of quantum
algorithms for modeling human dynamics to enhance threat detection capabilities.
Our proposed approaches are general quantum computing tools that are widely
applicable. The proposed framework (i) can be used to discover unusual events in
any super-large data set, (ii) inspires a new line of research in quantum
computing, and (iii) offers a unique opportunity for students to participate in
cutting-edge and interdisciplinary big data research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.