* 2319922
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment to Enhance Research and Training in Earth Sciences and Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Thomas Smith, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 403,060.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will provide funds to acquire
equipment for helium gas recovery and cryogen-free operations for two widely
used multi-user research centers at the University of Minnesota (UMN): The
Institute for Rock Magnetism (IRM) in the School of Earth and Environmental
Sciences and the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Laboratory in the Department
of Chemistry. This equipment will make these facilities more resilient against
helium shortages, rationing, and supply disruptions (and the associated impacts
on cost). As a result, these actions will maximize the use of instrumentation
without interruption and expand the laboratories’ scientific output, as well as
benefiting numerous NSF-funded projects, and improving the sustainability and
resilience of two key research centers. Measurements in these laboratories are
crucial for characterizing and understanding the magnetic properties of
geological, biological, planetary, and novel synthetic materials related to a
broad range of scientific questions. Helium is a finite resource and it is
imperative that proper stewardship, including helium gas recovery and cryogen-
free functionality become commonplace. The dependence on non-renewable cryogens
has made both laboratories vulnerable to shortages, as well as increasing annual
operating costs. The IRM and NMR Laboratory are at a critical juncture where
helium shortages and associated supply quotas have already reduced operations
and pose increasing uncertainty on scheduled activities. The ongoing shortage
has severely limited our ability to serve the broader scientific community and
advance cutting-edge research. The new equipment will reduce or eliminate the
need for LHe for critical equipment in our facilities. This will allow the
facilities to maximize the use of its instruments without interruption, further
expanding the laboratories’ scientific output, benefit numerous NSF funded
projects, and improve the sustainability and resilience of two key research
centers.

Both facilities are dependent on uninterrupted supplies of liquid Helium (LHe)
for the operations of superconducting magnets, superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) magnetometers, and variable temperature 57Fe
Mössbauer spectrometers for measurements that are crucial for characterizing and
understanding the magnetic properties of geological, biological, planetary, and
novel synthetic materials. The low-temperature (2-300 K) magnetic properties of
natural materials, their synthetic analogues, and novel materials are
indispensable for understanding a broad range of scientific questions, with low-
temperature measurements providing observations not obtainable through any other
methods. NMR spectroscopy is the most powerful technique available for the
elucidation of molecular structures. Its many uses include determining the
arrangement of atoms within molecules and characterizing the dynamics of
molecular interactions in solution. Preserving the functionality of LHe
equipment is essential to the operation of (1) the IRM as an NSF multi-user
facility for national and international researchers; and (2) the NMR Laboratory
as a shared-use instrumentation facility for research and teaching at the UMN.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.