* 2319060
* NCS-FR: Insect-based brain-machine interfaces and robots for understanding odor-driven navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Gage
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,745,051.00

Insects have relatively simple neural systems compared to humans and other
mammals, and yet they possess a richness in behavioral responses and can operate
under extreme energy constraints. The goal of this work is to examine how odor
trails are followed by walking and flying insects and how those insights can be
leveraged to develop novel biorobotic platforms. Studying insects, therefore,
could inspire the development of the next generation of computational
algorithms, hardware, and robots that have similar capabilities. To achieve this
goal, a repertoire of tools will be developed and used to realize biorobots. In
parallel, the biological algorithms for exploration and navigation will be
translated into computational and hardware approaches inspired by the brain
(i.e., neuromorphic algorithms and hardware). This interdisciplinary research
allows for active integration of research and education to facilitate the
creation of a new generation of students able to fluidly traverse science and
engineering. Aspects of the research proposed will also be incorporated into the
upper-level undergraduate and graduate classes taught by the team of researchers
at their respective institutions. Components of this work will be shared with
the general public through outreach programs such as the annual St. Louis Area
“Brain Bee” competition, the annual SciFest in collaboration with the St. Louis
Science Center, Science on the TAP, Women in STEM Day, Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) and Young Scholar (YS) programs at various institutions, public
lectures at St. Louis Zoo and other similar events.

The key goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive neuroengineering
approach involving the development of novel engineering materials and
technologies to monitor neural and locomotory responses in behaving insects, and
then replicating these capabilities in bio-hybrid and mobile robotic systems to
identify the key components/principles. This entails: (i) developing novel
testbeds for studying odor-driven navigational behaviors, (ii) innovation in the
design of neural electrode materials and arrays, (iii) development of low-weight
neural recording instrumentation (i.e., backpacks) to record in freely moving
smaller animals, (iv) creation of tools for perturbing the behavior and/or
neural activity, and (v) integration with computational and robotic approaches
to develop a minimalistic model of observed behavior. This work will generate a
toolkit that encompasses novel electrode arrays for neural recordings, hydrogels
for effective neural-electrode interfaces, neuromorphic hardware and algorithms,
autonomous miniaturized robots for chemical sensing, and finally genetically
engineering tools for a non-model organism. Beyond impact in their respective
disciplines, these tools may allow for the usage of insects’ sensory apparatus
and processing capabilities for addressing parallel sensing problems in
biomedicine and homeland security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.