* 2319063
* South Texas Partnership in Multi-messenger Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Stone, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2026
* USD 229,131.00

A new research and education partnership in astronomy will be developed between
the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) and Texas Southmost College
(TSC) to conduct research in multi-messenger and time domain astronomy. This
partnership will provide a pathway for Hispanic community college students in
South Texas to actively participate in astronomy research. A distinctive feature
of the program is the strengthening of a natural STEM ecosystem built within the
community. The partnership will provide and sustain several coordinated
activities: (1) regular weekly meetings with the UTRGV mentors (graduate
students and the principal investigator) and the TSC participating students and
faculty; (2) one summer workshop to train students in photometry, astrometry,
observational techniques and python coding in astronomy, including machine
learning techniques; (3) regular observations at the Cristina Torres Memorial
Astronomical Observatory (CTMO), operated by UTRGV, (4) monthly seminars in
relevant astronomy and astrophysics topics and (5) annual presentations at
regional meetings from participating students. The partnership also has the
capacity to reach a large audience in South Texas. The participating students
will be asked to assist with the regular Astronomy at the Park events, when the
CTMO is open to the public. Astronomy at the Park is organized jointly with the
South Texas Astronomical Society (STARS), a nonprofit amateur astronomer
organization.

This project creates a clear pathway into research for Hispanic community
college students, a group with very low representation in astronomy. The
research projects in which students will be involved are in the area of time
domain astronomy, and in particular, the optical follow-up of gravitational wave
events. The rapid localization and accurate characterization of electromagnetic
emission associated with the merger of two neutron stars (or a neutron star and
a black hole) can make significant contributions to the understanding of the
production of heavy elements through nuclear r-processes. The associated
gravitational wave information has the potential to yield estimates of the
expansion rate of the Universe (the Hubble constant), which complement, and are
competitive with current techniques. The activities proposed will make these
students relevant contributors to the development of multi-messenger astronomy.
This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.