* 2319518
* NCS-FO: Uncovering Dynamics of Neural Activity of Subjective Estimation of Time
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Tracey Shors, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 585,974.00

We are constantly estimating time in our everyday lives. Indeed, this
information is used to frame many aspects of our perception, memory, and general
understanding of the world. Research suggests that our personal experience of
time is not consistent and can be influenced by various internal and external
factors. While brain imaging techniques have contributed to advancing our
knowledge of how the brain estimates time, little is known about the neural
mechanisms that underlie time perception and estimation. This interdisciplinary
project brings together expertise from signal processing, neuroimaging and
psychology, to develop an innovative data-driven computational tool, that when
combined with brain imaging and behavioral measurements, can identify specific
brain processes that cause differences in how we experience time. The knowledge
gained may also have implications for neurological and psychiatric disorders
such as Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), for which changes in time perception are common. The
researchers also aim to make the signal processing tools they develop broadly
available and conduct extensive outreach and webinars to increase awareness and
utilization of the research.

The proposed research aims to uncover the specific neural mechanisms that
contribute to variations in our subjective sense of time, which are currently
not well understood. By utilizing matrix factorization, the project offers an
innovative data-driven computational tool, specifically developed for
identifying the differences (both spatially and temporally) between two neural
datasets. This new approach deviates from most conventional analyses, which make
stronger assumptions about the nature of the underlying neural processes (e.g.,
temporal or spatial adjacency). Thus, the technique developed here may offer new
insights across a wide variety of behaviors and their neural correlates. The
project hopes to develop this technique and utilize it in the context of the
neural mechanisms underlying changes in an individual’s subjective estimation of
time while three factors are manipulated (memory, sensory processing, and
arousal). The proposed computational tool can localize specific neural
activities that give rise to the observed differences, as well as identify when
these activities occur. Understanding of the neural mechanisms that contribute
to the variability in time perception and its estimation holds great
significance in advancing basic neuroscience research and theories about time
estimation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.