* 2319522
* Collaborative Research: URoL:ASC: Using the Rules of Antibiotic Resistance Development to Inform Wastewater Mitigation Strategies
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Liqing Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 10/31/2028
* USD 650,000.00

The increased prevalence among bacteria of resistance to antimicrobial drugs
(antimicrobial resistance, or AMR) is a critical societal challenge that
threatens human, environmental and agricultural health. When antibiotics used to
treat bacterial infections are no longer effective, infections last longer and
there is increased risk of death. Municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs)
are “hotspots” for AMR spread due to the enriched presence of antibiotic
residues, antibiotic resistance genes, and antibiotic resistant bacteria.
Therefore, WWTPs are a unique system for mitigating AMR spread in the
environment. This project investigates the role of different environmental
factors, such as temperature, heavy metals, and other contaminants in the
development of AMR. The convergent research will conduct field, laboratory, and
computational studies to determine when and how susceptible bacterial strains
are replaced by more antibiotic-tolerant resistant populations in the natural
environment. Knowledge from these studies will facilitate development of
predictive models and cost-effective strategies to prevent AMR proliferation in
the environment. This project also emphasizes the role of education, poverty,
and environmental pollution in AMR spread. Activities will include dissemination
of co-produced knowledge beyond the scientific community, through trust-based
partnership with farmers, K-12 students, and stakeholders.

The minimal selective concentrations (MSC) for antibiotics, at which a resistant
strain acquires competitive advantage in growth relative to its susceptible
progenitor, are challenging to determine under dynamic natural environmental
systems such as WWTPs. In this project, integrated studies using metagenomics,
non-target chemical analysis, and machine learning approaches will be conducted
to characterize emergence of AMR genotypes and phenotypes within WWTPs.
Engineered resistant strains of E. coli will be developed to determine how
variations in chemical contaminants affect de novo resistance development and
horizontal transfer of resistance genes. To control input of AMR drivers from
WWTPs, knowledge is needed to establish appropriate endpoints for mitigating
prevalence of AMR. The overall objective is to develop predictive models that
describe how AMR emerges and spreads in WWTP activated sludge systems. Machine
learning approaches will be used to determine MSC for two test antibiotics,
azithromycin and ciprofloxacin, in WWTP activated sludge under varying
environmental conditions. The central hypothesis is that temperature, heavy
metals, and other contaminants influence the selection of AMR at sub-inhibitory
antibiotic concentrations. Our research team will work closely with WWTP
engineers and utility workers to ensure that the knowledge gained in this
research can be translated into practice effectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.