* 2319804
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a Tundra Cryo-electron microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Avital Rodal, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,767,282.00

An award is made to Brandeis University to acquire a Thermo-Fisher Tundra cryo-
electron microscope. This microscope will enable visualization and analysis of
complex structures at the macromolecular level, and will bring together
researchers from diverse fields, ranging from materials science and chemistry to
cell, molecular, and structural biology, thus fostering interdisciplinary
collaboration. It will be available to researchers at Brandeis and in the local
region. The microscope will also have a significant impact on education,
training, and outreach. It will help train the next generation of scientists,
including those from underrepresented groups, through hand-on courses and
workshops for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars. In
addition, outreach programs for high school students will increase scientific
knowledge and understanding among the public. The research projects enabled by
the Tundra cryo-electron microscope span different scientific fields including
the study of biomaterials, cells, and biological structures. For example,
several groups of researchers will use cryo-electron microscopy to understand
how molecules self-assemble into larger structures, as well as how those same
design principles could be used to create new synthetic nanomaterials. Other
groups will use the instrument to investigate the shapes and functions of cell
membranes and proteins. The Tundra microscope will be essential for capturing
detailed images and determining the structures of these molecules. Overall, the
microscope will advance knowledge of how biological molecules are structured and
how they function, which has important implications for understanding of how
life works, and for taking inspiration from biology to create the next
generation of materials for human use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.