* 2319511
* IMR: MM-1C: Enabling Continual Passive Estimation of Performance of Internet Transfers: Online Measurement and Classification Methods
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jasleen Kaur Sahni, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project focuses on developing techniques that can monitor network traffic
and reliably estimate the performance experienced by Internet users, while only
looking at headers of network packets and not looking at any privacy-violating
information. They main novelty is in also inferring what type of network
connection, what type of application, and what type of device the user is using
for accessing the Internet, and in being able to do all of the analysis fast
enough to keep up with high speed with which traffic is carried by the Internet.

The innovations proposed in this project include: (i) The design of deep
learning frameworks for classifying end-user segments, based on access networks,
client platforms, and application usage, which will enhance understanding of
Internet performance. (ii) The design of online sampling, hashing, and sketching
techniques, which will enable other types of passive analysis to also be
conducted in an online and light-weight manner. Currently, most passive analysis
studies are relegated to storing and working with large sets of traces, which
limits the their deployment. (iii) Passive estimation of whether network
bandwidth constrains an Internet transfer, which has never been attempted before
in a setting as diverse and evolving as the Internet.

This collaborative project brings together investigators from the fields of
Computer Science and Statistics, and is expected to transform several domains:
(i) The proposed efforts in user segmentation will also aid in understanding how
other properties of the Internet (not just performance) differ across different
user segments. This will aid in ensuring equitable and ubiquitous Internet
access for all citizens. (ii) The proposed monitoring techniques will be an
important source of insights on network systems management that can help
alleviate system bottlenecks and improve performance. (iii) Experience in
experimentation, measurements, and scientific analysis of big data is invaluable
to federal, commercial, and academic institutions that are involved in mining
for information in large data-sets. The proposed efforts in emulation and
analysis of massive amounts of traffic data will be an excellent source of
undergraduate and graduate students trained in these aspects. (iv) The proposed
efforts in involving minorities and undergraduates in research will help broaden
the diversity and capabilities of the Data Science (Computer Science/Statistics)
work force. (v) The proposed outreach efforts (to middle- and high-schoolers)
will help increase community engagement with science and technology.

The website for this project can be found at:
https://sites.google.com/cs.unc.edu/real-time-passive-traffic-anal/home. This
website will be updated with new developments and resources, until the end of
the project activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.