* 2319793
* CICI: TCR: IRIS: Instrumentation for Research and Inter-institutional SOC
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Kallitsis, Merit Network, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,199,623.00

This project addresses the problems of designing, engineering and maintaining an
effective and scalable networking and cybersecurity infrastructure that would
enable unique research opportunities that span the areas of Internet freedom,
networking monitoring, threat intelligence and security and privacy, while at
the same empowering the protection of member institutions within Merit Network
(Michigan’s research and education network) from cyber threats. There are
significant barriers to effective cybersecurity, including constrained
cybersecurity budgets, inadequate staffing, and the need for continuous
infrastructure maintenance. Small, low-resourced institutions within Merit’s
membership are especially challenged by these barriers, finding it difficult to
remain competitive and relevant in today’s Internet in which cyber-attacks are
growing both in frequency and sophistication. Under these considerations, the
project creates a Merit-managed, shared infrastructure that allows these
entities to focus on their missions and be confident that they have a baseline
level of cybersecurity defense.

This project develops situational awareness infrastructure to efficiently
monitor Internet traffic entering and leaving Merit’s network border, and to
detect and help mitigate cyber-threats destined to Merit’s member institutions
(i.e., universities, K12 schools, etc.). The so-called IRIS (Instrumentation of
Research and Inter-institutional Security Operations Center (SOC))
infrastructure has the capability of monitoring ultra high speeds of network
traffic in a streaming manner in a centralized, configurable, and sustainable
manner. This high-speed network monitoring infrastructure is deployed on the
Merit backbone network at key peering locations and provides a constant feed of
rich network research data as well as distilled cyber-security threats (e.g.,
malware downloads, denial of service attacks, etc.). The SOC platform gleans
such threats via state-of-the-art cybersecurity solutions (including open source
ones) and passes them to a data pipeline for further analysis, enrichment and
research. These analysis products provide to security analysts and researchers
up-to-date insights with regards to the current malware ecosystem, actionable
threat intelligence regarding compromised computer systems and malicious
Internet sites, and exploitable vulnerabilities which require remediation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.