* 2319473
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track II: Cross-Language Support for Runtime Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Owolabi Legunsen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 02/28/2025
* USD 50,000.00

Runtime verification (RV) can help find bugs early, before the software is
deployed. RV monitors program executions against formal behavioral
specifications and generates violations if those executions do not satisfy the
specifications. Prior RV research found hundreds of bugs in scores of open-
source projects. But that prior research used tooling that only targets the Java
programming language and checks specifications written in a domain-specific
language that is hard for new RV users to learn. This project’s impact is to
make RV more widely used for bug finding among developers by creating RV tool
support for other programming languages and simpler specification formats. The
project’s novelty is that it targets commonly-used languages and formats to
lower the language barriers to entry for developers who are new to RV, and makes
it easier for them to write specifications. The investigators will train
undergraduate students to participate in developing OpenMOP, create modules on
OpenMOP in their software engineering classes, and evaluate OpenMOP usage when
deploying it to find bugs during software development.

This project proposes OpenMOP to address infrastructure gaps that today make it
hard to use RV to find bugs. OpenMOP is an RV infrastructure that builds on and
reuses parts of JavaMOP -- an RV tool for Java that has been in development
since 2002. OpenMOP provides two new features. First, it enables developers to
describe program events and properties in formats that they are already familiar
with. For example, in one proposed format, developers can define the program
events needed to specify program behavior at a small set of program locations,
similar to adding breakpoints for debugging. Second, OpenMOP adopts a language-
agnostic client-server architecture to enable the rapid creation of efficient RV
tools for different programming languages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.