* 2319920
* Cuffless models to infer blood pressure from bioimpedance
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Braxton Osting, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Measurement of blood pressure (BP) is essential for early diagnosis and
management of hypertension, a condition that 45% of US adults have and a risk
factor for development of heart failure, the leading cause of death in the US.
Worldwide, hypertension is one of the largest public health epidemics. Compared
to ambulatory BP measurements, frequent out-of-clinic BP measurements are better
predictors of cardiovascular events but, today, existing clinically-accurate
technologies to measure BP require costly, uncomfortable, and cumbersome devices
that prevent their extended use outside of the clinic. Given substantial
healthcare and mortality burden of heart failure, rising healthcare costs, and
the aging population, continued technological improvements to aid heart failure
prevention, management, and surveillance are extremely important. The goal of
this project is to address this need for an accurate, inexpensive, easy-to use
device for continuously monitoring BP through the development of a novel
wearable watch built for this purpose. This new technology will be a game-
changer to protect at-risk individuals and effectively manage patients with
hypertension proactively across the care continuum and reduce hospitalizations
associated with hypertension. This study will also serve as fertile ground to
support students in continuing their careers at the intersection of STEM and
human oriented research.

One tool that is well-suited for unobtrusive BP monitoring is bioimpedance
(BioZ). In BioZ, an imperceptible electrical current is passed through the body
to obtain insights into how blood flows through arteries and veins. Here, the
Investigators propose to develop new measurement methods rooted with fluid and
electricity principles to create a new BioZ sensing technology capable of
enabling continuous, cuffless, and convenient BP monitoring. For this, a novel
aspect of the approach taken will be the application of BioZ in conjunction with
physiological, computational, and machine learning models to establish the
underlying biological sources at the cellular level relating both signals. Once
the models have been established and optimized to link BP to BioZ, the
prediction accuracy will be evaluated in a cohort of individuals representative
of a wide range of body indices and age groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.