* 2319932
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an Orbitrap Exploris 240 High-Resolution LC-MS for Research, Education, and Outreach at The University of Southern Mississippi (USM)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Douglas Masterson, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 08/31/2026
* USD 636,312.00

An award is made to the University of Southern Mississippi to acquire a state-
of-the-art high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer system. The
instrument will allow graduate and undergraduate students to gain marketable
skills in high-resolution mass spectrometry. Acquisition of the instrument will
advance the educational experiences of undergraduate and graduate students by
enhancing their ability to conduct research in a broad range of projects of
biological and chemical significance. The University of Southern Mississippi
will use the instrument for outreach to local high schools to expose students to
the various STEM career opportunities and the importance of scientific literacy
in society.

The research this instrument will support helps advance our understanding of the
fundamental science in various biological processes. The instrument will allow
the study of these biological processes and the proposing of new hypotheses that
can provide insight into the development of bio-inspired materials, parasite-
driven food allergies, and the role of peptides in osteoporosis. Other uses of
the instrument will include the study of reaction mechanisms in new catalytic
processes to aid in the synthesis of important molecules and to develop new
molecular sensors to identify chemicals that are toxic to the environment.

This project is jointly funded by MRI, the Major Instrumentation Research
Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.