* 2319438
* URoL:ASC: What rules of life allow collectives to effectively manage risk? Understanding the rules underlying risk management across systems to increase societal resilience
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Theodore Pavlic, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Societies’ capacities to effectively manage risk, such as the threats arising
from natural disasters, have not kept up with the world’s ecological changes.
Previously very rare events, such as large floods or long-lasting droughts, are
becoming more frequent, and the rapid dissemination of information on the
internet is contributing to the spread of misinformation about hazards, risks,
and how to manage them. To better deal with these risks, this project builds new
risk management strategies that are based on biological Rules of Life. These
rules are used by living systems to preserve and protect the life in those
systems, including those based on altruism, community growth, communication, and
enforcement of community rules. Biological systems that exploit these rules
include bacterial colonies, hives of social insects, schools of fish, and
herding animals.

This project combines gamification of the Rules of Life with narrative
storytelling to develop new strategies for collectively managing risk of natural
disasters, infrastructure challenges, pandemics, and other shocks. The
researchers use a practice-based co-design process that conducts science with
involvement of individuals in at-risk communities. Story- and play-based
activities that require solving cooperation and coordination dilemmas create a
variety of experiences and products that uncover new solutions to societal
challenges, encourage cooperation and collective risk management, determine new
ways to encourage people to engage collective risk management strategies, and
develop new outreach activities, such as museum exhibits and workshops. The
project will benefit vulnerable low-income communities struggling to deal with
disasters and water managers in the desert southwest trying to increase the
resilience of the water supply.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.