* 2319563
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment - Closed-cycle Cryotraps for Polar Ice Core Trace Gas Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2026
* USD 217,172.00

The air trapped in polar ice cores is the most accurate source of information
about the variability in atmospheric composition. Measurements on polar ice
cores inform us about how trace gases influence and respond to climate change on
centennial and millennial time scales. The polar ice archive includes a wide
range of climate-active trace gases (sulfur-containing gases, hydrocarbons, and
halogenated compounds) that reflect emissions from oceanic biota and terrestrial
ecosystems. The UCI laboratory has developed analytical techniques to extract
and analyze such ultra-trace gases from polar archives, allowing researchers to
reconstruct their atmospheric histories and understand how they are influenced
by climate and human activities. Ongoing and planned projects require the
analysis of large numbers of samples from Antarctic and Greenland ice cores. The
implementation of closed-cycle cryotraps will ensure the ability to continue
this research while conserving helium used in the analytical process.

The analysis of air trapped in polar ice cores requires the extraction and
manipulation of small air samples under ultra-clean conditions. In the UCI ice
core laboratory this is currently done using liquid helium, a commodity subject
to fluctuating supply and rapidly increasing costs. This project requests funds
to purchase and install new closed-cycle cryogenic cold trap systems,
eliminating the need for liquid helium. Installation of the closed-cycle
cryotraps will ensure operational continuity and reduce long-term operating
costs of the UCI ice core laboratory. The new cold cryotraps will be installed
on vacuum lines used for the wet (melting) and dry (shredding) extraction of air
from ice core samples for low-level trace gas analysis.The proposed
instrumentation will support graduate and undergraduate student training. The
ice core laboratory is actively involved in outreach activities both on campus
and in local minority K-12 school districts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.