* 2319061
* I-Corps: High Performance 3D Printed Plastic Parts Through Novel Process Enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Ankur Jain, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to improve the quality of 3D printed polymer parts.
Despite the promise of 3D printing technology, it is still far from meeting its
full potential. Although it offers low-cost, accessible part fabrication with
geometric accuracy sufficient for many applications, polymer 3D printed parts
often have poor strength (less than 20% of that of injection molded parts) and
are not yet ready to be used as load-bearing parts. Poor filament-to-filament
adhesion is at the heart of such problems in polymer 3D printing. To address
this key technological challenge, a print-head has been developed containing
additional metal pre-heater and post-heater components, which provide additional
thermal energy in a highly localized manner to delay the cooling curve and
improve filament-to-filament adhesion. The proposed print head is an add-on or
plug-and-play device that may result in a simple add-on that can be fitted into
almost any existing filament-based 3D printer. If successful, the improved
quality and reduced cost of polymer 3D printing enabled by this technology will
help print high-performance parts that may go into a variety of engineering
systems.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an in situ metal heater
integrated with the regular filament-dispensing nozzle in a polymer 3D printer
to improve the mechanical strength of printed parts. The additional thermal
energy provided by the heater helps improve the filament-to-filament adhesion
through reduced rate of cooling during the printing process. This has been shown
to lead to improved mechanical strength and other properties of the printed
part. Parts printed with the proposed technology may be suitable for challenging
and complex engineering systems where the parts are expected to withstand
significant load. This will help elevate polymer 3D printing technology from
being able to print prototypes to one that can produce real-life parts. If
successful, parts printed with this product may enable applications that are not
possible with the current manufacturing technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.