* 2319389
* UROL:ASC: AI-Supported Bionic Bivalves for Surface Water Monitoring based on Freshwater Mussel Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Jay Levine, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

For over fifty years, biologists have explored using the response of bivalves to
water pollution to benefit from them as sentinel organisms. Initial efforts used
simple sensors to measure a limited set of behaviors. Recent developments in low
power and distributed sensing, and machine learning, now enable a new generation
of a Bivalve-based Living Sensor Systems (BLiSS) for multimodal, more
comprehensive assessment that can help mitigate the presence of water
contaminants at inlets & outlets of public water infrastructures, where they
pose a risk to human and animal health. The project is expected to bring new
insights into bivalve-microenvironment interactions and support modeling and
data analytics that can establish baseline data for detecting environmental
impacts to surface waters of public water systems. While native bivalves already
play a key role in water clarity and quality as filter feeders, they are some of
the fastest diminishing taxa on the planet and their conservation is a high
priority. This project combines opportunities to use bivalves in bioremediation
and assess their ecological impact as well as to raise awareness and support for
conservation efforts. Bringing together citizen scientists and students,
especially from underrepresented minority populations in STEM, these groups will
interact around a range of interdisciplinary areas including embedded sensor
systems, artificial intelligence, internet-of-things, data analytics,
environmental conservation, bivalve biology and epidemiology.

The goal of this project is to establish the fundamental physical and
algorithmic building blocks of a bionic sensing system using the physiological
and behavioral responses of freshwater mussels to their environment for the
monitoring and surveillance of surface water resources in the inlet and outlet
of public water systems. We aim to provide a) novel and multimodal on-body
sensors for continuous assessment of bivalve behavior and physiology with
measurements of the baseline responses to environmental conditions; b) portable,
low-cost and environmentally robust embedded system platforms to be deployed in
controlled laboratory conditions within the scope of this project and field in
the future; c) a repository of novel data collected from single and cluster of
bivalves under various environmental and pollutant exposure factors; and d)
model-based and data-driven techniques to analyze the collected data in the
presence and absence of ground truth validation of biosensor responses. This
will initially result in an non-specific early warning system based on anomaly
detection of environmental contaminants to trigger further environmental
investigation and chemical testing by environmental protection agencies. The
next stages of the project will focus on measured anomalies and a learning based
adaptive data analytics strategy to provide a relatively more precise
prediction/identification of particular exposure. These synergistic studies are
enabled by a unique and actively collaborating interdisciplinary team with
expertise in freshwater mussel biology, aquatic ecosystem epidemiology, bionic
animal-machine interfaces, wireless embedded systems, sensors, novel materials,
machine learning, and citizen science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.