* 2319628
* Collaborative documentation of an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2026
* USD 418,424.00

This project creates a team of linguists, anthropologists, and community members
to document an endangered language that almost disappeared in the 1960s when the
remaining speakers, who numbered fewer than 60, left their homeland and migrated
to join larger communities that speak related languages. Fewer than 20 of these
original speakers remain, and all of their descendants speak at least two other
languages. This project documents the speech of the elders to provide a baseline
of the oldest surviving forms of the language and culture, and documents the
speech of younger generations to discover changes in the sound structures and
grammar of the language caused by the recent multilingualism. To do this, the
project records audio and video of a range of speakers using their language.
Speakers transcribe a subset of these recordings and translate them to create
multilingual subtitles. The most important recordings are also translated to
English to facilitate analysis of the sounds and grammar, with special attention
to the differences between younger and older speakers. The project also
crowdsources a digital dictionary with words translated into English and other
languages used by speakers, with linked recordings and photos, all accessible by
cell phone or computer. In addition to the scientific findings, the project has
the broader impact of training speakers to use computers to work with their
language, so they can produce their own books and other educational materials to
use in local bilingual schools.

The language has been the subject of almost no prior linguistic work, so every
scientific product of this project is a new contribution to our understanding of
the diversity of human language. This project generates three main products. The
first is a crowdsourced digital quadrilingual dictionary, created in the Living
Dictionaries progressive web app. During two dictionary workshops, teams of
speakers use cell phones to expand and generate new entries for an existing
1400-item wordlist imported by the PI. Local researchers collaborate to complete
the dictionary entries, adding parts of speech and English translations. The
second product is an archived corpus of translated audio and video recordings,
some with time-aligned transcriptions and translations, and some with
grammatical annotation and translation into an additional language. This corpus
provides an empirical basis for future reference and pedagogical grammars of the
language. The third product is a set of scholarly articles for an academic
audience covering specific grammatical topics such as syllable structure,
lexical stress, sociolinguistic variation, and the creative use of ideophones in
storytelling. This award is made as part of a funding partnership between the
National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities for
the NSF Dynamic Language Infrastructure – NEH Documenting Endangered Languages
Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.