* 2319277
* IMR: MM-1B: Longitudinal End-device based Performance Measurement of Cellular Networks with Provable Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 187,346.00

Cellular networks provide convenient access to the Internet anytime and
anywhere. Measuring and improving the performance of cellular networks is
important to network providers, end users, content providers, and regulators.
While cellular network providers can directly measure their networks, they
increasingly outsource the measurements to third-party mobile analytics
companies, which collect measurements directly from end-user mobile devices for
scalable, low-cost, long-term, and wide-area measurements. Existing mobile-
device based measurement platforms, however, have two major limitations. First,
they do not provide provable privacy guarantees to end users. Second, they do
not coordinate measurements across the devices based on their locations, which
can lead to biased measurements or wasted resources. This projectâ€™s novelties
are in designing innovative architecture and techniques for longitudinal
coordinated measurements of cellular networks, while providing provable privacy
to end users. The provable privacy is based on the emerging local differential
privacy (LDP) model, under which end devices perturb the location information
before it leaves the devices, and hence the actual locations are never known
beyond the end devices. Based on perturbed location data, the measurements at
end devices are scheduled and coordinated to achieve efficient resource usage.
The project's broader significance and importance are in raising awareness in
privacy in mobile-device based data collection, recruiting underrepresented
students in research, and collaborating with industry.

This project makes three main contributions. First, it proposes an amplified LDP
based technique for collecting cellular network measurements from end devices
with high accuracy, while providing provable privacy to individual users.
Second, it proposes an optimization-based measurement scheduling framework to
coordinate the measurements at the mobile devices to conserve resource usage,
while incentivizing measurements. Third, it develops a data-driven simulation
toolkit that assists practitioners to adopt the measurement framework. The
research team further develops a prototype system and uses it to conduct a user
study to further validate and improve the system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.