* 2319149
* Collaborative Research: Autonomous eddy covariance air-sea CO2 flux system for moored buoys
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Douglas Vandemark, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2027
* USD 490,570.00

Accurate prediction of carbon dioxide exchange between the atmosphere and oceans
is an important earth system model requirement, but the exchange estimates in
state-of-the-art climate models remain uncertain. One model factor that requires
improvement is the rate of gas transfer across the air-sea interface, and the
micrometeorological eddy covariance (EC) flux technique can provide field
measurements needed to improve and validate transfer rate models across a broad
range of wind and wave conditions. While the EC technique is widely employed on
land, several technical hurdles have hindered wider adoption of this approach
for CO2 flux data collection at sea, particularly on unattended floating
platforms. Recent work by this team has demonstrated that fast-response closed-
path CO2 sensors, central to the EC technique, can be modified to substantially
reduce CO2 error due to ship and buoy motion effects. Under this new program,
the team will further improve these sensors and also adapt approaches used for
larger shipboard CO2 flux systems to develop a small, robust, accurate, and low
power system suitable for use on a growing number of autonomous ocean observing
platforms.

The goals of this project are to 1) design, build and field-demonstrate a next
generation infrared gas analyzer engineered to effectively remove motion
interference that has plagued previous air-sea gas exchange field experiments,
and 2) build and deploy a compact end-to-end eddy covariance CO2 flux system
suitable for autonomous measurements through all weather conditions and on small
ocean observing platforms where power demands must be minimized. Offshore buoy
field demonstrations will be conducted near a long-term CO2 measurement site in
the Gulf of Maine where supporting ocean and meteorological observations will
provide data needed for sensor and system assessment and validation. The work
will be performed using a team approach that formally partners industry,
academia, and ocean observing system engineers. The project's final buoy-based
flux measurement system will be designed in collaboration with NSF OOI to
facilitate integration onto existing and future ocean observing platforms,
paving a way for expanded at-sea direct covariance CO2 flux measurements to
support a broad range of carbon cycle and air-sea interaction studies and
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.