* 2319325
* CICI: UCSS: Enhancing the Usability of Vulnerability Assessment Results for Open-Source Software Technologies in Scientific Cyberinfrastructure: A Deep Learning Perspective
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Federally funded scientific cyberinfrastructure (CI) has accelerated ground-
breaking scientific discoveries, including black hole imaging, genome
sequencing, vaccine discovery, and more. However, the open-source software (OSS)
technologies that help facilitate these discoveries often contain thousands of
vulnerabilities that, if exploited, could threaten irreplaceable scientific
analysis. Since scientific CIs often lack the personnel to manage these
vulnerabilities, they increasingly outsource their vulnerability management
tasks to third-party Research & Education security providers such as OmniSOC.
However, security analysts at these providers often face challenges managing the
tens of thousands of vulnerabilities present in OSS assets at CIs. This project
scans thousands of scientific CI OSS assets for vulnerabilities and employs
novel Artificial Intelligence-enabled analytics to (1) manage OSS asset
vulnerabilities in scientific CI and (2) link them to their remediation
strategies. Vulnerability scan and analytics results are integrated into a novel
Vulnerability Management System that allows security analysts search, sort,
browse, and collaborate on vulnerability data and remediation strategies across
scientific CIs.

This project designs a novel Artificial Intelligence-enabled AZSecure Usable and
Collaborative Security for Science Framework that scans for vulnerabilities in
four major categories of open-source software (OSS) assets (virtual machines,
containers, infrastructure-as-code, and GitHub) across two major NSF-funded
scientific cyberinfrastructures (CIs): (1) CyVerse for life sciences and (2)
Jetstream, NSF’s first Science and Engineering Cloud for NSF and NIH. The
vulnerability scans support three sets of AI-enabled analytics research thrusts
to enhance the usability of vulnerability scan results for OmniSOC’s security
analysts. The first thrust aggregates OSS asset and vulnerability data into an
embedding for vulnerability management tasks through multi-view learning
incorporating a vulnerability severity weighting scheme and a novel
combinatorial attention mechanism. The second thrust uses self-supervised
learning and transformers to link vulnerability scans with remediation
strategies by stacking multiple word embeddings and aligning vulnerability
severity scores with a novel contrastive loss function. The final thrust
develops a Vulnerability Management System that integrates scan results and
enables analysts to operate the methods. Project execution includes roles for
NSF CyberCorps Scholarship-for-Service graduate students from UArizona (NSA/DHS
CD-, R, and CO-designated) and IU (NSA/DHS CD- and- R-designated). Findings are
disseminated through academic and industry publications and integrated into the
top-ranked MS in Cybersecurity programs at UArizona and IU.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.