* 2319989
* ADVANCE IT: University of Utah Institutional Change Studios—Systemic Institutional Change Through Problem Driven Iterative Adaptation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Claudia Geist, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2028
* USD 508,988.00

The University of Utah (UU) ADVANCE Institutional Transformation (IT) project
will adapt and develop the use of “problem driven iterative adaptation” (PDIA)
and “Institutional Change Studios” (IC Studios) to an institution of higher
education. PDIA comes from the field of international development and will be
applied in the IC Studios to create a dynamic “learn-by-doing” process involving
several steps: 1) analyze root causes of a specific problem that local
stakeholders have identified as a priority, 2) identify starting points to
address the problem, 3) take action, 4) reflect on results, 5) adapt and iterate
as needed based on outcomes and lessons learned. The UU ADVANCE IT project will
establish IC Studios that will focus on three key themes of institutional need:
1) faculty support and community, 2) faculty workload equity, and 3)
collaborative structures for ongoing systemic change. The IC Studios are
intended to cultivate a culture of continuous improvement to address on-going
and emerging systemic equity issues for all tenure and career-line faculty and
institutionalize the structures required to nourish and sustain this culture.

The University of Utah is a decentralized university that is home to several
STEM colleges, each with its own history, culture, disciplinary lens, programs,
and policies. One-size-fits all solutions have historically not worked well at
UU. PDIA is well suited to this context as it allows for different approaches to
problem solving and solutions. The IC Studios will be supported by the ADVANCE
Intersectional Data Core team that will leverage existing institutional data
sources, develop and pilot test new data collection methods, and compile needed
additional data. The original research associated with the project will advance
understandings of the ways racism, sexism, cisheterogenderism, ableism, and
other modes of domination coalesce in STEM spaces to impact the career
trajectories of STEM faculty and how faculty members use their social networks
to navigate professional climates. This work is novel in the area of social
network analysis and will offer rich data and results not only applicable to the
University of Utah, but also communities at other large research-intensive
Universities across the U.S. The findings from the research will also inform the
work of the IC Studios and will advance understanding of how the diversity of
faculty networks lead to successful careers and happy faculty who are committed
to their institutions and communities.

The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on
the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the
full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Institutional
Transformation" awards provide support for the development and testing of new
systemic change strategies for gender equity in institution of higher education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.