* 2319645
* RaMP: Training the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists to collaboratively address species responses to climate change with SPARCnet
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* David Miller, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Two formidable challenges exist for the scientific workforce in the 21st
century: (1) to produce a new generation of scientists with a broad spectrum of
ideas and experiences; and (2) to mitigate the impacts of large-scale global
change, including land-use shifts, species introductions, atmospheric
deposition, and climate change. Because the impacts of global change are
challenging to predict, there is a need for multi-disciplinary and collaborative
perspectives to better understand these impacts and to implement solutions.
Coordinated networks that integrate researchers across disciplines and locations
provide a framework to address these challenges. The Salamander Population and
Adaptation Research Collaboration Network (SPARCnet) is an intellectually and
geographically distributed network that brings together a diverse group of
scientists, educators, university, federal, state, and non-profit partners to
use terrestrial amphibians as models for understanding how species respond to
global change. The SPARCnet RaMP program will recruit and mentor a diverse
cohort of 30 postbaccalaureate mentees within this collaborative and multi-
disciplinary network. Individual and collaborative research projects will be
carried out by mentor-mentee teams to investigate patterns and predict responses
of species to global change. These teams will also integrate diverse
perspectives for policy and management. The SPARCnet RaMP program will provide
professional development and career exploration for mentees to gain placement in
career or graduate school opportunities, with the goal of expanding
participation in the scientific workforce.

Climate is driving ecosystem change, but the precise response will vary among
populations based on local conditions. Amphibians are particularly at risk given
their narrow temperature and moisture tolerances. The network-wide research
approach of the SPARCnet RaMP program will determine how different populations
of the same species, across a large geographic range, differ in their
sensitivity and response to changing climate. Program participants will
integrate multiple sources of complexity and variation to understand the
behavioral, physiological, and genetic basis of local adaptation and population
dynamics. In parallel, the principal investigators will provide and assess the
effectiveness of evidence-based mentoring practices and formative research
experiences for each cohort of postbaccalaureate mentees. Assessment of the
effectiveness of this program will focus on how well the program (1) builds and
fosters menteesâ€™ scientific identity, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging in
scientific disciplines, all of which are important measures of persistence and
future success in scientific careers, and (2) reduces barriers in scientific
career pathways for members of underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.