* 2319250
* ATD: Multiscale Anomaly Detection in Spatio-Temporal Multilayer Networks Encoding Human Mobility
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yingjie Hu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Human mobility data from anonymized mobile phone devices are becoming
increasingly available, enabling the detection of anomalies and potential
threats from human movements. Due to the massive scale of data, it is difficult
to detect anomalies that occur at different spatial and temporal resolutions. In
addition, human movements are often associated with different categories of
places (e.g., grocery stores and schools), and anomalies that are evident in one
category may be obscure in another. This project will furnish new mathematical
models and theories for encoding different categories of human movements as
spatial-temporal multilayer networks. It will develop new algorithms to detect
movement-pattern anomalies, which can help better forewarn anomalous events
concerning national security. It will also advance our understanding of the
impacts of anomalous and disastrous events on different categories of human
movements. This project will contribute toward education by supporting graduate
students and will facilitate interdisciplinary research between mathematics and
geography. Open-source software tools will be implemented and publicly shared to
help researchers and decision makers better predict, detect, and plan responses
to future anomalous events.

To represent human movements in different categories and effectively detect the
associated anomalies, the investigators will pursue three targets in this
project. Target 1 will develop spatial-temporal multilayer network models
encoding anonymized mobile phone location data of the United States. The
network-structural properties associated with both normal and expected anomalous
situations (e.g., holidays) will be extensively examined to develop a family of
realistic generative models. Target 2 will build algorithms to detect and
characterize movement-pattern anomalies based on the multilayer network models
using unsupervised spectral algorithms. Random matrix theory will be employed to
obtain theoretic guidelines for how to optimally preprocess data to maximize the
“detectability” of anomalies at different spatial and temporal resolutions.
Target 3 will apply the developed multilayer network models and anomaly
detection algorithms to two case studies, to further refine our models and
algorithms and to gain new insights into the evolutions and impacts of the two
important events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.