* 2319919
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding the Impact of Privacy-Preserving Analytics on the Ground
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alessandro Acquisti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 196,972.00

The project investigates downstream implications of the development and
deployment of tools for "privacy-preserving analytics." Privacy-preserving
analytics are mathematical and statistical techniques (such as differential
privacy and federated learning) designed to protect privacy while permitting
analysis of data. The project's goal is to generate assessments of the impact of
privacy-preserving analytics. The projectâ€™s novelty lies in complementing the
growing body of theoretical research in this area (produced by computer
scientists and statisticians) with social science empirically-grounded research.
While practical applications of these tools are growing, there is a paucity of
applied research on the downstream implications of their development and
deployment. The project addresses that gap by investigating the impacts of
privacy-preserving analytics across a variety of use cases. The project's
broader significance and importance pertain to the scholarly and policy debate
around privacy protection and data utility. The project can provide policy
makers with an assessment of the performance of such tools in real-world
applications. From a managerial perspective, the project can provide lessons
learned and generalizable best practices for organizations to consider in their
exploration of privacy-preserving analytics. While privacy-preserving analytics
are a popular subject of contemporary research, much of the research in this
area focuses on formal methods and theoretical contributions. The project
contributes transformative research by bridging the gap between theoretical
analyses of privacy-preserving analytics and their empirical investigation on
the ground. The project does so by conducting empirical studies of the
organizational and managerial considerations behind their development, and their
impact on consumer products, research efforts, and policy-making. The studies
leverage multiple methodologies, including qualitative survey research, online
field experiments, and observational research. The studies connect computer and
social sciences and tie different streams of technical, organizational, and
economic research to produce evidence grounded in practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.