* 2319934
* CICI: RSSD: A Vulnerability Modeling Approach Toward Secure Scientific Cyber-Infrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ahmad Patooghy, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,755.00

Scientific cyber-infrastructures play a crucial role in facilitating scientific
research and discovery by providing advanced data management capabilities. This
research project aims to fortify the cybersecurity of data-intensive scientific
cyber-infrastructures, safeguarding valuable scientific data and preserving
research integrity. To achieve this objective, the project aims to form a
cybersecurity coalition among institutions within the state of North Carolina,
promoting collaboration and knowledge sharing. Comprehensive cybersecurity
incident data is collected within the coalition using advanced tools that gather
information on incident types, timestamps, locations, active security policies,
and impact levels. The collected data is utilized to model typical
vulnerabilities encountered in data-intensive systems, enabling proactive
vulnerability management and improving the incident response. This project
impacts a wide community of scholars that conduct research through the
application of a variety of data-intensive scientific cyber-infrastructures.
Also, the research methodology developed in this project can be used to
safeguard other scientific cyber-infrastructures.

This project leverages a cybersecurity knowledge graph (CSKG) to model and
integrate the collected data. The CSKG incorporates data from the coalition as
well as authoritative sources such as the National Vulnerability Database,
Malware Attribute Enumeration and Characterization and Open-Source Vulnerability
Database. Advanced natural language processing techniques and deep learning
models are developed to process the generated data and construct the CSKG. By
representing the scientific cyber-infrastructure as a directed graph, the CSKG
we provide an intuitive visualization and effective querying, revealing
intricate relationships between vulnerabilities, attacks and affected systems.
This research endeavor will establish North Carolina Agricultural and Technical
State University as a leader in cybersecurity research and education. Through
the cybersecurity coalition collaboration, valuable insights and best practices
are shared, fostering a collective effort to strengthen the security posture of
scientific cyber-infrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.