* 2319959
* CICI:TCR:STARNOVA:  Scalable Technology to Accelerate Research Network Operations Vulnerability Alerts
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,199,994.00

Cyberinfrastructure plays a crucial role in performing computational and data-
intensive scientific tasks across various disciplines, including data science,
physics, bioinformatics, health IT, and Internet analytics. Targeted cyber
attacks, such as ransomware, malware, and denial-of-service attacks, can
severely impact the infrastructureâ€™s security, reliability, and robustness,
leading to significant disruptions to scientific workflows. Timely and
customized threat intelligence facilitates development of strategies for network
operators defending against emerging attacks.

This project designs and implements the Sustainable Technology to Accelerate
Research Network Operations Vulnerability Alerts (STARNOVA) platform. STARNOVA
leverages unsolicited Internet traffic to provide early-warning indicators of
new attacks targeted to cyberinfrastructure at the San Diego Supercomputer
Center (SDSC). The newly developed infrastructure extends the visibility of the
UCSD network telescope to monitor unsolicited traffic toward SDSC's equipment IP
address spaces. The platform applies novel machine learning-based time series
analytics methods to detect anomalies in traffic patterns. The analysis results
of each anomaly will automatically generate near real-time alerts for SDSC
operators to make informed defensive actions against potential threats. The
published software and results from this project facilitates traffic data
collection and information exchange across the network security and scientific
CI community, contributing to affordable community-based solutions, especially
critical at under-resourced institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.