* 2319580
* NCS-FO: Understanding the computations the brain performs during choice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposal seeks to understand how the brain supports and encodes decision
making by taking an interdisciplinary approach. The researchers plan to use
neural activity recorded while participants make complex decisions. This brain
activity can then be captured in a model that makes particular predictions about
how each brain area contributes to decision-making. In turn, the researchers
hope to use that model to test specific hypothesis about how decision-making is
affected by neurostimulation to those areas. Knowledge of how the brain supports
decision making can provide invaluable insight for the development of
educational curricula. Information is best presented to students in a way that
works in concert with the brain. Further, insights from this project may provide
insight into the development of artificial intelligence. This potential
application has profound ethical implications that the researchers aim to study
in this proposal. Finally, this work focuses on assessing the value underlying
decision making which is fundamental to economics. Specifically, valuation
maintains and/or updates our understanding of gains or losses based on
experience. Overly risky or risk-averse behavior can lead to suboptimal
decisions and have been linked to neuropsychological disorders.

The proposed research is split into three simultaneous objectives. In the first,
the researchers propose to identify which features of the data (e.g., amplitude
of the neural activity) provide information about the decision-making process.
In the second, the researchers aim to build decoders that explicitly combine
those features to predict which decision the person will make. In the final
objective the researchers aim to develop a control algorithm which predicts the
personâ€™s decision and then intervenes by applying neurostimulation to alter that
decision. This closed loop stimulation may prove important for developing
interventions that could, for example, help reduce risk seeking in compulsive
gamblers. Alternatively, in some people that are too risk averse (never leave
the house), at different type of stimulation could reduce this aversion to risk.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.