* 2319385
* Constraining the air-sea exchange of inorganic and methylated mercury with high resolution spatial and temporal measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 08/31/2026
* USD 680,675.00

Mercury (Hg), a global pollutant, is released to the biosphere predominantly by
human activity, through intentional use or as a trace element in coal, ores, and
other products. These releases are exacerbated by climate change. Atmospheric Hg
is predominantly elemental Hg (Hg0) - a gas with a relatively long residence
time that can be transported globally to remote regions. After its
transformation by atmospheric chemical reactions to ionic Hg, it is deposited to
the ocean through precipitation, aerosol, and gaseous Hg deposition. In surface
waters, ionic Hg is biologically and abiotically transformed into Hg0, which is
then returned to the atmosphere via gas exchange. Overall, atmospheric
deposition is the primary source, and Hg0 gas evasion is the primary loss
mechanism for ocean Hg. The extent of air-sea exchange therefore alters the
ocean Hg burden and impacts the global mercury cycle. Furthermore, the oceanic
ionic Hg can be transformed into the more toxic and bioaccumulative
methylmercury (MeHg), which concentrates in seafood sufficiently to be a global
human health concern and impact wildlife. Understanding the factors that mediate
the air-sea exchange of Hg is of vital importance for assessing the impact of
humans and climate change on MeHg levels in seafood, and human health.

The project, co-funded by the Chemical Oceanography Program and the Atmospheric
Chemistry Program, will evaluate the concentrations of Hg in the surface ocean
and atmosphere to examine the factors controlling their concentration and
chemistry, and the magnitude of the Hg sources and sinks. There is limited data
examining the seasonal and temporal variability of Hg speciation in the surface
ocean at a specific location, and its air-sea exchange, and this is the study’s
primary focus. Measurements will be made in the North Atlantic Ocean near
Bermuda, during both monthly and specific Hg-focused cruises. Atmospheric
samples will be collected as well at the atmospheric sampling station in
Bermuda. During cruises, high resolution Hg speciation data in the atmosphere
(gaseous and aerosol) and surface waters (gaseous elemental Hg, dissolved and
particulate ionic Hg, MeHg and dimethylmercury) will be gathered to examine the
sources of Hg and its transformations, and how this impacts the formation of
MeHg. Additionally, measurements of Hg stable isotopes in atmospheric and water
samples will be used to identify sources (e.g., geogenic or anthropogenic
inputs) and delivery mechanisms of Hg to this region. This proposed research
will further assess the importance of natural variability, human activity, and
climate change on altering Hg and MeHg levels in the ocean, and in marine
organisms consumed by humans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.