* 2319015
* SaTC: EDU: Digital Safety Immersion for Elementary School Students
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Florence Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 125,843.00

With increased access to digital devices, children have started to create
digital footprints and online identities, with associated risks to their
security and privacy. Fostering and facilitating the dynamics of healthy online
behaviors, conflict and identity is relevant to producing responsible 21st-
century learners in our schools and communities. There is a critical need to
develop educational materials and research around experiences emphasizing
digital safety for elementary school students. The outcome of this project has
the potential to greatly improve digital safety for children without restricting
their learning opportunities. This project will also provide undergraduate and
graduate students in computing and education majors with the opportunity to gain
experience by involving them in the design of the educational materials as well
as the evaluation and research activities. The implementation of security
education for elementary school grades will promote modernization of digital
safety educational materials and help elementary schools adapt to technology
development and prepare responsible 21st century learners.

This project addresses the need for digital safety and privacy education at the
elementary school level. To accomplish this goal the project will design a
comprehensive suite of digital safety educational materials for elementary
school students in Grades 3-5. Topics will include cyberbullying, digital
security and privacy, footprint, and the correct way of communicating on the
Internet. The materials will be disseminated to students by training 40
elementary school in-service and pre-service teachers through workshops in the
greater Charlotte, North Carolina area. Week-long digital safety summer camps
will reach 400 elementary school students and will be used to conduct thorough
evaluation and improvement of the educational materials. The project will also
engage parents through a Parent workshop and will explore the formation of a
Student-Parent-Teacher-Researcher coalition for future digital safety education.
In addition, the project proposes to apply a train-the-trainer model to ensure
the materials reach a wide range of end users. Thus, trained in-service teachers
will be equipped to train other teachers and students in their schools.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.