* 2319964
* Equipment: MRI Track 1: Acquisition of an integrated physical property measurement system for the electrical, optical, and magnetic characterization of materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Montoya, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 900,060.00

The acquisition of a cryogen-free and integrated Physical Property Measurement
System (PPMS) at the University of Utah is a significant advancement that
bolsters the research activities in quantum science, bioengineering, and
manufacturing at various universities and companies across Utah and the
surrounding States. The state-of-the-art PPMS tool enables researchers to
investigate the behavior of materials at low temperatures without the need for
helium to operate and under various external conditions such as magnetic fields,
pressure, and sample rotating angles. The utilization of multifunctional
characterization tools like the PPMS is crucial for pushing the frontiers of
material understanding and designing new materials with controllable properties.
The PPMS's ability to provide conclusive insights into electrical, optical,
thermal, and magnetic properties with high spatial resolution greatly benefits
the research community within the Intermountain West region. The instrument
meets the critical needs of research, education, and training by a diverse and
large group of faculty within the Colleges of Science, Mines & Earth Sciences,
Engineering, and the School of Medicine. The inclusion of several magneto-optic
interfaces adds even more value to the PPMS acquisition. The ability to
investigate the ferromagnetic responses of quantum materials using a cryo-
ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy probe is a unique capability that currently
does not exist in any facility in the State of Utah and its surrounding regions.
This specific feature makes the PPMS a unique capability that fosters
collaboration with major semiconducting companies in the area. As such, the PPMS
serves as a major open-access user facility where students and staff are
constantly trained in the areas of microelectronics, semiconductors, and device
engineering. More importantly, students and postdocs across many institutions
(R1, R2, and primarily undergraduate institutions) strongly overlap with
scientists at regional companies and government laboratories, which allow them
to seek internships and job opportunities in the region, furthering scientific
advancements and innovation in material science.

Pushing the frontiers of understanding the physical behavior of materials and
designing new materials with controllable properties demands the utilization of
multifunctional characterization tools that can provide conclusive electrical,
optical, thermal, and magnetic property insights with sufficient spatial
resolution. The cryogen-free and integrated PPMS provides a powerful capability
to characterize the physical properties of materials at very low temperatures
(100 mK-400 K) and as a function of magnetic fields, pressure, and sample
rotating angles. The location of the PPMS within the Materials Core Laboratory
at the University of Utah boosts the research of regional companies, promote
collaborative research, enhances existing lab outreach activities to
underrepresented students in STEM fields, and expands educational programs. The
PPMS includes several magneto-optic interfaces to investigate the ferromagnetic
responses of quantum materials using a cryo-ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy
probe, a unique capability not present in any facility in the State of Utah and
its surroundings. There are currently 11 regional companies that make use of
PPMS and help to spur the State’s burgeoning technology industry. The University
of Utah offers certificates in microscopy, diffraction, and nanotechnology which
are enriched by the addition of the PPMS. Finally, the PPMS data acquired by
underrepresented undergrads are presented to the public in a Spanish seminar
series where various Spanish-speaking professors and students doing cutting-edge
science deliver seminars to inform Hispanic families about the importance of a
particular scientific topic. Finally, the cryogen-free PPMS allows users to
decrease helium consumption in research activities as well as train and expand
the microelectronic workforce in coordination with industry and national
laboratories within the State and its surroundings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.