* 2319774
* I-Corps: Biodegradable Regenerative Spinal Implants
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Huinan Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
treatment and outcomes of spinal cord injury. Annually, approximately 18,000
people in the United States and between 250,000 to 500,000 people globally
suffer a spinal cord injury not only as a result of traumatic injuries but also
from vascular damage and infections. Depending upon the degree of severity,
spinal cord injury patients face lengthy, if not permanent disabilities, often
with lifetime medical costs exceeding million dollars. Currently, there are no
curative treatment for spinal cord injury while extensive and expensive
rehabilitative therapy is the only option for many patients. Advances in
surgical interventions have progressed beyond classic decompression and
stabilization to grafts which can provide limited improvements in nerve
regeneration, but new experimental approaches can be technically challenging and
costly while recovery times can remain painfully long. The proposed technology
aims to reduce the cost and complexities of neural repair surgery by offering a
simple to use and readily available tissue scaffold, while improving long term
outcomes by promoting neuronal regrowth.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of biodegradable bioactive
materials for tissue regeneration, controlled drug delivery, stem cell
therapies, medical implants and devices. Nerve injuries are among the most
difficult injuries to heal because under normal physiological conditions, mature
neurons do not undergo cell division. Tissue grafts are the standard of care for
surgical intervention in nerve injuries, however limitations on donor
availability, as well as tissue mismatches and damage to the graft site
represent serious drawbacks to these procedures. Alternatively, synthetic nerve
guidance conduit or channel devices made from different materials have been
approved for clinical use, but such devices fail to match the functional
recovery of traditional nerve grafting procedures. This project builds upon
existing nerve guidance conduit or channel devices by incorporating
biocompatible bioactive microwires to improve neural healing. This new device is
naturally biodegradable and bioresorbable in the body, mechanically matching
neural tissue, and electrically conductive for neural stimulation and controlled
release of neuroprotective ions. This bioresorbable neural device does not
require removal surgery as it degrades in a natural and safe manner. Overall,
the integration of bioactive microwires into nerve guidance conduit or channels
can accelerate neural recovery process and improve functional outcome while
eliminating the need for additional surgery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.