* 2319792
* Collaborative Research: EDGE CMT: Mechanistic basis of cricket wing dimorphism: predicting phenotype from genotype in complex threshold traits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Caroline Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,263,992.00

Many traits, including disease states in humans, come in two discrete forms
(i.e., are dimorphic), yet their genetic basis is not caused by a simple single
Mendelian genetic factor. The role of genetics and the processes that generate
discrete forms from continuous genetic and environmental inputs are not well
understood, limiting our ability to predict traits from genomic information and
to understand the evolution of these complex traits. The project will develop
and use a powerful model system, North American field crickets in the genus
Gryllus, to discover the genetic, developmental, physiological, and
environmental processes that convert genetic variation and environmental inputs
into a dimorphic trait. The project will impact society through improving our
ability to predict complex traits across environments, potentially improving
disease interventions, enhancing outcomes for selective breeding of domesticated
and managed species and populations, and predicting species’ responses to
environmental change. Crickets are increasingly used as an alternative food
source, and the insights into cricket biology and genomes generated by this
project will be a valuable resource for those developing these insects as a
sustainable food source. The project will train early career scientists in
programs that are broadening participation in the STEM workforce. Finally, the
research will be used to generate museum activities that will engage with urban
and rural communities to improve science literacy and the appreciation of
crickets in the wild and as food.

The project will generate foundational and generalizable knowledge on the
mechanisms that connect genotype-to-phenotype for dichotomous traits with
complex multigenic architecture. The project will develop genomic resources for
Gryllus field crickets and use these tools in a phylogenetic framework to
generate a mechanistic understanding of how multigenic and environmental
variation combines with developmental thresholds to jointly determine discrete
dimorphic phenotypes. Multiple species of field cricket are dimorphic for
alternative wing morphs, with adults emerging as either long-winged, flight-
capable crickets with delayed reproduction or as short-winged, flightless
crickets that can reproduce immediately. Previous studies indicate wing
dimorphisms in field crickets are classic alternative life-history strategies
that are environmentally sensitive and shaped by multigenic variation consistent
with the quantitative genetic threshold trait model. The project integrates
quantitative, evolutionary, and functional genetic approaches to mechanistically
dissect the genomic, developmental, and physiological basis for alternative
life-history strategies. The project results will inform prediction of phenotype
from genotype generally for complex multigenic dimorphisms, such as protective,
trophic, and mating polymorphisms, in addition to threshold traits that impact
human disease and breeding of domesticated species. The proposed phylogenetic
framework will inform how dimorphic life-history strategies may be maintained,
gained, or lost during species radiations.

This project is jointly funded by the Enabling Discovery through GEnomics (EDGE)
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.