* 2319231
* URoL:ASC: Next-Generation Biological Security and Bio-Hackathon
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Matthew Realff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,814,550.00

Biotechnologies include a variety of technologies that improve the quality of
life for billions of people worldwide. Contemporary biotechnologies often use
living systems or living materials – typically in the form of an engineered cell
– used to treat or diagnose disease, manufacture biofuels, or produce foods or
dietary supplements. These could be thought of as biological assets. Biological
security is a process that is used to prevent the unwanted release or capture of
a given biological asset, especially if this asset is potentially pathogenic or
harmful to the environment. Current approaches to biological security rely
primarily on restricting physical access: for instance, the biological assets
are confined in high bio-security labs. The current solution lacks any measures
to prevent the unwanted proliferation of the biological material once the asset
has breached its restricted environment. This is the equivalent of protecting
your data by having your cell phone unprotected by a password, but storing it in
a locked drawer. Your data is protected, as long as the phone remains locked.
However, anybody getting physical possession of the phone will be able to use it
and access your data. Similarly, with the current biosecurity approach, anybody
can use the biological asset if they get access to it. The objective of this
research is to develop bio-security measures that are inherently embedded in the
biotechnology asset, much like the embedded password authentication on your
phone. This embedded security prevents someone from accessing your data even if
they have physical possession of the phone. The successful completion of this
research will result in a paradigm shift in biological security and security
protocols. In addition to dramatically improving containment and asset
protection, the resulting technologies will increase public confidence in the
use of engineered biological systems.

The objective of this research is to transition biological security from an
operational technology platform to a novel biologically intrinsic informational
technology platform. To accomplish this will require the convergence of
biological engineering informed by a prescribed set of rules of life,
cybersecurity principles, and chemical engineering workflows. Biosecurity
predicated on intrinsic informational technology will enable the development of
scalable active protection measures and passive containment strategies for any
engineered chassis cell or consortium of chassis cells. The use of cybersecurity
principles will enable biological engineers and related stakeholders to define
and establish the standards and protocols for next-generation biosecurity
systems, in addition to staging and conducting penetration tests for the
iterative improvement of biological security systems. This plan of action will
facilitate use-inspired research via deploying synthetic-decision making and
synthetic memory and complementary engineered parts to design, build, and test
ascending iterations of biosecurity. Assessment of the impact of next-generation
biosecurity will be achieved via a consortium of co-producers that include
security specialists, policy makers, industrial partners, and national
organizations. In addition, this research program will be used to develop
innovative education and training activities aimed at fostering convergent
research. The societal impact of this research will be many-fold and is aimed at
reducing the anxiety associated with the use of engineer biological systems,
increased biosecurity measures that are of interest to national security, and
addressing a general interest in improving containment measures from federal
institutions to improve biosafety.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.