* 2319427
* URoL:ASC: The design, development, and societal impact of rapid, in-home, water quality biosensors
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Jean-Francois Gaillard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

The global water crisis is among the most urgent issues of our time. Billions of
people globally face problems with water security caused by water contamination,
leading to far-reaching adverse economic, political, nutritional, and mental and
physical consequences. However, limited accessibility to water testing methods
is a critical barrier to understanding water safety. Therefore, this proposal
seeks to address the need for action on water quality and water insecurity by
developing a three-stage methodology for the design, development, and
distribution of rapid in-home, water quality monitoring tests. The water test
platform is based on knowledge gained from the study of how natural
microorganisms detect water contaminants in the environment, allowing molecular
engineering principles to be used to repurpose these sensing mechanisms in safe
formats that can be operated by non-experts. Using a novel combination of
biological, chemical, engineering and social science techniques, this study will
investigate how the ability to test water quality at home changes the knowledge,
attitudes and behaviors of individuals related to water access and use. The
vision is that this synthetic biology biotechnology platform will help mitigate
the economic, political, and health impacts of the global water crisis by
providing actionable information to individuals and communities that positively
impacts their daily lives and informs mitigation strategies.

This new approach to water quality monitoring will be established in
collaboration with the greater Chicagoland community for the detection of lead
(Pb), copper (Cu), and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), three water
contaminants that are the subject of major public regulation and concern. In
Stage 1, social science techniques will be combined with community-driven
approaches to collect information that will guide the development of the tests.
In Stage 2, tests for a particular contaminant will be tested with users to
understand how tests can be optimized for maximum user benefit. In Stage 3,
tests will be given to users, and surveys will be used to measure changes in
their knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors about the three specific water
contaminants before and after tests are performed. Importantly, each stage will
integrate the perspectives of community stakeholders through the establishment
of a community advisory board. Education and outreach activities will be
performed to train a diverse group of students to combine multiple disciplines
to tackle global challenges in partnership with affected communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.