* 2319708
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a Novel Performance-Driven 3D Imaging System for Extremely Noisy Objects (NPIX)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mark Tehranipoor, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,350,000.00

X-ray machines have found extensive applications in various fields, including
medicine, engineering, agriculture, and dentistry. They are utilized to capture
high-quality images of small components such as teeth, bones, and semiconductor
chips for detailed analysis. However, the current X-ray machines often produce
images with significant noise and poor resolution when dealing with intricately
shaped parts. Consequently, comprehending the issues and identifying potential
solutions becomes exceedingly challenging. The objective of this project is to
acquire an advanced system that addresses these limitations. The Novel
Performance-Driven 3D Imaging System for Extremely Noisy Objects (NPIX) system
will possess enhanced capabilities to capture images of the objects with complex
geometries with minimal noise.

The NPIX system offers numerous advanced capabilities surpassing conventional
tomography and laminography. NPIX significantly reduces the required training
dataset size to merely tens or hundreds of images, as opposed to millions, for
automated image analysis in various research areas. The resulting low noise
images enhance state-of-the-art AI and deep learning algorithms, elevating
conventional X-ray imaging to new heights. As a result, this system becomes a
valuable tool for a diverse array of research and industrial applications.

The NPIX system is designed to be user-friendly and accessible, ideal for
educational and training purposes. The project aims to utilize the system in
multiple ways: 1) offering access to both on campus and off campus students
nationally; 2) integrating X-ray expertise into K-12 education through the
student science training program (SSTP); 3) partnering with research education
for undergraduates (REU) and scholarship for service (SFS) programs, Neocity
academy to expose undergraduate students to X-ray techniques; 4) providing
continued education options for practical training; 5) involving undergraduate
and underrepresented students in research; 6) collaborating with minority-
serving institutions; 7) showcasing the system to visitors from local schools,
community colleges and universities to inspire future leaders.

The project will involve collecting a large amount of X-ray images from the NPIX
system in different fields. These resources can be accessed at https://paine-
conference.org/resources/. These shared resources can engage the community in
different areas and help automating and enhancing inspection and assurance
processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.