* 2319114
* Adenosine triphosphate as a master variable for biomass in the oceanographic context
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 470,558.00

In the ocean, most living organisms are microbes that are too small to be seen
by the naked eye. Despite their small size, microbes play an important role in
processes that govern marine ecosystems and food webs. For example, microbes
affect the concentrations of nutrients and gases in the water and the
atmosphere, thereby exerting a significant impact on the climate globally.
Consequently, it is important to know how many microbes there are in any given
environment because there is a direct causal connection between living mass and
overall biological activity. Determining how “alive” any volume of water is,
however, is a difficult task. The gold standard is to count microbial cells
under the microscope. This method is extremely time consuming when done well and
needs to be performed separately on many different types of microbial cells. In
addition, standard microscopic techniques do not reveal whether the cells were
alive when they were collected. In contrast, a chemical method based on the
amount of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) offers distinct advantages. Notably, ATP
is relatively easy to measure, and the method can be widely used because all
living cells contain ATP in similar concentrations. This study tests and applies
an improved method of ATP analysis to generate data at very high resolution in
space and time. One PhD student and six undergraduate students will receive
research training and the project fosters international research collaborations
with European scientists. This research provides deeper insights into the
distribution of live matter in different regions and depths of the world’s
oceans.

Decades ago, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) was proposed as a universal biomass
indicator. However, its application in the field of oceanography has been
limited due to misconceptions regarding cellular ATP concentration. Recent
evidence suggests that ATP functions as a hydrotrope requiring homeostatically
controlled ATP levels much higher than those solely needed for energy
metabolism. ATP occurs in surprisingly stable concentrations in cytoplasm across
a wide range of microbes thus representing live cytoplasm volume. This project
examines in detail the usefulness of particulate ATP (PATP) as a biomass marker
over a large section of the North Atlantic Ocean with special emphasis on
mesopelagic and deep-sea environments where chlorophyll is a poor indicator of
biomass or associated biological processes. The project uses field collections
of marine snow and ambient water in combination with particle cameras to examine
the microscale heterogeny of biomass in the water column. Laboratory studies
determine factors that may influence the recovery of PATP through filtration and
extraction protocols and determine to what extent ATP concentrations potentially
deviate from the typical cytoplasm concentration during phosphorus limitation.
The improved PATP-biomass method offers numerous operational advantages,
especially the fact that it can be employed at high spatial and temporal
resolution. Once validated, the PATP biomass method could be widely adopted as a
key variable for biomass in routine oceanographic surveys. This project supports
graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds to contribute to
laboratory and field research. Public outreach efforts include tours and
presentations for middle and high-school students, as well as the general
public.

This project is funded by the Chemical Oceanography and Biological Oceanography
Programs in the Division of Ocean Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.