* 2319181
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Knitting Semantics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Gilbert Bernstein, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 429,952.00

What is the meaning of a program written to control an industrial knitting
machine? Usually, we say two programs are equivalent (mean the same thing) if
they compute the same output data for every given input. But manufacturing
programs don’t take input and they manufacture objects rather than output data.
This project studies when two programs to control knitting machines are
equivalent in the sense that they manufacture equivalent garments or fabric. It
does so by connecting the mathematical study of programming languages with the
mathematical field of Knot Theory (a branch of Topology). In tandem with the
basic theory, this project develops a new, more robust software stack for
compiling knitting machine programs, and new design tools leveraging the theory
and infrastructure. This project’s novelties are in providing the first precise
definition of manufacturing programs for non-rigid objects, and in developing
theory, compilers and tools on that basis. The project has the potential to
improve the efficiency and robustness of machine knitting – the only presently
viable approach to whole-garment manufacturing not reliant on extensive manual
labor. Such advances in textile production may eventually enable
onshoring/localization of garment production, as well as more ecologically
sustainable manufacturing through just-in-time production, customization, and
waste reduction.

The project covers the research and development of three layers: a basic theory
of knitting machine programs, a new compiler infrastructure, and new design
tools exploiting and demonstrating these advances. The theory level consists of
a formal (denotational) semantics for a machine-independent knitting machine
language called Knitout. Programs denote knot theoretic diagrams. Investigators
are developing a complete axiomatic characterization of this equivalence, a
decision procedure for the equivalence (possibly in P, i.e., in polynomial
time), and associated normal forms/optimization procedures. The compiler level
consists of a number of scheduling, checking, and optimization passes operating
on formalized knitout programs, and interoperability links to tools in the
existing Knitout ecosystem. The design tool level consists of tools for creating
and debugging complex, non-standard textile designs, as well as the design of
user hints and scheduling controls to help expert users ensure efficient
manufacturability of their designs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.