* 2319492
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FR: Individual variability in auditory learning characterized using multi-scale and multi-modal physiology and neuromodulation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Matthew McGinley, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* David Daniel
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,159,314.00

It is critical for people around the world to be able to learn new skills and
information throughout their lives, although often people differ in their
proficiency to do so. For example, while all adults are capable of some extent
of non-native speech sound category learning with optimized behavioral training
paradigms, some people achieve high levels of proficiency with extensive
training, while many others fail to overcome fundamental challenges. Prior work
has attempted to explain individual differences in learning using static
"traits" that are thought to change very little over time - e.g., working memory
span, IQ, and musical ability. However, recent work has suggested that a major
source of variability is the constantly changing "states" of the brain during
learning. Scientists are at a unique moment where advances in cognitive and
systems neuroscience, computational behavioral modeling, and neuromodulation
(the ability to manipulate neural systems safely and non-invasively in humans)
will allow us to achieve a unified, cohesive, neuroscience-based model of
learning that explains individual differences. Using information gleaned from a
series of studies in both human and animal models, this project seeks to develop
a non-invasive device that integrates attention (pupil dilation) and its
modulation (vagal nerve stimulation) toward the goal of problem solving, in this
case second-language learning. Success in this endeavor will enable the
development of novel neurotechnologies and training regimens that will make
challenging tasks like second language acquisition accessible to wide array of
underserved and overlooked communities in education.

The main goal of this study is to take an integrative approach to understanding
an underappreciated set of critical factors that are hypothesized to underly
individual variability in perceptual learning: task-related dynamic neural
states. Subcortical arousal systems (e.g., noradrenergic, cholinergic, and
dopaminergic) have a substantial impact on cortical circuit function during
distinct phases of a learning task, including pre-stimulus periods, stimulus
encoding, and feedback monitoring. By studying each of these task phases at
multiple scales, from specific neuromodulators and single neurons in mice, to
population neurophysiology and dynamic behavior in mice and humans, it will be
possible to explain substantially more variability in learning than is currently
possible. Furthermore, researchers will leverage a neuromodulation approach,
vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), to regulate the activity of these neuromodulatory
systems and help improve learning performance in a targeted and highly dynamic
way. Using a multi-modal, cross-species (humans and rodents) approach, the
researchers propose a conceptual framework where rapidly changing and high
dimensional neural states have dynamics that cut across traditional boundaries
of human trait categories, such as memory capacity and perceptual experience,
and neuromodulatory system functions, such as arousal, attention, and reward
signaling. This multi-scale approach is all tied together with concurrent
measurement of pupil-linked arousal, population neural dynamics, and trial-by-
trial behavioral performance. This work will have transformative implications
for understanding why individuals struggle to learn important skills in
adulthood, and will advance the development of simple, cheap, and safe tools for
enhancing performance and leveling the playing field across diverse communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.