* 2319780
* Collaborative Research: CCSS: Hierarchical Federated Learning over Highly-Dense and Overlapping NextG Wireless Deployments: Orchestrating Resources for Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jie Xu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2026
* USD 225,000.00

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed framework proposed for training machine
learning (ML) models on mobile devices in Next Generation (NextG) wireless
communication systems. Hierarchical federated learning (HFL) is an architecture
that shows promise in enabling FL over wireless networks. However, existing
research on HFL falls short in effectively addressing the challenges posed by
the NextG communication environment, such as high user and edge server density,
diverse edge server deployments, and overlapping wireless coverage. To tackle
these challenges, this project aims to investigate resource allocation problems
in HFL, focusing on selecting mobile clients to participate in HFL, associating
them with edge servers, and allocating sufficient bandwidth under these
demanding conditions. The successful completion of the proposed framework has
the potential in transforming the deployment and operation of NextG systems and
will provide support for a wide range of ML-powered applications and services.

The primary objective in designing the performance of HFL over wireless networks
is to optimize the overall training time required for convergence. This can be
achieved by minimizing the time duration of each HFL round through efficient
allocation of wireless bandwidth to each client (the bandwidth allocation
problem). However, due to high client density, limited wireless spectrum, and
mobility, not all clients may be able to participate in every round. This leads
to the need to determine which clients should participate in each round (the
client selection problem) and which clients should be associated with which edge
server given the overlapping wireless coverage and presence of multiple
providers (the client association problem). To address these challenges, the
project focuses on three key research areas: (i) designing short-term bandwidth
allocation for HFL under highly dense and heterogeneous deployments, (ii)
developing a long-term optimization framework to solve user selection and
association for HFL, and (iii) improving HFL under the emerging scenario in
which a mobile client can be associated with multiple edge servers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.