* 2319715
* Bioethical Frameworks Informing Medical Decision-Making around Palliative Care
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Elyse Singer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 238,583.00

Population aging and the rise of chronic illness means that more and more people
suffer a slow decline at the end of life marked by physical and psychic pain.
What the terminally ill as well as their biomedical and family caregivers want
at the end of life remains poorly understood. This research investigates how the
terminally ill, palliative care clinicians, and others define a dignified death.
At a moment of heightened attention to death with dignity, this research has
direct implications for improving end-of-life care. The project also provides
training for a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student from
underrepresented groups. Results will be disseminated broadly to academic and
non-academic audiences, including healthcare workers and other stakeholders.
This project is jointly funded by Cultural Anthropology and Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This project explores how families and medical providers respond to end-of-life
laws and practices meant to accommodate terminally ill patients. The project
uses ethnography, interviews in health facilities, and case studies of dying
patients to investigate local definitions of dignified death; to examine what
challenges palliative care providers face in guaranteeing their patients a
dignified death; and to track ongoing social and legislative activity regarding
expanded end-of-life options. This research helps to develop and test theories
that explain the cultural and social factors that shape experience and meaning
at the end of life among the dying and those responsible for their care. Work on
care in medical anthropology and other social sciences has been oriented mostly
on efforts to foster, extend, and/or improve the quality of life. This study
focuses on care delivery in the context of end-of-life decision-making. The
results advance basic scientific theory in the areas of care, bioethics, and
social gerontology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.