* 2319847
* Collaborative Research: Subduction Megathrust Rheology: The Combined Roles of On- and Off-Fault Processes in Controlling Fault Slip Behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Heather Savage, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2026
* USD 270,793.00

Over the past two decades, the discovery of a broad spectrum of fault slip
speeds in subduction zones â€“ from slow tectonic rate creep to episodic tremor
and slip to fast earthquakes - has ignited a burgeoning new research direction
focused on understanding the physical mechanisms that cause faults to slip fast
or slow, and how slower slip might potentially interact with large destructive
earthquakes and tsunamis. Advancing our knowledge of subduction fault and
earthquake mechanics requires a quantitative and holistic investigation of the
deformation behavior of the plate boundary system. The deformation of both
material within the fault and the surrounding wall rocks has been shown to be a
function of stress, temperature, strain rate, and rock type. At the same time,
heterogeneity in the fault zone, due to variations in rock type and conditions
along the fault, has emerged as a leading hypothesis to explain the occurrence
of slow earthquakes and slow slip events. Therefore, quantifying the deformation
behavior of subduction zone rocks has been a growing endeavor for
experimentalists.

Through experiments and numerical models, this research will specifically
address two questions. First, how does rheology along the megathrust - and its
heterogeneity - affect fault slip behavior? Second, how does inelastic
deformation on- and off-fault affect strain energy accumulation and the
occurrence and distribution of locking and slip? New experiments will be
conducted on subduction zone rocks that are deformed under pressures and
temperatures present at the depths where earthquakes begin. The experimental
data will inform numerical models that can bridge scales to include
heterogeneity along the fault. The net result of this work will be new
quantitative insights into the roles of spatial heterogeneity and rheology in
subduction systems over a range of timescales. The project will support training
of early career scientists including undergraduate and graduate students,
postdocs, and two early career PIs. In addition, the project will develop a
modeling short course for subduction zone rheology using newly developed codes.
The lessons from the short course will be made publicly available as a set of
short videos that include instructions for using the codes as a pathway to
maximize their accessibility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.