* 2319123
* Collaborative Research: URoL:ASC: Determining the relationship between genes and ecosystem processes to improve biogeochemical models for nutrient management
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Anand Gnanadesikan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2026
* USD 312,597.00

Clean water is essential to life and critical for maintaining healthy
ecosystems. Whether in the Chesapeake Bay or engineered systems like wastewater
treatment plants, managing clean water requires modelling how these ecosystems
respond to environmental changes due to remediation or climate change. Microbial
processes are crucial to such ecosystem responses, but models typically do not
incorporate any direct measurements of the microbes in the ecosystem (its
microbiome), either during model development or validation. This project takes
advantage of a fundamental rule of life, that cellular processes are encoded by
the genes in living things, to provide that direct measurement of microbes in an
ecosystem. The team will focus on the process of denitrification, which removes
excess nitrogen pollution and is critical in both wastewater treatment plants
and Chesapeake Bay. They will use controlled, laboratory experiments to
investigate factors influencing the relationship between the abundance of
particular genes involved in denitrification, as measured across all the
microbes in an ecosystem, and denitrification rates. The project will determine
how gene abundance data can improve the predictive value of different types of
models that encode denitrification in different ways and that are used in
managing Chesapeake Bay and wastewater treatment plants. By listening to the
concerns and input of water management and community partners throughout the
project, the team will focus on efforts to benefit those most impacted by
wastewater and Chesapeake Bay water quality, ultimately improving model
predictions that guide management decisions.

This work uses gene abundance, measured by quantitative PCR, as a non-
conservative tracer of microbial denitrification, serving as a proxy for
“functional group cell density”, to estimate cell-density dependent reaction
rates in nutrient models of wastewater, receiving waterbodies, and downstream
ecosystems. Models of ecosystems, like the Chesapeake Bay, typically do not
encode cell-density dependent reactions but may be more accurate if reaction
rates are density dependent and functional group abundance is tracked and
calibrated using gene abundance. Controlled bioreactor experiments will test the
relationship between gene abundance and denitrification rates, and whether that
relationship changes in response to disturbance frequency. The project will
systematically compare how encoding denitrification as either cell-density
dependent or independent reactions influences model results in the Chesapeake
Bay. We will also test whether gene abundance, can be used as a non-conservative
tracer to calibrate other cell-density dependent reactions in both the Bay and
wastewater treatment models. We will work with management partners to understand
the budgetary and technical limitations of incorporating gene abundance
measurements into their typical surveillance and modeling workflows, and design
solutions to advance its use as a measure of denitrification to improve model
predictions. This work will serve as an example of how gene abundance can be
used as an additional input into models encoding microbial processes across a
range of managed ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.