* 2319675
* Conference: 2023 AEESP Research and Education Conference in Boston, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Amy Mueller, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,689.00

This NSF award supports the 2023 Association of Environmental Engineering and
Science Professors (AEESP) Research and Education Conference. This in-person
conference will be held on June 20-23, 2023, in Boston (MA). The theme of the
2023 AEESP conference is “Responding Together to Global Challenges”. The
conference will provide a variety of venues for participants including
environmental engineers, scientists, health experts, educators, and other
stakeholders to exchange ideas and build new partnerships for addressing
societally relevant environmental challenges including (1) current and emerging
environmental quality and human health threats, (2) aging infrastructure in the
face of growing populations, (3) marginalization of communities, (4) a changing
climate, and (5) evolving educational demands to prepare future engineers and
scientists. The AEESP 2023 conference will also feature a variety of workshops
and training events for participants at all career stages, including (1) a
career workshop for training scientists, (2) an NSF CAREER proposal writing
workshop for junior faculty, (3) a leadership workshop for mid-level faculty,
and (4) several workshops targeting innovation in education to better serve a
diverse student body and evolving societal needs. NSF funding will enable the
2023 AEESP conference organizers to provide travel grants to students and early
career faculty/scientists from underrepresented/underserved groups and others
for whom attendance at the conference may not be otherwise be possible.

The 2023 AEESP Research and Education Conference will be hosted by a group of
academic institutions including Northeastern University (Lead Institution),
University of Massachusetts – Amherst, University of Rhode Island, University of
Vermont, University of Maine, University of Connecticut, Tufts University, and
MIT. The bi-annual AEESP Conference is the preeminent event for research and
teaching in the collaborative space of environmental science, engineering, and
health. The overarching goals of the conference are to: 1) provide a venue and
platform for the Environmental Engineering and Science (EES) community to
discuss and share recent research results and teaching innovation/needs through
interactive and collaborative workshops, and 2) promote the communication and
furthering of scientific and engineering innovation across a wide range of
environmental topics, including legacy and emerging contaminants, infrastructure
managing the interaction of society with the planet, approaches to understanding
and improving the interactions of industrial processes and human health, etc.
The expected outcomes of the conference include: 1) visioning documents that
will contribute to a road-mapping of the future of the discipline, both on
research and education, defining how the environmental engineering, science, and
health community can have the most impact in responding to emerging and
sustained global challenges that are at the intersection of technology, science,
and society; 2) recommendations for evolutions in teaching materials, approaches
and pedagogy, and 3) publications of the workshop outcomes/recommendations in
the AEESP newsletter and website as well as in selected open-source journals.
NSF funding will enable the 2023 AEESP conference to bring a diverse set of
participants and voices into the conversation as the EES community discusses
critical and societally relevant environmental challenges.

This award is jointly funded by the NSF/ENG/CBET Environmental Engineering,
Environmental Sustainability, and Nanoscale Interactions programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.