* 2319318
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Designing Safe and Robust Human-machine Interactions with Fuzzy Mental Models
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Matthew Bolton, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2027
* USD 375,000.00

Human error is a major factor in failures across safety-critical domains. One
common cause of human error is mode confusion. Mode confusion arises from a
misalignment between a human operator's mental model of the system and the
actual system design. Mode confusion can result in automation surprise, which
can disorient the operator, increase the likelihood of operator mistakes, and
erode the operator's trust in the system. This project aims to develop a new
method for designing human-machine interfaces (HMIs) that minimizes this type of
error. In particular, the project will develop a novel, formal foundation of
mental modeling, along with techniques for rigorously evaluating the safety of
HMIs and eliminating possible errors. The knowledge and tools produced in this
research will be made available to researchers and designers and have potential
applications to a wide range of safety-critical systems. This knowledge, in
turn, will help avoid system disasters, prevent injuries, save lives, and
protect critical resources across society.

The central idea in this project is fuzzy mental models. These will explicitly
model the vagueness inherent to how human operators understand system states and
functions. This new type of mental model will be capable of capturing a wider
range of human-machine interaction problems than are possible with existing
mental model concepts. In support of this new mental modeling approach, this
project will develop methods for (1) systematically eliciting fuzzy mental
models from humans, (2) automatically analyzing an HMI to identify potential
misalignments between a mental model and the system, and (3) generating
suggestions for repairing misalignment flaws in HMIs and reducing the likelihood
of human errors. The efficacy of these methods will be demonstrated on HMIs
across a number of domains, such as automobiles, medical devices, web security,
and aeronautical systems. The work will lead to improved methods for evaluating
the usability of interfaces, widen the application of formal methods to new
contexts, and provide resources for researchers, designers, and engineers to
improve the reliability of cyber-human systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.