* 2319988
* CICI:TCR: Enhancing Security and Privacy of Community Cyberinfrastructures for Collaborative Research
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Neal Magee, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) systems, including high-performance computing and data
centers, play a critical role in supporting research in academic institutions.
As scientific endeavors become more complex and collaborative, it is necessary
to enhance CIâ€™s security and privacy aspects to address evolving threats. This
project leverages an existing CI system as a development platform and integrate
novel cybersecurity research to create a more secure and resilient CI
environment. Specifically, the project focuses on developing advanced techniques
for secure data management and computation within CI systems. It has three
thrusts. In thrust 1: Protect Data in Centralized Computing, cutting-edge
techniques are employed to safeguard the security and privacy of data in
centralized computing environments. In thrust 2: Protect Data in Distributed
Computing, state-of-the-art techniques are deployed to protect the security and
privacy of data in collaborative computing scenarios. In thrust 3: Protect Data
Computation, innovative statistical and machine learning-based schemes are
developed to detect and mitigate memory denial-of-service attacks, ensuring the
security of computation. By implementing state-of-the-art security protocols and
privacy-enhancing technologies, the project aims to enhance the resilience of CI
systems against evolving cyber threats.

This project encompasses technology transitions in cybersecurity research,
empowering CIs and enabling highly secure and trustworthy applications in
scientific and engineering domains. It advances the state-of-the-art in CI
security, paving the way for cutting-edge discoveries and innovations while
ensuring the security of scientific data and computation. Additionally, it
facilitates further research, experimentation, and advancements in the field of
cybersecurity, and contributes to enhancing the security and privacy protection
capabilities of the national CI ecosystem. This project provides comprehensive
training opportunities for students, collaborative research prospects for
graduate and undergraduate participants, faculty engagement, and involvement of
K-12 students. Special attention are given to recruiting students from
underrepresented groups to foster inclusivity and diversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.