* 2319430
* URoL:ASC: Co-producing knowledge, biotechnologies, and practices to enhance biological nitrogen fixation for sustainable agriculture
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Shuichi Takayama, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,668,807.00

This project will utilize principles of material science and bioengineering to
create biopebbles, particles made of natural polymers that can enhance nitrogen
fixation by soil bacteria they will contain, thereby reducing dependency on
synthetic fertilizers and their harmful social and environmental effects. Given
the disproportionate access to resources to achieve agricultural sustainability
among farmers in the developing world and to ensure that the technology
developed in this project meets the needs of these populations, the team will
collaborate with international science-policy interface organizations, regional
agricultural development agencies, agricultural scientists, and small-scale
farmers and indigenous communities in Chile to co-design every stage of the
research, from concept to field tests and evaluation. The project will provide
interdisciplinary training and intercultural competencies to participating
American students and help build a more globally oriented workforce.

Nitrogen fixed by soil bacteria is a sustainable biofertilizer. However, the
efficiency of this process is low, forcing farmers to rely instead on synthetic
fertilizers that cause environmental pollution. This project will utilize
principles of liquid-liquid phase separation and mathematical/kinetic modeling
to create rehydratable microcosms that can be mixed into soil and provide
optimum conditions for biological nitrogen fixation. Experiments in field
conditions will be conducted to ascertain the extent to which biopebbles can
support the growth of crops in the absence of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer. A
final assessment of the co-production process will be performed with a
combination of in-depth interviews and focus groups, integrating participatory
network mapping techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.