* 2319486
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1B: Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing for Mobile Internet Measurement and Traffic Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yi Qian, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2026
* USD 170,000.00

Mobile Internet measurement is critical to network design, resource allocation,
and troubleshooting network issues. However, sharing of mobile Internet
measurement data can potentially compromise user privacy. Given the wide
introduction of artificial intelligence to mobile Internet measurement and
traffic analytics, there is an urgent need for data sharing solutions that
provide explainability in terms of the trade-offs among data quality, utility
and quantity. To close the gap, the objective of this project is to develop new
methods to augment data with explainable data quality and utility, to access and
share collected data in a privacy-preserving manner, and to collaboratively
analyze Internet data with intelligence and autonomy.

This collaborative project brings together investigators from University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Utah State University, and University of Wisconsin-Madison. It
aims to lay a solid foundation for mobile Internet measurement with privacy
preservation, collaborative and distributed intelligence, and autonomy.
Methodologies and methods will be developed for quality-explainable data
synthesis and augmentation; privacy-preserving data sharing; and collaborative
and privacy-preserving analysis of Internet measurement data. Moreover, a mobile
Internet traffic generator will be developed for evaluating the proposed
methods. This project can significantly advance the prior research in Internet
traffic analytics, quality-explainable and privacy-preserving data processing,
mobile Internet traffic analytics, distributed artificial intelligence and
machine learning algorithms, optimizations, modeling, simulations, and testbed
experiments.

The research efforts associated with this project will greatly advance the
understandings of the critical issues in the next-generation mobile Internet
measurement with distributed and collaborative intelligence to provide privacy-
preserving data sharing and Internet traffic analytics. The outcomes of the
project can potently foster the transition of our society into data sharing with
privacy and intelligent era. Research and education will be integrated in this
project by introducing emerging mobile Internet measurement and privacy-
preserving data processing with advanced topics such as 6G wireless systems,
data augmentation, artificial intelligence and machine learning models into the
current curricula in the three collaborative institutions.

The project website is hosted at: cns.unl.edu/imr-ppds. The collected data,
simulation codes, and publication list will be published on the project website.
Copies of technical reports and accepted manuscripts will also be published on
the project website. The website will be maintained during the project years,
and remain accessible for least 2 years after the completion of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.