* 2319796
* EDGE CMT: Defining the cost of mutation in nuclear encoded tRNAs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Annalise Paaby, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 679,278.00

All living systems harbor costly mutations in their genomes. Individual high-
impact mutations that cause genetic disease are relatively easy to identify, but
mutations that compromise fitness in aggregate are harder to characterize. One
class of genes has recently come under attention for its likely influence on
health via mutational load: transfer RNAs. Transfer RNA genes are are essential
to all organisms and are among the most ancient genes in the tree of life. Most
eukaryotic genomes encode hundreds of transfer RNA genes, which are expressed at
high levels in cells to “transfer” amino acids in the ribosome during protein
synthesis. This critical and ubiquitous process is also mutagenic; transfer RNA
genes degrade rapidly, likely incurring fitness costs to the organism and the
species at large. The rapid evolution of transfer RNA genes offers an
opportunity to experimentally compare, using advanced genome sequencing
technologies, genomes with distinct complements of transfer RNA gene sets. This
project will estimate the cost of mutation in the model organism C. elegans, a
microscopic worm, to draw conclusions about the cost of mutation in living
systems generally. As genomic science increasingly becomes part of society, this
project will foster biotechnical expertise in the next generation of
professionals via two outreach activities: a communicating science course for
biology graduate students, and an information exchange between biotechnology law
students at Georgia State College of Law and genomics trainees at Georgia
Institute of Technology. Both activities emphasize the importance of
interpreting the advances of technical scholarship within a wider intellectual,
societal, and collaborative context.

Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are essential genes that are highly conserved across the
tree of life and found in the genome of every living organism. Yet, tRNAs
experience exceptionally high mutation rates and demonstrate rapid and dynamic
evolution over short timescales, likely reflecting tension between the
evolutionary forces of mutation and selection. Consequently, mutational load at
nuclear encoded tRNAs is likely a universal feature of eukaryotic genomes.
Recent work has uncovered intraspecific gains, losses and alterations to nuclear
encoded tRNAs within the nematode worm C. elegans, as well as evidence of
exposure to extremely high rates of transcription-associated mutagenesis. This
project proposes to leverage the genetic tractability of this model system to
test the consequences of the variation in an experimental evolution setting in
the lab. By testing the effects of mutational variation in nuclear encoded tRNAs
in C. elegans, this work aims to provide insight into the cost of tRNA mutation
in eukaryotic genomes generally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.