* 2319820
* RaMP:  Making meaningful connections: Fostering the Integration of Biodiversity Patterns with Genetic Evolutionary Mechanisms (BioGEM)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Kathy Denning, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,986,439.00

Given the severity and complexity that a rapidly changing climate imposes on all
life on Earth, a multi-faceted approach to addressing the biodiversity crisis is
needed. This project brings together a group of mentors with diverse expertise,
ranging from genomics to paleontology, in order to train postbaccalaureate
scholars in integrative and interdisciplinary organismal biology research.
Scholars and their mentors will engage in research that spans time scales,
biological hierarchies, and organisms across the tree of life, to address
specific questions regarding past, present, and future organismal responses to a
changing environment. Three cohorts of ten postbaccalaureate scholars each will
be recruited to broaden participation in the sciences. Network partners include
a local tribal college, regional primarily undergraduate institutions, a
biomedical research institute, and a non-profit organization that interfaces
with industry. In bringing together a diverse group of mentors, network
partners, and postbaccalaureate scholars to engage in interdisciplinary
research, this project will provide extensive training that diversifies the
workforce in integrative organismal biology, while leading to important
discoveries that help better understand and predict biological responses to a
changing climate.

This program centers on integrating Biodiversity science and Genetic
Evolutionary Mechanisms (BioGEM) to investigate biological responses to climate
change. BioGEM postbaccalaureate scholars will be primarily based at the
University of Kansas (KU) and utilize KU’s world-class facilities and museum
collections to conduct research that incorporates the network’s expertise in
biodiversity science (phylogenetics, paleontology, morphometrics, biogeography,
and community ecology) and genetic evolutionary mechanisms (comparative and
functional genomics, developmental biology, and quantitative genetics).
Specifically, studying speciation/extinction/persistence, paleobiogeography, and
morphological disparity and innovation will allow us to address how organisms,
species, and clades were shaped by their past environment; studying population
dynamics, ecological interactions, and biogeographic patterns will allow us to
address how organisms, populations, and species respond to their present biotic
and abiotic environment; and studying plasticity, genomic responses to
adaptation, and mechanisms of genetic diversity will allow us to address how
genetic mechanisms equip organisms to respond to future environmental change. A
key component of the BioGEM program experience is a weekly Professional &
Scholarly Advancement series, involving the mentors and network partners, that
will include both professional development workshops and hands-on mentor-led
training modules covering a wide range of research methods. The BioGEM program
is geared towards recent graduates that have had limited or no prior research
experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.