* 2319028
* Direct measurement of in situ growth and growth limitation of bacterioplankton species
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* scott manalis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ricardo Letelier
* 08/31/2026
* USD 690,714.00

Marine microbes, including bacteria and archaea, account for up to 70% of
biomass in the ocean. How this biomass turns over has large implications for the
global cycling of carbon and many other elements. Recent efforts have shown that
a microbial community at a certain location and time is composed of
metabolically diverse, co-existing species and that the most abundant microbes
do not necessarily display the highest metabolic activity. However, we still
lack an understanding of fundamental ecological parameters including how
different bacteria and archaea contribute to global element cycles, how their
mass and growth rates are distributed across the diverse species and how these
parameters change under varying conditions. This project uses a novel technology
that enables precise measurement of single cell mass and growth rate in natural
samples. The goal is to characterize how mass and growth of diverse species
respond to environmental changes in the ocean and determine how this response is
translated into cycling of global carbon and other elements. The results fill a
knowledge gap on how environmental changes govern microbial populations and the
consequential broader processes related to global climate and human interactions
with the ocean. In addition to advancing the scientific understanding, this work
contributes to the academic training of students and postdoctoral scholars in a
highly interdisciplinary manner and will also produce podcasts describing the
work and its progress to a broader audience.

Central to this project is a technology called Suspended Microchannel Resonator,
a well-proven microfluidics-based mass-sensor that precisely measures mass and
growth rate of individual cells. Importantly, growth is directly measured as the
addition of biomass and thus reflects the instantaneous growth of a microbe at
the time the seawater sample was collected. This technology is being applied to
characterize mass and growth of diverse species in a series of natural samples
from coastal environments and complemented with gene sequencing and elemental
analysis to estimate the contributions to element cycles. The project addresses
the following questions: (i) How fast do different bacterial species grow in
their native seawater over different timescales and how is growth related to
relative abundance from sequencing data? (ii) What is the contribution of
individual species to carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous turnover? (iii) What
nutrients limit bacterial growth under given conditions? (iv) Can in situ growth
rates of populations be inferred from their single cell mass distributions?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.