* 2319553
* Collaborative Research: California-Hawaii Astrophysics Mentoring Partnership (CHAMP)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bahram Mobasher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2026
* USD 424,933.00

The California-Hawaii Astrophysics Mentoring Partnership (CHAMP) is a program
between the University of California Riverside (UCR), a minority serving
institution, and the University of Hawaii (UH), Institute for Astronomy (IfA).
CHAMP is designed to build on years of successful partnership between these two
institutions to share their existing facilities and infrastructures, with the
goal of building a partnership to address the 2022 Decadal Survey
recommendations for Astronomy & Astrophysics. The UH-IfA has extensive access to
ground-based telescopes (~15% of the observing time on all large telescopes on
Mauna Kea - Keck, Gemini, Subaru, CFHT, UKIRT), with experience in observing
techniques, data processing and reduction. UCR has significant expertise in data
science, machine learning, data visualization, data cataloging, STEM education,
and outreach. CHAMP will use this combined expertise to develop a research,
education, and outreach program targeting both undergraduate and graduate
students in the two partner institutions. CHAMP will particularly focus on the
under-represented minority groups in astronomy, including Native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders, Hispanics and women. CHAMP will also organize summer camps in
astronomy for high school students, introducing them to coding with Python and
data science techniques. Using the telescopes at UCR observatory in Joshua Tree
National Park and at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, CHAMP will organize hands-on and remote
stargazing nights for the public. The focus of the broader impact will be Native
Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders at IfA and the Latino and Hispanic community at
UCR. UH-IfA and UCR have played a major role in creating two of the largest and
deepest ground-based multi-wavelength galaxy surveys - COSMOS2020 and Hawaii-
Two0 (H20). CHAMP will use these surveys to address major scientific questions
in Galaxy Evolution and Cosmology and to develop research and training programs
for undergraduate and graduate students who will visit the partner institutions
to receive training and perform research under a faculty member. The program
will last for 10 weeks each year for both undergraduate and graduate students.
UCR students will gain hands-on observing experience and UH-IfA students will
learn about data science and machine learning techniques and their application
to astronomy. CHAMP will also develop two new courses to be delivered at both
institutions: “Tools in Modern Astronomy” to teach basic skills in measurement
of photometric redshifts, galaxy mass, extinction, star-formation rates; use of
stellar population synthesis algorithms, and “Machine Learning for Astronomers”
by adapting and building on an existing undergraduate course at UCR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.