* 2319917
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Laser System for High Precision Spectroscopy and Trapping Neutral Holmium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* William Raven, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 330,009.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a laser system to perform fundamental
atomic physics research at Smith College. The research group is studying the
complex interactions and inner workings of the atom. The best theoretical model
of atomic systems is known as the Standard Model of Particle Physics. It is a
very successful model, but we know it is not complete. For example, the Model
does not include gravity or dark matter. Dark matter is a substance which
astronomical observations indicate makes up 25% of the universe, but we know
very little about. Two methods of improving our understanding of atomic systems
are to work within the framework of the Model (known as testing the Model) or to
work outside that framework (known as physics beyond the Standard Model). This
laser system will enable this research group to use both methods in two
independent projects. The first, which works within the Model, will perform
experimental measurements on the light atoms beryllium, boron, nitrogen, and
oxygen. Comparing these results to ongoing theoretical work from other groups
will both test the validity of these complicated theoretical methods and,
combined with the theoretical results, serve as a test of the Model. The second
project, which works outside the Model, is to look for dark matter interaction
with an isotope of holmium known as 166m-holmium. It is theorized that dark
matter might cause an interaction with the nucleus that, if that interaction
occurs, can be detected. The goal is to build a sensitive apparatus that will
either detect this interaction or conclude this idea is not valid. In addition
to this scientific impact, the Raven lab will continue to include a large number
of undergraduate researchers through traditional lab projects and senior theses
as well as our new course-based research experience (CURE). The goal of the CURE
is to 1) provide a robust research experience for twelve undergraduate students
each year and 2) train the next generation of scientists to perform high
precision spectroscopy.

The Raven lab will use this new laser system to measure the absolute transition
frequencies as well as hyperfine coupling constants, when applicable, of a
variety of states in the light atoms to provide invaluable feedback to theorists
who are in the pursuit of developing high precision multi-electron models.
Combined with theoretical predictions, the results will serve to test the
accuracy of quantum electrodynamics. Planned spectroscopic measurements will be
performed on a number of triplet states in neutral beryllium-9, two transitions
in the stable isotopes of boron, and a variety of states in nitrogen and oxygen.
In addition, the Raven lab will develop an atom trap trace analysis (ATTA)
apparatus for holmium atoms. 166-Ho is short lived while the metastable 166m-Ho
state is long lived. Starting with a sample of only 166m-Ho atoms, ATTA will
look for induced dark matter decay of 166m-Ho to the nuclear ground state. This
new ATTA could also assist in the Electron Capture 163-Ho (ECHo) experiment,
where 166m-Ho is a contaminant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.