* 2319332
* Collaborative Research: EDGE-FGT: Furthering Progress on a Genetic System for the Oceans' Most Abundant Phototrophs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 417,009.00

The picocyanobacterium Prochlorococcus is the smallest, most numerically
abundant photosynthesizing organism in the global ocean ecosystem, contributing
to almost 10% of global carbon fixation – roughly as much as global croplands.
Its abundance is attributed to its enormous genetic diversity; while each cell
contains around 2,000 genes, the Prochlorococcus collective has over 80,000
unique genes, allowing these cells to inhabit a wide range of marine
environments. Most of these genes are of unknown function, however; thus,
researchers are unable to decipher their unique contribution to the ecology of
different “ecotypes” along environmental gradients. The bottleneck has been the
lack of ability to manipulate the genes in order to determine their function.
The investigators will build upon their previous work to optimize a set of
methods for the genetic manipulation of Prochlorococcus. Developing these
technologies is a critical first step in developing Prochlorococcus as a
potential chassis for artificial photosynthesis. Science outreach events at the
Boston Public Library focused on cyanobacteria genetics will be designed and
implemented, as well as the development of a free, publicly available
bioinformatics visualization module to teach students about bacterial horizontal
gene transfer events.

Recent EDGE funding has allowed the Chisholm and Burton Labs to begin developing
a genetic toolkit for Prochlorococcus and its close relative, marine
Synechococcus. Because it is unclear which sites in the Prochlorococcus genome
will be essential or how efficiently constructs will be integrated into the
genome, a two-pronged approach will be utilized in the development of a genetic
system in Prochlorococcus. The first aim will involve development of a method
for the targeted knockout of genes in the Prochlorococcus chromosome, by either
further optimization of the CRISPR-Cpf1 plasmid tool for Prochlorococcus or by
induction of the natural-, chemical-, or electro-competent uptake of a linear
knockout cassette. The second aim will involve generation of a transposon
library in Prochlorococcus, through the use of either natural competence for the
uptake an in vitro transposon library, or through generation of an in vivo
transposon library by electroporating cells with a pre-assembled custom
transposon-Tn5 transposase complex. Collectively, this work will further develop
Prochlorococcus as a model system for cross-scales systems biology and allow
researchers to characterize how these genes of unknown function contribute to
the global success of Prochlorococcus in Earth’s oceans. Results from these
studies will be presented at scientific meetings and published in peer-reviewed
scientific journals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.