* 2319011
* ATD: Anomaly detection and functional data analysis  with applications to threat detection for multimodal satellite data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Kon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,999.00

The combination of massive data analysis and advancements in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) is causing major changes in society. One area where this is
crucial is the integration of remote sensing and Geographic Information System
(GIS), like satellite data, which is important for understanding the impact of
human activities on the environment and climate. Deforestation is a key factor
in climate change, causing negative effects on ecosystems, biodiversity, and
human populations. Fortunately, there are now extensive satellite datasets that
can help detect deforestation, especially in critical forests like the Amazon.
However, tracking deforestation, degradation, and forest regrowth is challenging
due to factors like clouds and shadows. To address these challenges, the
investigators will develop an innovative approach based on a new mathematical
framework. This research is relevant to various fields such as human migration,
climate change, transportation logistics, and epidemic disease diffusion. The
findings will be valuable for intelligence gathering and will contribute to
understanding security conditions, informing assessments and decisions,
including those with military and political implications. Moreover, the
investigators are committed to training and nurturing students' expertise in
these areas, providing them with valuable learning opportunities.

The investigators will develop an innovative and distinct approach to change-
point and anomaly detection within the framework of mathematical functional
analysis, utilizing representations like the Karhunen-Loeve (KL) expansion. This
approach deviates from previous methods in several significant ways. KL
expansions are ideal for representing random processes, providing optimal
representations. They exhibit a remarkable level of generality, enabling
accurate representation of various processes and fields over complex geometrical
domains. Detection is achieved by constructing and matching nested eigenspaces
tailored to truncated KL expansions. Unlike current statistical approaches, the
proposed approach is rooted in functional analysis and offers several advantages
for detecting hidden phenomena in complex domains: 1) Principled detection of
anomalous global and local signals. 2) Development of reliable hypothesis tests
using robust concentration inequalities without making assumptions about data
distributions (essential) e.g. robust statistical significance for detection. 3)
Precise anomaly quantification. 4) Applicability to diverse geometries,
including geo-spatial, spatio-temporal, surfaces, networks, etc. The
construction of nested subspaces involves efficient algorithms derived from
computational applied mathematics and high-performance computing. 5) Integration
of multilevel filters capable of processing massive volumes of data with near-
optimal performance. Overall, this approach, rooted in functional analysis,
presents a new perspective on change and anomaly detection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.