* 2319905
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a fluorescence activated cell sorter to advance multidisciplinary biological research and training at the University of Memphis
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Judith Cole, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 429,371.00

An award is made to the University of Memphis to support the acquisition of a BD
FACSMelody Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorter (FACS) for a shared, multiuser
facility. The FACS will enhance a broad range of multidisciplinary and
collaborative research among the University of Memphis and Memphis area research
institutions and enrich the training of the next generation of biologists. This
instrument will enable researchers to separate cell populations based on
specific cell surface markers or cell size and evaluate them for specific
cellular functions. The FACS will allow current researchers to address exciting
new basic science and help to attract future researchers thus improving the
capacity to perform cutting-edge research at the University of Memphis. The
acquisition and use of this instrument will strengthen connections with the
Memphis Zoo and provide educational opportunities to two Primarily Undergraduate
Institutions and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in the
Memphis area. The FACS will improve research infrastructure, enhance faculty
research, and expand the training of undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers in the Department of Biological Sciences, the College
of Health Sciences, other STEM programs at the university, and the Memphis
scientific community. The University of Memphis along with collaborating
institutions serves a diverse population of trainees and the acquisition of the
FACS will ensure students and postdoctoral researchers from different
backgrounds will have the opportunity to learn to use the FACS instrument. The
project will also enhance networking and collaborative opportunities through an
annual mini-symposium and outreach activities with local institutions, including
HBCUs and the Memphis Zoo.

The BD FACSMelody Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorter (FACS) rapidly separates
cells into groups based on size and cell-surface markers that give the cell a
unique set of characteristics (e.g., the insulin receptor and insulin-dependent
glucose transport). This allows researchers to address a wide range of
multidisciplinary biological questions including the regulation of gene
expression, the evolution of adaptive changes to the environment, and how
information is transferred from the outside to the inside of the cell. Projects
will focus on 1) the genetic basis for morphological traits in the sunflower
family; 2) changes in immune cell populations associated with obesity, aging,
and disease; 3) how receptor trafficking regulates cellular responses; 4) the
single cell genomic analysis of stem cells; 5) the impact of environmental
toxins on skin function; 6) the analysis of gene expression in the sensory
neurons of ant antennae; and 7) endangered species conservation by enhancing
techniques for assisted reproduction. The work that results from this project
will be shared with the scientific community through publications within peer-
reviewed articles, presentations at scientific meetings, and sharing to social
media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.