* 2319391
* URoL:ASC:Synthetic Protocell Communities to Address Critical Sensing Challenges
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Shuichi Takayama, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,225,964.00

This project will create a tool that can be used by untrained users and without
sophisticated equipment to allow diagnosis of medical conditions characterized
by the combination of multiple indicator molecules. While some medical
conditions can be diagnosed by the level of just a single molecule, most require
the measurement of multiple molecules’ levels to enable accurate diagnosis. To
address this challenge in a user-friendly manner, this project entails creating
a tool that harnesses biology to sense target molecules, combine the information
gained from those measurements, and report out patient status to the user. The
project uses technology that allows genes to be turned on and off in small
droplets that mimic simplified versions of cells. Individual droplets sense an
individual molecule and then communicate with another droplet that produces a
combined readout. By having each droplet detect a single molecule and exploit a
reusable form of communication with other droplets, it makes the tool modular
for creation of diagnostics for essentially any set of target molecules. The
droplet technology and the combination of proposed approaches for communication
and combination of signals are unique and novel. If successfully completed, this
project would impact society broadly and help address health and other
inequities by enabling assessment and monitoring of nutrition status in
developing countries and around the world, helping individuals and improving
public health policy.

As a proof of principle testbed, the project focuses on the development of a
comprehensive diagnostic for zinc deficiency, a condition that is responsible
for the deaths of tens of thousands of children under the age of 5 every year.
The droplet technology uses aqueous two-phase systems combined with cell-free
transcription and translation to create “protocells” that enable the
implementation of biological circuits for sensing and signal integration and
thus the creation of complex biosensors. Multiple protocells each produce a
distinct messenger molecule drawn from nature to enable communication with a
separate “receiver” protocell that integrates the signal via a three-hybrid
system. By using a common communication and integration framework, individual
sensor protocells can be changed to sense different target molecules without
impacting the downstream biological computation, which greatly simplifies the
creation of new diagnostics for different conditions. An important part of the
project will also include efforts to make the protocell platform more efficient
and robust for field use. These efforts use the Rules of Life for Building a
Synthetic Cell and for Microbiome Interactions and Mechanisms as the basis for
the development of a platform that could have a substantial impact on
nutritional epidemiology and patient health by virtue of easier access to
medical diagnostics. The project also envisions and will entail pursuit of
environmental applications of the proposed platform. These efforts, combined
with outreach efforts and support for students from groups that are
underrepresented in engineering, are expected to have a truly broad impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.