* 2319246
* Collaborative Research: Syntactically-annotated corpora for endangered languages in areal contact
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Francis Tyers, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2026
* USD 299,977.00

There is a revolution underway in the ability for computers to understand and
use human language. This revolution, though, depends on techniques that require
large amounts of data. This project builds specially annotated datasets of a
series of endangered languages for which only small amounts of data exist,
validating new computational techniques that work on datasets such as these.
This develops language technology that works on "small languages", while also
generating new, computationally driven analytical insights about the grammars of
the languages of interest. A core aspect of the project is training, providing
opportunities for US students to learn these computational tools, to build high
quality datasets, and to build technological platforms on top of the datasets
produced by the project. The overall result is an increase in the United States'
language infrastructure, including human resources, since the project prepares
students to enter the private sector, government, or academia with advanced STEM
training in computational linguistics. Universal Dependencies (UD) is a
standardized framework for building syntactically annotated corpora of any
language in the world. The UD framework has garnered widespread support due to
its ease-of-use for quantitative linguistic analyses and cross-linguistic
comparisons, and due to its utility for training natural language processing
(NLP) pipelines to annotate new input texts. It is especially useful for dealing
with smaller languages where rich annotation can make up for lack of large
datasets, which many modern NLP techniques presuppose. This project develops
five new UD corpora of endangered languages of sufficient size to do deep
scientific analysis as well as to build technology platforms. The final results
of this project are: (1) Five freely-available and fully-annotated treebanks of
at least 30,000 tokens, (2) free and open-source natural language processing
(NLP) pipeline models to automatically perform word segmentation, stemming,
morphological analysis, and syntactic parsing for each of the target languages,
also made freely available in public-facing code repositories, (3) novel methods
for identifying areal linguistic clusters in large multilingual language models,
and for leveraging this information to bootstrap NLP systems for related
languages, and (4) a thematic volume describing comparative quantitative and
computational syntactic investigations based on the corpora collected during the
project. This award is made as part of a funding partnership between the
National Science Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities for
the NSF Dynamic Language Infrastructure â€“ NEH Documenting Endangered Languages
Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.