* 2319410
* Collaborative Research: IMR:MM-1B: Privacy in Internet Measurements Applied To WAN and Telematics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Christos Papadopoulos, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2026
* USD 91,208.00

The PIMAWAT (Privacy in Internet Measurements Applied to WAN And Telematics)
project will demonstrate new methods to provide data networking datasets that
respect end-user privacy, while still being able to support new research in
network protocols, security, privacy, and machine learning. The main insight is
that *most data today sent over the wide-area network (WAN) is encrypted*; thus,
the challenge is to demonstrate what data is encrypted, detect and scrub any
remaining leaks, and finally anonymize the metadata (who talks to whom) before
sharing data.

The intellectual merit of PIMAWAT will be to develop new methods to anonymize
network traffic at scale, then use those new algorithms to evaluate potential
data leakage, and demonstrate that real-world data sources can be scrubbed for
sharing while respecting privacy. PIMAWAT plans to focus the investigator’s
prior work on wide-area network data traffic. As possible, it will also explore
vehicle telematics as a recently developing dataset that poses unique privacy
opportunities and challenges, with a device (not person) focus, yet with
geolocation and application details.

The broader impacts of PIMAWAT will be to democratize the potential to collect
and share network data through new tools and best-practices for privacy-
respecting data scrubbing. Data from this project will enable new approaches in
computer science for protocol design and cyber-security, applying AI and machine
learning, and will provide early results in the rapidly evolving field of
vehicle telematics. PIMAWAT will provide new tools, data, and practices, and
encourage use of these methods by other researchers, in classrooms, and by
industry.

The PIMAWAT project website will be https://ant.isi.edu/pimawat and its tools
and datasets will be provided through https://ant.isi.edu/datasets/ as they are
developed during project and after it completes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.