* 2319722
* Collaborative Research: EDGE CMT: Genomic and molecular bases of pollination syndrome evolution in monkeyflowers
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Foen Peng, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 233,411.00

Variation of complex traits (e.g., human height) are usually caused by multiple
genes. Identification and characterization of the causal genes and mutations
underlying these polygenic traits remain a central challenge in biology. One of
the most intriguing examples of polygenic adaptations in plants is the
pollination syndrome, a suite of floral traits that enable specialized
associations between flowers and their animal pollinators (e.g., bees,
hummingbirds, hawkmoths). For example, hummingbird-pollinated flowers are
usually large in size, red in color, with copious nectar production and exerted
reproductive organs, whereas bee-pollinated flowers usually display various
colors (but not red), a smaller quantity of nectar, inserted reproductive
organs, and a clear landing platform. Evolutionary transitions from one
pollination syndrome to another require coordinated changes of multiple floral
traits, with each trait controlled by multiple genes, yet these switches occur
rapidly in nature in many plant groups. This study employs a new genetic model
system, monkeyflowers, to investigate how pollination syndrome switches occur at
the genomic and molecular level. Furthermore, this study integrates research
with student education and public outreach through the lens of pollination
syndromes. Specific activities include organized pollinator observation
experiments in a common garden on the University of Connecticut campus to raise
public awareness of animal pollination service, creation of a bioinformatic
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience at Haverford College, and
production of professional videos that bring pollination syndrome research to
life and that will be released on a highly subscribed YouTube channel, Science
IRL (‘in real life’).

The overall objective of this project is to systematically dissect the genomic
and molecular bases of floral trait variation among three closely related
monkeyflower (Mimulus) species that display three distinct pollination
syndromes, including the bee-pollinated M. lewisii, the hummingbird-pollinated
M. cardinalis, and the self-pollinated M. parishii. These species are amenable
to fine-scale genetic mapping and rigorous functional interrogation through
stable transgenics. We plan to accomplish our overall objective by pursuing the
following specific aims: (i) Generate high-quality near-isogenic lines (NILs),
which differ from a parental species by only a single floral trait locus
introgressed from another species, and use the NILs to genetically dissect each
quantitative trait locus (QTL) underlying the pollination syndrome switches.
(ii) Functionally characterize the causal genes and mutations under individual
QTLs using stable transgenic experiments. (iii) Construct gene regulatory
networks/modules that control pollination syndrome component traits using
weighted gene co-expression network analysis. Results from this study are
anticipated to provide an in-depth, genome-wide view of the causal genes
underlying pollination syndrome switches, to identify a set of gene regulatory
modules controlling individual floral traits that should be widely applicable in
other plant systems, and to reveal novel molecular mechanisms that can inform
studies of phenotypic evolution in not only plants, but also other organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.