* 2319881
* Collective physics of slowly sedimenting anisotropic objects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Narayanan Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 314,605.00

Non-technical abstract

The settling of solid particles in a liquid is of wide relevance to a number of
technological, biological, and geophysical processes. Sedimentation of solid
particulates out of a liquid phase is a ubiquitous process in chemical
extractions, purifications and separations, cleaning of ores, and processing of
foods and beverages. In the natural world, settling in lakes, rivers and oceans
are important geophysical processes, as are sinking of crystalline phases within
magma and the settling of ice crystallites within clouds. A crucial phase in
carbon capture in the oceans is the sinking of dead phytoplankton. Most relevant
systems are comprised of nonspherical shapes (rods, plates, flakes, or branched
filamentary structures) and yet, laboratory experiments and theory have largely
addressed the case of spherical shapes. In this project, a series of experiments
are executed to study the settling of non-spherical shapes by a variety of
experimental techniques. In addition to two graduate students, a number of
undergraduate students are also trained in the relevant methods. The PI
contributes to graduate education in soft matter physics beyond their home
institution by organizing an annual summer school at UMass Amherst entitled Soft
Solids and Complex Fluids, and launching a new summer school for undergraduate
students. During the activity, the PI with a colleague and two high-school
teachers run an annual summer program for middle- and high-school teachers
entitled Patterns Around Us.

Technical abstract

Studies of sedimenting suspensions of spheres have already shown this to be a
formidable many-body problem, however, the practically relevant case of the
collective sedimentation of anisotropic objects in suspension has received less
attention. Recent studies show that adding an orientational degree of freedom
via the particle shape leads to qualitatively new phenomena, and makes the
answers more relevant to a far larger class of physically relevant systems. In
the course of this research, experiments are to be conducted with a range of
particle shapes to build up a vocabulary of progressively lower symmetry
objects, starting with axially symmetric non-polar shapes (discs, rods,
ellipsoids), axially symmetric polar shapes, biaxial shapes, chiral shapes, and
finally, irregular shapes with no evident symmetry. In the spirit of progressing
from simple to more complex systems, the experiments start by studying single-
particle sedimentation, then pair dynamics, and finally sedimentation in
suspensions of controlled volume fraction. Suspensions will be studied in a few
geometries to understand the effect of confinement and hard walls. These systems
will be interrogated by a few different probes such as video imaging, x-ray CT,
and light scattering to measure mean settling rate, spatial gradients as well as
fluctuations in concentration, velocity and orientation fields. The experiments
are supported with schematic numerical calculations using stokeslet
representations that capture the shape symmetry of particle geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.