* 2319944
* CICI: TCR: A Unified Monitoring Approach to Enhancing the Security and Resiliency of Hazard Workflows on Heterogeneous Infrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shiqing Ma, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,170,202.00

Climate change and natural hazards present significant dangers to both humanity
and critical cyberinfrastructures (CI). In response, the Earth Sciences
community has adopted a cross-boundary approach to monitoring and mitigating
these threats by developing CI and workflows that encompass sensors, edge
computing nodes, network backbones, and remote cloud data centers.
Unfortunately, this cross-boundary approach is vulnerable to both physical
(resiliency) and cyber (security) threats. Current state-of-the-art techniques
for addressing these threats take a fragmented approach, focusing on specific
resources and proving ineffective for the overall hazard workflow. This project
proposes the HazardMon framework, which scales horizontally (from sensors to
edge cloud to WAN backbones to remote cloud) and vertically (across all layers
of the hardware and software stack) to combat these two threats. The project
will open-source HazardMon, and results will be disseminated to the community.
The broadening participation activities in this project will catalyze community
engagement and experiential learning, resulting in a globally competitive
workforce. The project will also collaborate with stakeholders, particularly the
NSF SAGE project, to facilitate the practical implementation of these ideas.

HazardMon will adopt an interdisciplinary approach that encompasses computer and
earth sciences across Rutgers and the University of Oregon, addressing the two
threats through three main thrusts. First, HazardMon will utilize the NSF-funded
Parasol micro-datacenter to identify threat telemetry for various representative
hazard scenarios. Additionally, it will include a monitoring service to observe
diverse sensors, WAN backbones, and remote cloud/HPC backends based on the
identified telemetry. Second, HazardMon will focus on intelligent techniques to
filter and process threat telemetry at the edge, distinguishing between threat
telemetry and hazard workflow data. Third, HazardMon will incorporate workflow-
specific configuration spaces to develop resilience strategies that mitigate
physical threats across CI resources and workflows. Furthermore, it will feature
a three-layered mitigation solution to address cyber threats.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is also supported
by National Discovery Cloud for Climate (NDC-C) resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.