* 2319935
* MRI Track 1: Acquisition of a Photoionization-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer (PI-TOFMS) to Advance Environmental Research in Water, Soil, and Air
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Monica Arienzo, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 780,823.00

The investigators in this project will acquire a new state-of-the-art
observational instrument, a real-time Photoionization-Time of Flight Mass
Spectrometer (PI-TOFMS), which will enable new observations of the molecular
structure of the composition of organic materials suspended in air. The project
team will use this instrument to take measurements of a range of compounds in
our atmosphere which will reduce existing uncertainties and data gaps pertaining
to ambient aerosols, wildfire emissions, and microplastics in our environment.
This instrument will supplement existing and planned projects at the Desert
Research Institute and will support and provide research training to at least
two undergraduate students, four graduate students, and one postdoctoral
researcher. Additionally, this project team will conduct STEM training,
integrate the instrument and new observations into academic courses and student
projects, and conduct outreach and data dissemination to the public.

This PI-TOFMS to be acquired in this project includes three ionization modes: a
single photon ionization (SPI) mode, a resonance enhanced multiphoton ionization
(REMPI) mode, and an electron ionization (EI) mode. The instrument can be
integrated with a Multiwavelength Carbon Analyzer (MWCA) and a Fast Gas
Chromatograph (fast GC) to achieve more detailed speciation. Specific research
aims include strengthening research capabilities in the observation of wildfire
emissions and microplastics in the environment, to establish source profile
libraries for estimating emissions and air and water quality modeling, to
develop new educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
and to engage early career researchers in cutting-edge research. A wide range of
current and future projects will be enhanced via the acquisition of this PI-
TOFMS instrument.

This project is jointly funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry (ATC) Program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.