* 2319960
* MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF-TOF Mass Spectrometer with TOF/TOF Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Scott Grayson, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 490,000.00

This award is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular,
and Nanochemistry (MSN) program in Chemistry, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This award will support several
universities within the New Orleans area, including Tulane, Dillard, and Loyola.
The acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometer (MALDI-ToF MS) will be used by researchers in the departments
of chemistry, chemical engineering, and physics. MALDI-ToF MS is one of the main
tools for the characterization of large molecules (having a molecular weight of
greater than 500) including peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates,
and polymers. The new instrument will have high resolution and tandem MS
capabilities. This instrument will strengthen the mass spectrometry community
within New Orleans and ensure that undergraduate and graduate students at the
participating institutions will have access to state-of-the-art mass
spectrometry instrumentation. In addition, high school students, 80% of whom are
African American, will learn about polymers and how MALDI-ToF MS can determine
molecular weights and repeating units.

The acquisition of a MALDI-ToF MS will enhance existing MS capabilities and
enable new research not currently possible at Tulane, Dillard and Loyola. These
new capabilities will elucidate the interaction of structure and molecular
weight for a variety of large molecules. For example, the degradation of
hexadecapeptide found in Alzheimerâ€™s patients can be investigated by the
arrangement of the labile amino acids. Topological transitions of DNA will also
be investigated using gyrase variants in bacteria. A number of these gyrase
variants have higher (proline) or lower (glycine) flexibility, and it will be
useful to determine the high molecular weight degradation products of these
compounds. The polymer structure of bis(hydroxymethyl)propanoic acid (purely
linear, purely dendritic, or randomly hyperbranched) will also be investigated.
The new instrumentation will also be used to characterize the end groups of
poly(ethylene glycol) polymers. There will be many mass spectrometry analyses
that the new instrumentation can do quite easily, including DNA, cavitands,
inorganic complexes, etc. that will be hard or impossible without this
instrument.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.