* 2319450
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Dynamic Brain Graph Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Liang Zhan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Mapping the connections in human brains as networked systems, i.e., brain
graphs, has become a pervasive paradigm in neuroscience. In cognitive
development, aging, and disease, it is crucial to understand how the structures
and functions of the brain change over time to provide insights into individual
differences and the mechanisms underlying different behaviors and disorders.
Traditional models, however, mostly treat the brain graphs as “static,” ignoring
the underlying changes over time. This project aims to develop new methods for
modeling the dynamics of brain graphs that are robust in generating accurate,
interpretable, and fair predictions. This interdisciplinary project will provide
a unique mix of training for the participating researchers, and the research
findings will be incorporated into education. The investigators will disseminate
their findings through an established benchmark platform, new publications,
tutorials, and collaborations with domain experts.

This project seeks to overcome the barriers of existing static brain graph
models and develop practical foundations and computational tools for processing
and analyzing complex brain graphs derived from dynamic neuroimaging data. The
project will develop a unified framework of Brain Graph Ordinary Differential
Equations (BrainGDE) interweaving advanced deep graph learning techniques and
ordinary differential equations, addressing the challenges of data complexity,
model interpretability, fairness and trustworthiness, as well as clinical
transformation. Planned research tasks will focus on: (1) unimodal dynamic brain
graph mining, (2) multimodal dynamic brain graph mining, and (3) clinical
investigations, in collaboration with domain experts. If successful, this
research will reshape deep learning approaches for temporal data mining in
bioinformatics and healthcare technologies. The dynamic graph mining framework
established in this project will also guide research on the problems of sensing,
knowledge discovery, reasoning, and inference on high-dimensional dynamic data
with structures and will serve as a universal benchmark for future work in this
direction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.