* 2319597
* URoL:ASC: Using Rules of Life to Capture Atmospheric Carbon: Interdisciplinary Convergence to Accelerate Research on Biological Sequestration (CARBS)
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Ashley Cordes, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2028
* USD 2,999,048.00

Effective solutions to mitigate climate change are urgently needed and require
adaptive strategies implemented on immediate and long-term timelines. Federal,
state, and local governments have made major investments in biological carbon
sequestration for climate change mitigation, but these investments are often at
odds with community priorities to adapt to climate-induced disturbances such as
drought, wildfire, and sea level rise. To address this challenge, we propose
Convergence to Accelerate Research on Biological Sequestration (CARBS), an
approach that builds on existing investments to ensure the US’ leadership in
climate change mitigation and adaptation. CARBS combines Indigenous Knowledge
(IK), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and environmental DNA (eDNA) into carbon
capture research oriented by 3-Ds (discovery, development, and deployment) and
3-Ps (protocols, prescriptions, and pedagogies) of interdisciplinary
convergence. We will focus on working landscapes, from montane to coastal
ecosystems of the Pacific Northwest, to answer questions such as: How can carbon
sequestration projects be coordinated across diverse social and ecological
contexts for optimal outcomes? How can land management, restoration, and
conservation be presented as a range of options for communities to choose from
rather than a single mandatory model? How can early engagement with historically
marginalized communities build trust, promote innovation, and encourage the
adoption of technologies to mitigate climate impacts in vulnerable ecosystems?

Technical Abstract Life on Earth depends on energy transformations from light
into carbon-based molecules, which are metabolized to build and maintain
biological structures. Metabolic scaling theory explains how the metabolic rate
of organisms increases with their biomass, a relationship that spans many orders
of magnitude in size across biological kingdoms. This “rule of life” is well-
known, but understanding how genomics (i.e., information processing) relates to
the metabolism (i.e., energy processing) of ecosystems remains a challenge,
especially under social and ecological change. CARBS combines metabolic scaling
and collective action theories to address basic biological questions while
delivering translational science for sustainable carbon sequestration. We will
explore socioecological and genomic controls on carbon dioxide and methane
fluxes to quantify and map landscape ‘metabolism’, leveraging extant investments
in ecosystem flux networks and remote sensing. We will use experiments to test
theories and to build novel AI tools that will deliver the first study of IK and
eDNA applied to carbon capture, co-produced with communities in an iterative
process designed to improve land management and conservation. This will include
data-enabled predictions of ecosystem carbon fluxes as well as experimental
selection of soil microbiomes to assess the potential for increasing biological
carbon sinks in human-engineered systems. Our research activities span the whole
range of oxidation-reduction potential of the terrestrial biosphere, from
montane forests to estuaries of the Pacific Northwest, with outcomes and
approaches that can serve as a model for the nation and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.