* 2319535
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating and parameterizing wind stress over ocean surface waves using integrated high-resolution imaging and numerical simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kianoosh Yousefi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 323,315.00

The small-scale dynamics above/below the ocean surface are crucial for wind-wave
coupling and govern the air-sea exchanges of mass, momentum, heat, and energy.
In particular, surface waves and the corresponding generation of turbulence,
breaking waves, and bubbles profoundly affect the roughness of the surface and
determine the wind stress at a given wind speed. Although many studies have
investigated the impact of water waves on wind stress, the present
parameterizations lag behind actual needs. In this project, an interdisciplinary
team of investigators (with backgrounds in physical oceanography, air-sea
interactions, and atmospheric sciences) will leverage recent advances in
infrared imaging of waves and high-resolution modeling to develop a sea-state-
dependent numerical algorithm that estimates the wind stress accurately for
models that cannot explicitly resolve the air flow over waves. Such models are
used for many research, engineering, and planning applications, including
physical oceanography, meteorology, climatology, and coastal engineering, among
others. The project is highly interdisciplinary and will give the participating
students valuable experience interacting with researchers outside their core
disciplines. It will also broaden participation in science through the
recruitment of students from under-represented groups at the University of Texas
at Dallas (UT Dallas) and Columbia University through established programs. The
knowledge and data generated by this research will be incorporated into the
educational programs of both institutions. For example, at UT Dallas, the PI
will introduce new under- and graduate-level courses on Wave Dynamics and Air-
Sea Interactions into the engineering curricula. Further, PIs will participate
in the Skype a Scientist program that provides middle and high school students
opportunities to talk about basic science-related topics. As part of this
project, two graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training in
turbulent air-sea interactions, and an early career scientist who leads the
project will gain valuable experience working with two experienced scientists.

The wind stress at the ocean surface is a crucial parameter for ocean,
atmosphere, and surface wave models. Although progress has been made in
understanding how the air-sea fluxes are modified by different sea states,
detailed investigations of the wind stress and drag coefficient above waves
remain rare, and the specific processes governing wave-mediated transfers of
momentum are not well understood. Most operational atmospheric models use a
simple bulk parameterization based on the equivalent surface roughness. Using
existing integrated laboratory measurements of surface stress (Co-PI Zappa) and
high-fidelity digital twin simulations of turbulent flow above ocean waves (PI
Yousefi and Co-PI Giometto), this collaborative research project is anticipated
to lead to a sea-state-dependent parameterization of surface stress based on a
dynamic reduced-order modeling. This integrated approach will allow the PIs to
specifically (1) investigate the variability of wind stress and its partitioning
(i.e., the skin friction and form drag) over ocean waves under a range of wind-
wave regimes, (2) examine the scale-invariance and self-consistency arguments of
the surface drag over water waves, and (3) develop a wall-layer model for LES of
wind over ocean wavefield to investigate the air-sea fluxes in strongly forced
conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.