* 2319415
* Building a Multi-Messenger Astronomy Research and Education Partnership that Creates Pathways to Astronomy Careers from Two HBCUs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Norton Orange, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,269,457.00

A collaboration between two Historically Black Colleges or Universities (HBCUs)
and one R1 research institution will form a unique partnership that will benefit
all three institutions through sharing resources, exchanging personnel, and
engaging students and faculty in the exciting field of time domain, multi-
messenger astronomy. The HBCUs are South Carolina State University (SCSU) and
the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI), with Clemson University as the R1
partner. Additional collaborators, who are leaders on the Vera Rubin Observatory
program, will assist the partnership in participating in the future of ground-
based astronomy. The main research areas are gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), active
galactic nuclei (AGN) and pulsating variable stars. The broader impacts are
developing a model partnership of bidirectional/multidirectional benefit among
minority serving institutions and a predominately white R1 university, mentoring
and support through graduation for undergraduate and masters students from
minoritized populations in astronomy and physics, and working with a licensed
social worker to mitigate the challenges facing our communities when it comes to
stress and mental health.

The astronomy research will be concentrated in three areas: (1) the study of GRB
outflow mechanisms and environments through discovery and analysis of late-time
GRB optical flares; (2) the study of AGN using optical observations correlated
to multi-messenger signals to investigate the production of high-energy cosmic
rays; and (3) high-precision studies of pulsating variable stars in the era of
Rubin science. The partnership has access to a network of four 0.5-1.3m
telescopes in both the northern and southern hemispheres covering a wide range
in longitude, which allows tracking of objects continuously for 12-18 hours. The
team will study short period RR Lyrae stars, delta Scuti stars and Cepheids.
Rubin Community Scientists will train faculty and students in preparation for
Rubin’s first data release during the third year of the award. The partners have
an existing Bridge to Masters 3+2 B.S.+ M.S. physics memorandum of agreement
between Clemson and SCSU. This award will set up a similar arrangement with UVI.
Students will benefit from an accelerated program to an M.S., while Clemson will
be able to attract highly talented students from a group that is severely
underrepresented in these fields. This unique partnership will serve as a model
and inspiration to others. The team will closely document successes and
challenges through an external evaluator and communicate results to the physics
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.