* 2319572
* FMitF: Track I: A Holistic Approach Towards Online Monitoring of Integrated Circuits and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Kaiyuan Yang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2027
* USD 749,998.00

The ever-increasing complexity of chip design and system integration, the
reliance on third-party hardware components, and the untrustworthy global
semiconductor supply chains open up the possibility for the introduction of
errors. These errors can be unintentional consequences of design bugs and
neglected operating conditions or induced by intentional attackers. Recently, it
has been shown that even more challenging threats exist where the attackers
manipulate the hardware operations via malicious modifications of a hardware
design before fabrication. Given the possibility of unintentional errors and
maliciously modified hardware components and the difficulty of detecting all
these issues, this project develops one last line of defense by monitoring
fabricated hardware components during normal deployment and operation. This
approach enables the detection of attacks or other conditions that violate the
system's integrity and security. The project's novelties are the development of
a rigorous approach for monitoring the operation of integrated circuits and the
design of a software toolchain and hardware prototype that realizes the
monitors. The project's impacts are advances in the reliability, safety and
security of the hardware that forms the basis of computing systems.

The project develops a novel monitor specification language, called FlowSL, for
describing properties that are relevant for the integrity and security of a
system. FlowSL goes beyond established approaches based on temporal logic and
regular expressions in order to achieve a balance between expressiveness and
being amenable to efficient execution on hardware. Principled heuristics and
compilation algorithms are designed for the effective translation of monitor
specifications into primitive hardware operations. The specification language is
co-designed with a programmable hardware accelerator. The project designs highly
optimized computational primitives in hardware, which are used for realizing
individual operators of FlowSL, and a scalable and programmable pipeline
architecture that enables the composition of several primitives to implement the
monitors. A full-stack prototype is developed, which is evaluated on
representative applications from the domains of hardware security and runtime
verification of cyber-physical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.