* 2319690
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of An X-ray Diffraction Contrast Tomography Instrument Enabling Research and Education Towards Establishing  Microstructure-Property Relationships
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Maria Auad, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 704,482.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
X-ray diffraction contrast tomography instrument at Auburn University. This
instrument is expected to enable new research, education, and workforce
development activities at Auburn University, in the State of Alabama, and in the
Southeast region of the United States. The acquired instrument can uniquely
reveal the internal microscopic features of a broad range of materials in a non-
invasive manner. This is a capability that has been lacking at Auburn University
and the surrounding institutions. This instrument will advance several strategic
research areas including fatigue and fracture, materials science/engineering,
machine learning and data analytics, earth sciences, chemistry, physics,
chemical engineering, and environmental engineering. Through these cross-cutting
research efforts, this instrument will benefit the society by enabling greener
and more efficient advanced manufacturing, fabricating better fitting and more
biocompatible bone implants, understanding the impact of global warming on
geological materials, and designing stronger and lighter materials. This project
will also actively integrate the generated knowledge from the instrument into
several outreach and educational activities. This includes activities designed
for K-12 students, underrepresented minorities, and women in STEM, as well as
graduate/undergraduate education and research training, and short courses for
working professionals. The acquisition of the instrument will therefore result
in significant broader impact, promoting public awareness and participation in
STEM fields.

This X-ray diffraction contrast tomography instrument utilizes the diffracted
portion of the incident X-ray beam, that would be discarded by conventional
X-ray computed tomography systems, to non-destructively map the orientations of
crystalline materials in three dimensions. This instrument will deliver
researchers the unique ability of obtaining both the ante mortem three
dimensional micro-/defect-structures and their response to excitations - a task
that has been dilemmatic via conventional approaches. Thus, the construction of
true structure-property relationships of crystalline materials will be enabled
by knowing the micro-/defect-structure of the same specimen both before and
after testing. Owing to the ubiquitous nature of polycrystalline materials, the
instrument can enable significant, new research and education activities at
Auburn University and regional institutions in three interdisciplinary research
areas: metal additive manufacturing, minerals and synthetic inorganic compounds,
and polymers and composites. As an example, for additively manufactured metallic
materials, this project can help reveal how fatigue damage initiates,
elucidating the competing roles of volumetric defects and microstructure
mediated crack nucleation mechanisms. Notably, machine learning and data
analytics will be used to assist extracting geometric features of micro-/defect-
structure and correlate with material response to excitations, including
thermal, mechanical, and environmental.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.