* 2319501
* Biogeochemical and Physical Processes Regulating the Benthic Flux and Speciation of Iron from Non-Upwelling Continental Margins
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Martial Taillefert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 09/30/2026
* USD 880,688.00

Iron is an important nutrient for phytoplankton in the ocean. Dust from the
continents is the primary source of most of the iron delivered to the ocean.
However, this iron is not soluble in the surface ocean, and most settles to the
bottom rather than being used by phytoplankton. This project investigates
whether sediments could be an important source of iron to the ocean. The team of
scientists will quantify biogeochemical and physical processes that influence
the flux of iron from sediments to the water column on continental margins. They
will measure fluxes of iron at the seafloor along the western North Atlantic
Ocean and in the western Mediterranean Sea. Shipboard analyses of different
forms of iron will complement the benthic flux studies. This research will re-
examine whether the iron coming from sediments is primarily in organic forms
versus inorganic (mineral) forms. Most previous studies have been conducted in
the eastern parts of the oceans, where deep waters are transported to the
surface. In addition, the exact composition of dissolved iron diffusing out of
the sediment has often not been determined. The project will provide training
for two Ph.D. students from underrepresented minority groups who will gain
experience in science and engineering. A capstone course for undergraduate
students will be offered that creates opportunities for students to learn and
engage in oceanographic field work. The researchers will participate in
meaningful outreach to spark the interest of K-12 students in chemical
oceanographic research through hands-on experiments and online lesson plans.
This information will be shared with K-12 teachers for use in the classroom.

This study will use in situ benthic flux measurements, in situ physical
measurements, and iron speciation analyses supported by reactive transport model
calculations to: (1) investigate the role of the organic carbon input flux to
the sediment on the release of iron from the sediment; (2) identify the bottom
water transport processes that may affect the benthic flux of dissolved iron;
and (3) extrapolate the findings of the proposed study to the global ocean using
data generated during the proposed study, including data from the cruise of
opportunity in France, and data from other published studies. This study will
characterize the role of sediments in the supply of nutrient to surface waters.
The proposed research will also help identifying how the transport of bottom
waters affects the exchange of chemicals at the sediment-water interface.
Results from this study will provide new data that can be incorporated in ocean
circulation models to predict the effect of climate change on ocean
productivity, atmospheric CO2 consumption, sediment carbon transformation, and
the expansion of oxygen minimum zones. This project includes training for two
Ph.D. students from traditionally underrepresented minorities, several
undergraduates from Science and Engineering, and guest students during the
cruises. The Ph.D. students will be recruited via the new Ocean Science and
Engineering program at Georgia Tech that provides training in both engineering
and science. Additional ship time is requested to expose senior undergraduates
from an Environmental Field Methods capstone course to oceanographic research.
The PI and his group will also continue outreach activities by exposing K-12
students who visit Georgia Tech to chemical oceanography research via
presentations and hands-on experiments. A web site with lesson plans and
podcasts will be provided to K-12 teachers via the Center for Education
Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing. The science team will also
interact with students during the cruises via satellite communication and social
media.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.