* 2319975
* CICI: UCSS: Secure Containers in High-Performance Computing Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xing Gao, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Ensuring the security and privacy of high-performance computing (HPC)
infrastructures is of utmost importance due to their handling of sensitive data
and critical scientific computations. HPC infrastructures commonly employ
containers, which provide lightweight and isolated environments for running
applications. Nevertheless, containers in HPC infrastructures encounter security
challenges, including insecure container images and vulnerabilities related to
isolation. Existing container image scanners face a major challenge of low
coverage, while current container runtimes struggle to ensure both security and
performance for HPC workloads simultaneously. This project addresses these
challenges by developing secure containers specifically tailored for HPC
infrastructures. The project introduces innovative solutions, including the
development of an efficient image vulnerability scanner and a secure container
runtime. These systems incorporate various customized optimizations for security
and performance targeting HPC workloads. Additionally, educational efforts are
made to integrate the research findings into graduate and undergraduate
curriculum development. Outreach activities are conducted to encourage
participation from underrepresented groups and promote cybersecurity awareness
and HPC expertise in the states of Texas and Delaware.

The project consists of two primary tasks. The first task focuses on designing
an efficient image vulnerability scanner using innovative and feasible
techniques. The research team designs a novel method for container image
vulnerability detection based on cross-language code similarity detection. This
approach combines graph neural networks with a language-agnostic code
representation that leverages natural language processing techniques.
Furthermore, it designs an efficient and scalable online search solution. The
second task involves developing a secure and high-performance container runtime
by utilizing a lightweight virtual machine hypervisor. Additionally, the runtime
is optimized based on the characteristics of HPC workloads with the goal of
improving both security and performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.