* 2319560
* Collaborative Research: Institute on Collaborative Language Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Tyler Peterson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 258,146.00

This award supports the Institute on Collaborative Language Research (CoLang),
jointly hosted by Arizona State University (ASU) and Salt River Pima-Maricopa
Indian Community (SRPMIC), a federally recognized tribe. CoLang takes place
every two years, bringing together academics, community scholars, and indigenous
language activists to provide training in language documentation,
revitalization, and collaborative practices. Because ASU is situated on the
ancestral homelands of the Akimel O’odham and Piipaash, the two Native American
societies and languages that comprise the SRPMIC community, the theme for CoLang
2024 is "Creating Partnerships, Honoring Neighbors, Building Capacity". This
theme represents a step in the evolution of social science, where educators and
indigenous scholars meet, learn, and do research in a setting shaped by the
collaborative vision of an institution of higher learning and a tribal-run
language program. CoLang 2024 serves as a model for productive and sustainable
partnerships between neighbors, and for how major American research universities
such as ASU can engage with their tribal neighbors in a meaningful way.

CoLang responds to the needs of a diverse group of participants: academic
linguists who want to gain technical skills, linguistics students who need basic
training in collaborative research in language documentation, language teachers
who wish to train themselves in basic linguistics skills, and community language
activists who work on maintenance and revitalization projects for their
communities. The institute consists of two weeks of intensive workshops on a
broad range of topics in linguistics, language documentation and revitalization,
education, and technology, with an emphasis on community-based participatory
research. This is followed by two weeks of in-depth practica, where the
participants apply their newly acquired skills and develop focused research
projects. Previous participants have incorporated their institute experiences
into documentation projects and community revitalization activities worldwide.
The institute builds capacity, skills, and methods that result in career
advancement, outputs, projects, and generating new linguistic methodologies and
research. These include grants, graduate theses and dissertations, books,
academic articles, language archives and databases, project development and
cross-community networking methodologies. Linguists and academics who complete
CoLang come away with an understanding of the importance of community-based
language work. Language activists who complete CoLang are equipped with skills
that help them make meaningful, productive, and sustainable contributions to the
language reclamation efforts of their communities. This award is made as part of
a funding partnership between the National Science Foundation and the National
Endowment for the Humanities for the NSF Dynamic Language Infrastructure – NEH
Documenting Endangered Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.