* 2319135
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Tunable Ultrafast Spectroscopy System at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution to Enhance Undergraduate Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jingqiu Hu, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,463.00

Non-Technical Description: To advance the utilization of materials essential for
emerging technologies such as augmented reality, quantum sensing, nanomaterial-
based biosensing, artificial photosynthesis, and optogenetics, a thorough
understanding of their optical and electrical properties is critical. Many of
these materials properties result from processes that occur very quickly, on the
order of picoseconds, and do not result in light emission. Thus, conventional
emission-based spectroscopic techniques, such as photoluminescence, cannot be
used. An ultra-fast transient absorption spectrometer allows for the precise
measurement of the temporal variation in a material's light absorption with sub-
picosecond resolution. This major research instrumentation grant adds a
transient absorption spectrometer to the existing spectroscopic measurement
equipment at West Chester University of Pennsylvania (WCU). The instrument
provides advanced hands-on training opportunities for undergraduate students at
WCU to prepare them for the STEM workforce in a variety of areas, such as
physics, biomedical engineering, materials engineering, chemistry, and molecular
biology. Additionally, the instrument integrates into WCU's high school outreach
programs. Lastly, it fosters broad collaboration and enhances student exposure
to research expertise by providing access to other institutions in the greater
Philadelphia area.

Technical Description: This highly versatile ultrafast transient absorption
spectrometer system facilitates research projects across various disciplines,
offering pump and probe ranges of 258 nm - 1400 nm and 350 nm - 1000 nm,
respectively. This broad range enables investigations into diverse condensed
matter and biological systems. Integrated into an existing spectroscopic
measurement system, the instrument allows for sub-picosecond resolution
measurements, including transient absorption, photoluminescence, and time-
correlated single photon counting. Researchers at WCU utilize this instrument to
explore: the carrier dynamics of rare-earth-doped semiconductors for micro-
display and quantum information applications, the excitation/decay dynamics of
nanoporous silicon powders for biosensing, the photoinduced electron transfer
involving gold nanoclusters, nitrogen-vacancy centers in nanodiamond aerogel
composites for quantum sensing, etc. Furthermore, external investigators employ
the instrument to probe the exciton dynamics in Rubrene and to investigate new
materials for photovoltaics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.