* 2319548
* An Observational Study to Quantify the Impact of Nearshore Processes on  Air-Sea Momentum Transfer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Henry Potter, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 302,035.00

The overarching goal of this project is to identify and systematically quantify
coastal processes and features that alter nearshore air-sea momentum exchange.
This will be achieved through analysis of an existing data set collected by the
PI at the Army Field Research Facility (FRF) in Duck, NC. Data were recorded
between August 2021 and January 2023 by five high frequency 3-D anemometers
mounted on the pierhead and beach tower. The extensive observational network at
FRF will be leveraged to characterize the nearshore environment and quantify its
impact on the drag coefficient. In continued support of underrepresented
students in STEM, this project will fund undergraduate students with
disabilities from Texas A&M University. Students recruited outside STEM
disciplines will have the opportunity to participate in high impact learning
experiences that may otherwise be unavailable. Those from within the College of
Arts and Sciences will be encouraged to produce an undergraduate thesis based on
their research. Participants will present their results at Texas A&M Student
Research Week. A graduate student will also be supported through this research.
The PI will work with the NSF funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program (LSAMP) to help recruit a student from a group
underrepresented in STEM from Texas A&M or another LSAMP university. The PI and
graduate student will work with On the Ocean, a radio show from Texas A&M
University and broadcast on the local National Public Radio Affiliate, KAMU, to
produce eight radio segments resulting from this research. The segments will be
broadcast in two series of four episodes each on the subjects of air-sea
interaction and the physics of the coastal environment.

This work is motivated by the need to improve parameterization of the air-to-
sea momentum flux for nearshore use. This remains a significant challenge
because parameterizations donâ€™t adequately account for the impacts of surface
currents and their feedback, wave shoaling or breaking, the effects of onshore
topography, or weather systems that alter atmospheric stability. This further
limits the ability to predict the true impact of wind forcing on the ocean or
any wind-driven coastal process. The result of this research will be an in-depth
understanding of the influence of coastal processes on momentum transfer and the
surface layer flux profile, thereby leading to more accurate parameterization.
The results are expected to lead to a more robust understanding of nearshore
wave growth and breaking, which are important for whitecap creation, cloud
formation, subsurface turbulence, acoustics, wave run-up and coastal erosion,
sea ice breakup, and heat and gas exchange at the air-sea interface.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.