* 2319802
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Analytical Models for Conversational Social Engineering Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Akbar Siami Namin, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 163,418.00

Social engineers use a false pretense and their interpersonal skills to persuade
their targets to divulge sensitive information such as their usernames,
passwords, or credit card numbers. Social engineering over the phone, known as
vishing, is a very common, growing, and costly problem. This project aims to
investigate the nature of vishing attacks and use what is learned to develop a
software application that detects key vishing attack features, moving the
project toward its long-term goal of developing a software system that can
detect vishing attacks in real-time and warn targets.

To accomplish that aim, the research team is creating two corpora: 1) a set of
vishing attack recordings and 2) a set of legitimate phone call recordings. The
research team is developing advanced analytical techniques to identify features
that differentiate vishing conversations from legitimate conversations. The
research team is developing novel audio signal and natural language processing
algorithms to detect emotional language that is unique to vishing conversations
and novel natural language processing algorithms to detect requests for
sensitive information. Collectively, these algorithms provide critical
capabilities to detect vishing attacks in real-time and form the foundation of
the real-time vishing attack warning system the research team is developing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.