* 2319342
* Collaborative Research: IMR: MM-1A: Functional Data Analysis-aided Learning Methods for Robust Wireless Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 320,001.00

With the growth of large-scale, heterogeneous, dynamic, and complex wireless
networks, how to achieve accurate and robust measurements in 5G networks and
beyond becomes a challenging and important problem. Most existing data-driven
solutions are black-box approaches, which may not be robust and adaptive, and
work only for low-dimensional and discrete data. In fact, wireless data belong
to the class of functional data, which can be represented by curves or
functions. High-dimensional wireless datasets can be better handled by
functional data analysis (FDA). Recognizing the significance of the
aforementioned problems, this project aims to bridge the gap between FDA-based
learning and wireless measurement.

The proposed research falls into the following four interwoven thrusts. (i)
Functional Data Regression for Sparse Wireless Measurements: to develop a deep
learning-based approach to address fundamental regression problems of functional
data. (ii) FDA-based Transfer Learning for Dynamic Wireless Measurements: to
study transfer learning for functional data regression and classification under
the distribution shift between test data and training data for effective
wireless measurements in dynamic environments. (iii) Quantile FDA-based Learning
for Robust Wireless Measurements and Control: to develop a deep learning-based
approach to address the fundamental bottleneck of quantile regression-based
methods. (iv) Wireless Measurement Applications for Integration and Validation.

If successful, this research will greatly advance the practice and understanding
of functional data for wireless measurement and related fields. The educational
and outreach components include: (i) Curriculum enhancement with learning theory
and FDA, and joint developing a graduate course on FDA-based learning for
wireless measurements. (ii) Engaging undergrads with hands-on projects. The
existing outreach programs will be leveraged to offer research opportunities and
seminars to undergrads, with emphasis on engaging underrepresented students.
(iii) Outreach activities to increase public awareness, include journal
publications, conference presentations, seminars, IEEE distinguished lectures,
journal special issues, and workshops and special sessions at major conferences.

The code produced from this project will be disseminated at the public
repository GitHub (https://github.com/). A project website will be maintained at
Auburn University with URL: https://www.eng.auburn.edu/~szm0001/proj_lMR23.html.
This project website will be frequently and regularly updated for dissemination
of the outcomes from this project, including a description of the project,
project team, major outcomes such as publications, codes and datasets, as well
as an acknowledgement of NSF support to this project. This website will be
managed/updated by the PI for the three-year project period.

This project is jointly funded by the Networking Technology and Systems (NeTS)
program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the
Statistics program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS), and the
Computing and Communication Foundations Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.