* 2319079
* CCHDO: serving easily accessible, global, high-quality hydrographic data for research, climate monitoring, and education
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Karen Stocks, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 655,280.00

This grant will allow continued operation of an oceanographic data server (the
CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data Office, or CCHDO) at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography. This facility provides to the community different types of data
obtained by the Global Ocean Ship-Based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-
SHIP), which is a component of the Climate Observing System and the Global Ocean
Observing System. The CCHDO makes data available for diverse purposes related to
research and education. Data are used to assess the state and health of the
ocean and for verification of ocean models. The project will develop learning
modules for undergraduate and graduate students and will improve ocean
informatics.

This activity will continue to operate the CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data
Office (CCHDO) at Scripps Institution of Oceanography. This facility aggregates,
standardizes and disseminates hydrographic, carbon, and tracer data obtained by
the Global Ocean Ship-Based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-SHIP), which
is a component of the Climate Observing System and the Global Ocean Observing
System. The CCHDO carries out 5 main activities related to data availability
for: a) research and education; b) diverse audiences; c) global climatologies;
d) climate assessments; and e) archiving with NOAA for long-term preservation.
Data are used to assess the ocean storage and transport of heat, freshwater,
carbon and nutrients; to determine the oceanâ€™s uptake of anthropogenic carbon
and heat; to monitor changes in ocean oxygen and acidification; and to evaluate
ocean circulation and ventilation. Also, CCHDO data are used for model
initiation, calibration and validation, as well as for Argo float quality
control. The project will also develop learning modules for undergraduate and
graduate students using the data archives. Finally, CCHDO will effect
improvements to ocean informatics through open source software and data clusters
for co-learning. This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to
support AI/ML advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.