* 2319315
* IMR: MM-1C: Methods and Metrics for IPv6 Internet Scanning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Paul Pearce, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 166,835.00

Technology to quickly map (i.e., scan) the Internet and explore its
characteristics is of the utmost importance to researchers, governments, policy
makers and businesses. Existing technologies rely on exhaustively enumerating
the entire Internet address space. With the advent and recent widespread
adoption of a newer Internet addressing scheme (called IPv6), such exhaustive
enumeration is impossible, preventing our existing technology from being applied
to future Internet growth. This project will create new Internet mapping
technologies that are suitable for the newer IPv6 addressing scheme through the
careful exploration of how IPv6 is deployed in practice, the development and
evaluation of key mapping metrics, and the use of reinforcement learning on
known addresses.

This project will enable the next generation of generative IPv6 Internet
scanning, and provide a platform for extending existing IPv4 research to the
IPv6 realm. Developing IPv6 scanning metrics and methods requires understanding
detailed behaviors of the IPv6 protocol, service providers, address allocation,
and machine-learning methods. The project will first construct a set of
comprehensive metrics for understanding IPv6 scanning performance that can serve
as a benchmark for evaluating current and future scanning techniques. Next the
project will characterize the substantial impact of large-scale IPv6 aliasing on
IPv6 scanning, and the inadequacy of prior solutions, especially in the context
of existing metrics and methods. From this the project will develop an online
IPv6 dealiasing strategy and evaluate it over existing methods, quantifying its
improvement on IPv6 Internet scanning. Lastly, guided by the aforementioned
metrics and understanding of aliasing, the project will develop a new
generalized online approach to IPv6 address generation and scanning via levering
reinforcement learning from a set of known seed addresses to generate a diverse
set of candidate IPv6 addresses which it subsequently scans.

Extending whole-Internet scanning to IPv6 is critical to a range of networking
topics, from censorship measurement to network outages to vulnerability
detection. Further, it is necessary to ensure results do not bias against
certain regions without significant IPv4 infrastructure. Thus the value of IPv6
measurement and Internet scanning as a whole is key to researchers,
policymakers, and governments. This project will produce the foundation for
supporting a wide range of IPv6 Internet measurement research in the future.

More information about the project, including all research papers, datasets,
code, repositories, tools, results, and outreach activities can be found on the
project's website: https://cc.gatech.edu/~pearce/imr_metrics_methods_ipv6/. The
website will be maintained for a period of at least 5 years after completion of
the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.