* 2319894
* CAREER: Explorable Formal Models of Privacy Policies and Regulations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Christopher Martens, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 343,625.00

Data collection and analysis enable great advancements in digital technology,
but the stewards of this data have a responsibility to society to ensure that
the practices of collection, storage, and user control abide by user
expectations. Policies and regulations governing data privacy play a critical
role in communicating privacy expectations to users and defining the bounds of
permissible data use. However, in practice, there are severe mismatches between
user expectations and the actual practices of software companies, even when
those practices conform with their privacy policies. This project's goal is to
enable automated reasoning over privacy policies and regulations that can assist
users, policy developers, and regulators in understanding unintended
consequences of data practices and policies.

Past research on automated reasoning for privacy has led to efforts to formally
model the logical semantics of regulations and support mechanized correctness
proofs. The desire for transparency to users, on the other hand, has led to
proposals for policy annotation schemes that support clearer presentation
through natural language and visualization. This project aims to unify these
goals by developing techniques to represent policies and regulations that are
both formal and explorable, answering 'what if'? questions about specific
scenarios in addition to providing provable guarantees. The project requires
technical advances in formal methods, narrative generation, natural language
processing, and human-computer interaction. The research team will formalize
privacy regulations such as the European Union's General Data Privacy
Regulation, as well as privacy policies specific to software companies and
service providers, using a relational programming model known as Answer Set
Programming (ASP). The research team plans to discover new techniques for
interoperating with ASP as a lightweight semantic modeling framework, with
support for answering queries, generating scenarios that reveal privacy
loopholes, generating counterexamples to global correctness conditions,
suggesting repairs for broken policies, and enabling the exploration of
hypothetical scenarios by policy developers and users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.