* 2319190
* FMitF: Track II: Bringing Verification-Aware Languages and Federated Authentication to Enable Secure Computing for Scientific Communities
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Ravishankar Iyer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2025
* USD 99,999.00

This project will enable trusted computing for flagship cyberinfrastructures
(e.g., Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), Open Science
Grid, Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE)) and their
vibrant scientific communities. The project’s novelties are to: 1) bring
verification-aware languages to provide rigorous mathematical proofs that
existing federated authentication implementations (CILogon, SciTokens) are
correct, and 2) make rigorous verification an integral part of developing
distributed computational science. The problem of correctly implementing token-
based authentication protocols is critical to enable researchers across global
institutions, industrial partners, and government agencies to collaborate
safely. For example, SciTokens operates a sophisticated infrastructure to manage
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)-standard, short-lived OAuth tokens to
enable zero-trust data access and job execution in distributed computing
environments. The project’s impact is to reduce costly production-stage bugs
that may be missed by manual testing. The project will advance the knowledge of
hidden bugs that could expose the backbone of our nation’s cyberinfrastructures,
thereby advancing research security.

This project brings together: i) verification-aware languages such as Dafny, ii)
the field of federated authentication in networked computing systems, and iii) a
large scientific community of 20,000 researchers from 500+ organizations (both
international and from the U.S.) who use SciTokens daily. The expected advances
of our Verification-aware SciTokens project will be: a) continuous automated
reasoning (verification) algorithm that uncovers critical bugs in SciTokens
code, b) certification proof that a token-based authentication implementation is
correct, and c) synthesis of correct applications: from a single specification
defined in Dafny into a variety of programming languages (e.g., Go, Java, PHP)
to broadly integrate Verified SciTokens into different systems and networks.

The project's technical approach is implementing critical authentication
functions of SciTokens in Dafny, which provides the mathematical proof of
SciTokens’s protocol using Hoare logic and automatically generates correct code,
e.g., authorization scopes, in multiple languages. Preliminary results show that
two critical bug classes have been discovered in SciTokens: timing-based and
access control logic bugs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.