* 2319143
* Collaborative Research: Probing internal gravity wave dynamics and dissipation using global observations and numerical simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Maarten Buijsman, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 260,172.00

This project will map the space-time geography of internal gravity wave (IW)
dissipation and mixing, and the underlying dynamics, using state-of-the-art
high-resolution global and regional IW models along with theory and observations
of IWs. The research will employ global models, regional models, observations,
and theory to take a first step towards a future in which IW dissipation and
mixing arise naturally in models, without being parameterized. The project will
support two summer schools on ocean and environmental science in Kenya, East
Africa, to complement the successful West African summer schools that has been
run every year since 2015, with cumulative participation of several hundred
African participants and several dozen US participants.

The Principal Investigators hypothesize that the representation of the IW
spectrum in global IW models is sufficiently realistic for the models to make
useful predictions about spatial and temporal distributions of IW dissipation
and, by extension, IW-induced mixing. They also hypothesize that much as an
inertial subrange is implicitly resolved by Large Eddy Simulations of
turbulence, an implicitly resolved IW continuum in models may be within reach
with appropriate choices of dissipation schemes, model resolutions, atmospheric
forcing frequency, and enabling of nonhydrostatic dynamics. Regional IW models
will be run to determine the impacts of resolution limitations and dissipation
mechanisms on the modeled IW spectrum. Regional IW simulations and IW theory
will be used to probe the dynamics underlying the IW spectrum and dissipation.
Dissipation will be mapped using four different methods: as spectral fluxes
computed using traditional Fourier techniques, as spectral fluxes computed using
new coarse-graining techniques, as a residual of IW conversion rates and flux
divergences, and as computed from model dissipation operators applied to high-
frequency flow. Modeled energy dissipation rates will be compared to
observation-based estimates of dissipation, from fine-structure methods applied
to ARGO floats and ship-based CTD lines, and from microstructure measurements
including those from a new NSF-funded set of EM-APEX floats.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.