* 2319880
* CICI: TCR: Prompt, Reliable, and Safe Security Update for Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Thomas Cheatham, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,198,133.00

Cyberinfrastructure plays a crucial role in the nation's critical
infrastructures, driving advancements in science, engineering, education, and
collaboration. However, cyberinfrastructure also becomes a perfect target for
cyber attackers, due to its high-value data (e.g., nuclear test results) and
massive computing resources (e.g., supercomputers). As shown by data, cyber
attacks are happening to cyberinfrastructure more frequently, causing remarkable
damage to the economy, environment, public health, and even national security.
This project aims to transition recent cybersecurity advancements and techniques
for enhancing cyberinfrastructure resilience under cyber threats. In particular,
this project ensures that security updates, or patches, for software systems
running on cyberinfrastructure are adopted in a timely, reliable, and safe way,
which can help eliminate up to 85 percent of targeted attacks, according to US-
CERT. The research outcomes advance the scientific study of software patching
under challenging conditions such as limited monetary resources, insufficient
admin expertise, and highly diverse environments. The research outcomes are also
projected to deploy to large-scale cyberinfrastructure platforms, including Utah
CHPC (a 5,600-user platform) and many similar platforms (e.g., PNNL, ORNL, and
the Rutgers Office of Advanced Research Computing).

Technically, this project develops three innovations to offer security updates
desired by cyberinfrastructure. First, it adapts recent open-source frameworks
to provide affordable patch management for cyberinfrastructure and explores
research advancements in patch presence detection and automated exploit
generation to detect unadopted patches and assess their urgency. Second, it
introduces directed fuzz testing and regression fuzz testing as methods to
evaluate patch quality for cyberinfrastructure and tailors differential program
analysis to analyze the testing outcomes and measure the reliability of
available patches. Third, it develops a system-wide dependency analysis to
understand the components impacted by a target patch and informed by the
analysis result, assembles a low-cost testbed on the fly to assess the safety of
the patch to the entire system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.