* 2319979
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Machine Learning Foundations and Applications in the Earth Systems Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Nicole Corbin, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,095.00

The increasing use of machine learning techniques in Earth Systems Science (ESS)
has positive impacts on science and engineering research, but ease of use
coupled with the opaque nature of many commonly available tools can lead to
trust without critical assessment of the tools' outputs. Education surrounding
the theoretical underpinnings of machine learning tools requires additional, and
often substantive, coursework in advanced math and programming.
Cyberinfrastructure users without access to this background information may have
difficulty building an appreciation and understanding of the utility and
appropriateness of machine learning technology for their research and career
goals, especially when they attend under-resourced institutions that cannot
create relevant educational materials on their own. This project intends to help
university-level learners build necessary cyberinfrastructure literacy and
skills that will allow them to appropriately apply machine learning techniques
to their ESS research without requiring prohibitive additional coursework. These
future cyberinfrastructure users benefit from practicing appropriate and ethical
usage of machine learning techniques even when the tools in use were developed
by others.

The goals of this project are to elucidate the conceptual mechanisms behind
machine learning models for university-level ESS students and early-career
professionals, and to bridge the gap between machine learning concepts and low-
code, real-world applications in the Earth Systems Sciences. It will accomplish
this by providing a series of three learning modules: (1) a self-paced
conceptual introduction that uses a systems-thinking approach to understanding
how machine learning works in ESS, (2) a self-paced, low-code module that
enables learners to apply the conceptual frameworks to real world scenarios with
relevant ESS data, and (3) a lab-based activity that promotes group discussion,
justification of decision making, and critical analysis of machine learning
techniques and outputs. This design lends itself well to a flipped classroom
setting integrated with existing curricula, allowing learners to practice these
skills without the need to take on additional coursework. Additionally, the
program fosters critical judgment skills in ESS cyberinfrastructure users,
furthering the broad, strategic, ethical, and appropriate usage of
cyberinfrastructure and machine learning.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.