* 2319225
* I-Corps: A label-free, autofluorescence lifetime flow cytometer for in-line monitoring of T cell function
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Melissa Skala, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a label-free method for cell therapy manufacturing process
optimization and product characterization prior to clinical use. Cell-based
therapies have the potential to treat, or even cure, a myriad of diseases.
However, these complex biological products display intrinsic variability within
a tightly regulated industry and standard quality assessments require labels to
characterize functional subsets of cells. Current methods of assessment are
laborious, time-consuming, susceptible to reagent quality variability, and may
alter cell function. The proposed technology may provide a solution for cell
manufacturing that is critical for the continued development of cell-based
therapies.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a label-free, non-
destructive optical detection technology with single-cell resolution to quantify
cell function, viability, and metabolism including machine learning methods that
predict later cell quality. The proposed hardware, optics, and analytical
algorithms may be readily integrated into a variety of geometries, such as flow
cytometry and microscopy, enabling non-destructive assessment for rapid, label-
free diagnostics and biomanufacturing process optimization. The inherent
flexibility of the proposed technology enables non-destructive assessment for
rapid, label-free biomanufacturing process optimization. In addition, a
prototype has been engineered that was purpose-built to integrate with
biomanufacturing workflows at reduced cost and footprint compared to commercial
instruments. Software also has been developed to detect functional biomarker
changes at the cell level along with machine learning models that predict later
cell function, neither of which are commercially available. The proposed
technology operates on intrinsic universal cellular signals, enabling utility
across all cell types. Previous results demonstrated that the technology is
sensitive to functional response from T cells that predict activation within
minutes, preceding expression of activation surface marker at 1 hour.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.