* 2319327
* Collaborative Research: Breaking Barriers in Multi-messenger Astrophysics: The RITTU Partnership
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Benjamin Owen, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 195,088.00

A new research and education partnership in astronomy will be developed between
the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) and Texas Tech University (TTU) with
the aim of exploring how to break both disciplinary and cultural boundaries to
solve key questions in neutron-star astrophysics. RIT hosts the National
Technical Institute for the Deaf, one of the premier deaf education institutes
in the world and TTU is a Hispanic Serving Institution. The two-year program
will explore authentic pathways for Deaf/Hard-of-Hearing and Hispanic
undergraduate students to join the RITTU partnership and participate in academic
year preparation programs and summer research experiences. The students will
acquire a set of skills that cross between theory and observations and will be
supported by a dedicated mentoring team, thereby placing them in competitive
positions for graduate programs or other STEM careers.

The next few years will herald a golden age for the astrophysics of neutron
stars, which are compact stellar objects, often synonymous with pulsars, and
which are one of the end stages of massive star evolution. Neutron stars and
mergers of binary neutron stars can be observed through multiple messengers:
gravitational waves (GWs), electromagnetic radiation and potentially
neutrinos—offering unparalleled opportunities to answer fundamental questions in
astrophysics. The program will involve two inter-related studies. The study of
binary neutron star mergers will reveal the formation mechanism of the
Universe’s heaviest elements, probe the generation and structure of the most
powerful astrophysical jets, and elucidate the characteristics of the remnant
population of massive stellar evolution. In the topic of neutron star
astrophysics, the team will develop new tools to shed light on pulsar glitches
and use pulsar timing observations to guide searches for burst and continuous
GWs. This award advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.