* 2319139
* NSF-FR: Bidirectional Neural-Machine Interface for Closed-Loop Control of Prostheses
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Robert Sainburg, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,523,806.00

Humans can control their limbs to perform a variety of daily tasks with great
precision and remarkable adaptability in unpredictable environments, thanks to
our cognitive capacity and physical characteristics. People with disabilities
could rely on assistive robots that have similar functional capabilities of real
limbs, yet people find it difficult to use on a daily basis, partly because the
interfaces are unnatural and unintuitive. The objective of this project is to
understand the neural and cognitive processes brought to bear during daily
tasks, such as reaching and grasping, and to establish natural and nature-
inspired approaches that allow the user and the machine (the artificial limb) to
communicate. The research outcomes will reduce motor disability and improve
quality of life of individuals with physical disabilities. The developed
approaches can also enable intuitive control of assistive robots in medical,
industrial, and military applications. Summer projects and outreach events,
incorporating the proposed techniques, will be offered to undergraduate students
in minority-serving universities and local K-12 students, specifically targeting
underrepresented students. The research team will organize workshops at national
conferences to disseminate research findings and facilitate broader
collaborations. Certificate and credential programs will be offered through
online learning platforms. Research outcomes will also be presented to local and
regional patient support groups and national clinical-oriented conferences so as
to disseminate state-of-the-art research development to end users.

The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a biomimetic human-centric
neural-machine interface system, which incorporates outward (efferent) and
inward (afferent) directed signals for the control of assistive robots. The
system will allow individuals with disabilities to interact with their assistive
robots as they use their biological limbs. If successful, it will provide a
robust and effective model for intuitive interaction of human-machine systems
for application to a broader variety of health and industrial applications, and
finally overcome the problem of intuitive control of assistive devices in
individuals with disability. The research team will strategically integrate
research threads that address critical barriers for human-robot integration:
Thread 1 will develop implantable and wearable electrode platforms for neural
recording and neural stimulation. Thread 2 will understand fundamental
principles of neural encoding of artificial sensation and establish biomimetic
sensory encoding strategies. Thread 3 will develop an integrated shared control
framework for dexterous control of robotic hands. Thread 4 will collectively
address the functional integration of closed-loop robotic systems for perceptual
motor control. The research team will integrate the proposed techniques, closing
the loop between artificial sensing and actuation of the robot and the
perception and control authority of the human, examining the adaptability and
robustness of the closed-loop human-machine systems. Collectively, the research
project can generate transformative outcomes that can blur the boundary between
humans and assistive robots, allow end-users to fully leverage the functionality
of advanced robots, and promote the development of next-generation neural-
machine interfaces and assistive robots.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.