* 2319819
* Collaborative Research: Energy Landscapes of Designed Cold Unfolding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Brian Kuhlman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 206,912.00

Proteins are very large biological molecules synthesized in living organisms by
linking hundreds or even thousands of amino acids to form a linear chain.
Proteins are required for life and they are thus important targets for
fundamental and biomedical research, including drug development, and
biotechnology. Enzymes catalyzing biochemical reactions, protein drugs such as
insulin, and antibodies conveying immunity are well-known examples. Importantly,
the biological function of proteins is intimately linked to the many different
three-dimensional shapes the linear chains can adopt, and these shapes depend
critically on both temperature and pressure. The objective of this project is to
enhance the understanding of the distinct shapes which proteins adopt at extreme
conditions, that is, at very low temperatures below the freezing point of water
and/or at very high pressures of several hundreds of atmospheres. This is
required to understand life in the vast ecosystems existing under these
conditions (e.g. in oceans and the polar regions), to understand how these
shapes relate to protein function, protein related diseases, protein vaccine
development, and protein drug formulation, and to enhance the engineering of
bio-technologically and bio-medically important ‘cold adapted proteins’. The
research contributes to develop rules to predict protein shapes and their
energetic properties under such extreme conditions, and newly developed
methodologies and computational tools will be made available to the broader
scientific community. The project enables cross-interdisciplinary training of
researchers, including scientists from underrepresented groups. To pursue this
goal and to increase interest in STEM in general, Drs. Kuhlman and Szyperski,
participate in well-established, major initiatives at their schools which are
dedicated to promote inclusive communities, to retain underrepresented students
in STEM and to mentor students. They also participate in NSF-funded research
opportunities for undergraduates, and offer webinars on ‘linchpins’ for the
understanding of (bio)physical chemistry and (bio)physics. Programming workshops
focusing on methods for molecular modeling will also be offered.

The relationship between the different three-dimensional molecular shapes of
proteins dominating at different temperatures / pressures is related to their
molecular energies and entropies, which are represented by so called ‘energy
landscapes’. Proteins which tend to lose a well-defined shape at low
temperatures have been named ‘cold unfolding proteins’. Research focuses on
exploring and understanding the energy landscapes of such proteins. This
includes the structural and thermodynamic properties of the ‘cold’ low energy /
low entropy states, their transitions to other states and, in general, a more
advanced understanding of protein pressure-temperature ‘phase diagrams’. A
unique approach combining computational de novo protein design, cutting-edge
biophysical techniques and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations is employed in
order to specifically test central structural and thermodynamic hypotheses,
namely that (i) a mixed hydrophobic / hydrophilic protein core results in a
partially cold unfolded cold state in which water molecules form an integral
part, (ii) this is manifested in complex energy landscapes, (iii) this results
in a distinct thermodynamic signature for the formation of such cold states, and
(iv) the co-operativity of the formation of the cold states decreases with an
increasing hydrophilic content of the folded core. Moreover, the research lays
the foundation to tackle the hypothesis that cold states can be functionally
important, even at ambient conditions when they are lowly populated. Finally,
new computational design protocols are developed which facilitate or enable the
design of beta-sheet containing cold unfolding proteins, and the redesign of
folded, naturally occurring proteins to congeners which unfold under extreme
conditions in order to validate newly established principles. This project is
supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.