* 2319305
* Collaborative Research: Accessing the dark Arizona skies for research and education, a NCAT-BU partnership
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Carl Schmidt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/28/2026
* USD 256,696.00

A new partnership will be developed between North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University (NCAT), a research-active Historically Black College
or University (HBCU), and Boston University (BU), a university with
institutional access to large, research-grade telescopes. The partnership has
three key goals: enhancing astronomy research and education at NCAT by providing
access to research-grade telescopes; raising the visibility of astronomy as a
career at NCAT and at high schools, colleges, and universities in the area; and
increasing the number of minoritized students pursuing graduate degrees in
astronomy and astrophysics, including at NCAT and at BU. The program will offer
summer undergraduate internship opportunities at BU for NCAT students, designed
to promote scientific advancement and career training simultaneously, while
improving student competitiveness for admission to graduate programs. They will
conduct pre- and post-project assessments to measure how well the goals are met
and the impact of the programs in the lives of the students involved.

Scientifically, the partnership will build long-term research collaborations
among faculty at NCAT and BU. Researchers at the partner institutions study a
wide range of phenomena, including exoplanets, galactic magnetic fields, and
active galactic nuclei and blazars. However, NCAT lacks institutional access to
research-grade telescopes in dark sky locations. Boston University owns the 1.8m
Perkins Telescope Observatory and has access to observing nights on the 4.3m
Lowell Discovery Telescope. By combining resources, the partnership will be the
engine that produces scientific journal articles as well as scientific and
public talks, many led by students from both institutions. The partnership will
enhance educational opportunities of NCAT students through hands-on experience
obtaining and analyzing data from research-grade telescopes, provide NCAT
students access to summer research opportunities at BU, and create pathways for
students to pursue graduate studies in astronomy and subsequent leadership
positions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.