* 2319642
* Individual fitness, directional dispersal, and the dynamics of trailing-edge populations
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Richard Chandler, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2027
* USD 820,495.00

Biodiversity conservation is one of the great challenges of the 21st century,
and conservation efforts depend on information about how environmental change
will impact wildlife. For many species, it is unclear whether population
declines are the result of reduced reproduction and survival, or if local
populations are shifting as individuals move in search of better environmental
conditions. Reduced reproduction and survival would negatively affect genetic
diversity and increase extinction risk, whereas movement towards preferred
habitat could allow species to avoid negative impacts of environmental change.
This research will develop a new framework for using data from field studies to
determine the contributions of reproduction, survival, and movement to changes
in species distributions. The new framework will be applied to long-term data
collected on bird populations in the southern Appalachian Mountains where
numerous species are restricted to high elevations and are sensitive to recent
changes in temperature and precipitation. Results will advance knowledge about
population dynamics and extinction risk while enhancing society's ability to
prioritize species and regions in need of conservation.

Quantifying fitness in natural populations is notoriously difficult because
survival and reproductive rates can vary greatly among individuals as a result
of spatial variation in the environment and heterogeneous phenotypic traits. For
animals, the problem is complicated by location-dependent survival and
reproductive rates that can change continuously in time as individuals move
through complex landscapes. This project will develop theory and methods needed
to understand spatial, temporal, and individual-level heterogeneity in fitness
of mobile organisms, even when demographic data are incomplete and subject to
observation error. The new framework will be used to determine if trailing-edge
populations of birds at the southern edge of their geographic range will
experience fitness reductions in response to climate change, or if populations
can preserve fitness via directional dispersal towards cooler climates. Mark-
recapture data, count data, and nest monitoring data will provide information
about spatio-temporal variation in reproduction, survival, and species
distribution over a pronounced elevation-driven climate gradient. Information
about the effects of environmental change on dispersal distance and
directionality will be collected using novel tracking technologies that yield
precise location information for small songbirds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.