* 2320956
* Design of Multifunctional Nanocomposites through Mixed-Graft Block Copolymer Templating
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mingjiang Zhong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Polymer-nanoparticle composites offer numerous advantages over traditional
single-component materials for a variety of applications. By combining desirable
properties from different materials and creating new functions through unique
interactions at the polymer-nanoparticle interfaces, these composites have the
potential to revolutionize various fields, including sensing, energy conversion,
and soft electronics. This project aims to develop an innovative approach to
producing hybrid organic-inorganic materials endowed with multiple independently
tunable properties. To achieve this, graft copolymers and functional
nanoparticles will be co-assembled. The design of graft copolymers involves the
incorporation of dissimilar polymeric side chains into a linear backbone,
resulting in the formation of novel ordered nanostructures that are not easily
attainable with other materials. The integration of functional nanoparticles
into specific domains or interfaces of these nanostructured polymers will
enhance their respective functional properties through precisely defined
interactions between particles and polymers. The successful development of these
nanocomposite materials with independently tunable properties holds great
promise for advancing the field of materials science, with potential
applications in optoelectronics and energy devices.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Mixed-graft block copolymers (mGBCPs) that contain dissimilar side chains
combine the unique properties of both block copolymers and graft architecture,
providing access to materials with synergistically enhanced properties. This
project aims to synthesize, process, and characterize mGBCPs, with a primary
focus on their applications as template materials for the preparation of
multifunctional nanocomposites. Precisely defined side chain sequences in mGBCPs
enable the formation of ordered hierarchical nanostructures across a broad range
of characteristic length scales. Co-assembly of these mGBCPs with inorganic
nanoparticles results in hierarchically structured nanocomposites with control
over the size, geometry, and orientation of formed nanoparticle arrays. By
rationally engineering the mGBCP structures and polymer-nanoparticle
interactions, electronic band structures, photoenergy transfer behaviors, and
thermomechanical properties of the nanocomposites can be precisely tuned or
optimized. Furthermore, integrating more than one type of functional
nanoparticles into mGBCPs through diverse orthogonal polymer-nanoparticle
interactions will create a design platform for the discovery of functional
materials with multiple independently tunable properties. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.