* 2320104
* Transition: Metabolomics-driven understanding of rules that coordinate metabolic responses and adaptive evolution of synthetic biology chassis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Yinjie Tang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

This Transitions award supports the principal investigator to be trained in
modern metabolomics and engineering biology methods, enabling his lab to
decipher and control microbial metabolism. Microbial metabolism distributes
carbon and energy resources to support biomass growth and bio-productions.
During synthetic biology applications, the implementation of heterologous
biosynthesis can disrupt the cellular supply chains and impose metabolic burdens
on microorganisms. This issue causes microbial populations used in
biotechnology, to undergo unpredictable physiological changes, posing a
roadblock for commercializing synthetic biology microbial strains. Until now,
the understanding of how metabolic burdens affect metabolite productions, enzyme
reaction rates, and cellular adaptations is still poor. With this problem in
focus, the PI is learning and applying new technologies to uncover the
underlying causes, extent, and effects of metabolic burdens that lead to
metabolic or evolutionary changes in microbial cells that are used in
biotechnology. This project delivers new knowledge on the rules of microbial
life under stressed conditions and paves the way for building high performance
biomanufacturing workhorses. Moreover, the project trains graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students in interdisciplinary biotechnology
research. The principal investigator is partnering with Lincoln University, a
Historically Black College and University, to organize both summer research and
workforce development collaborations.

This award enables the principal investigator to transition the focus of his
research to a new area at the interface of integrative metabolomics, engineering
biology, and biomanufacturing. The professional development that is pursued has
two aims, the first of which is learning modern liquid chromatography–mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) techniques that can be used to perform isotope assisted
metabolomics to discover new metabolites, delineate functional pathways,
determine enzyme reaction thermodynamics, and decipher genotype-phenotype
relations. The second aim is to acquire CRISPR-based gene editing tools that can
be used to re-program regulatory architecture and metabolic pathways. The
research undertaken employs the new techniques, along with carbon-13 metabolic
flux analysis, to analyze a model industrial yeast chassis (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) for the biosynthesis of natural products under various bioreactor
conditions. The systems analyses undertaken improve the understanding of driving
forces of enzyme reactions, metabolite inhibitions, and adaptive cellular
responses when yeast cells are under metabolic stresses. The new insights and
principles are expected to facilitate the design and control of microbial
pathways for effective bioproduction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.