* 2320409
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of the Thermo Fischer  Cryogenic Helios 5 CX DualBeam for Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lynda Brinson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,530,757.00

The interdisciplinary field of modern materials science focuses on an
increasingly smaller scale for understanding and manipulations of optical,
mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties of materials, including naturally
existing as well as with man-made, engineered materials. Remarkable progress in
studying materials on the nanometer-scale is enabled by the advanced, state-of-
the-art nanofabrication tools for carving bulk materials, creating and imaging
nanoscale features. One of the most versatile nanofabrication and nano-imaging
approaches relies on the focused ion beam (FIB) technique, widely used in the
development of the latest generation of microelectronic systems, microfluidic
chips, photonic and biomedical devices. Recently, the development of cryogenic
FIB has further expanded its capabilities, particularly in characterizing
materials and systems containing soft and liquid phases, while maintaining
sample integrity. The Thermo Scientific™ Helios™ 5 CX DualBeam instrument offers
a unique opportunity of handling samples at both room and cryogenic
temperatures. Its cryogenic inert-gas sample transfer system enables the safe
transfer of samples to gloveboxes and other instruments under cryogenic
temperatures, without exposing them to ambient conditions. The instrument
contributes to the educational mission of Shared Materials Instrumentation
Facility at Duke and in the Research Triangle and Triad Areas enabling the
diverse population of graduate, undergraduate, minority and female students to
prepare nano- or microfluidic channels, deposition of nano-wires, and
fabrication and characterization of micro-electro-mechanical systems.

The Thermo Fischer Scientific Cryogenic Helios 5 CX DualBeam for Materials
Science is an integrated FIB and scanning electron microscope instrument,
enabling a plethora of flexibility to perform nanofabrication, lithography,
volumetric imaging, and in-situ measurements. The development of more flexible
ion beam columns and in-situ cooling capabilities in this instrument also reduce
detrimental effects of Ga+ implantation and ion and electron beam irradiation-
induced heating on the sample surface and enable studies of beam-sensitive,
soft, and liquid materials. A cryogenic stage in a FIB is especially critical to
scanning electron microscopy analysis and transmission electron microscopy
specimen preparations for microelectronic, energy storage materials, and two-
dimensional materials, which are extremely sensitive to ion and electron beams
and can only be imaged and sectioned at cooled temperatures. The Thermo Fischer
Scientific Cryogenic Helios 5 CX DualBeam enables a number of cutting-edge
research projects including nanofabrication of hyperbolic metastructures for
imaging with subwavelength resolution, characterization of hard-soft material
interfaces where preparation of a very smooth surface exposing undamaged polymer
with the hard domains is critical, studies of cathode-electrolyte interfaces in
alkali-ion batteries, analysis of high-performance composites for lithium-metal
batteries, investigation of interference effects in superconductor-quantum Hall
hybrid structures, ultra-high-resolution imaging and characterization of the
catalyst-support for plasmonic catalysts enabling solar ammonia synthesis under
concentrated sunlight.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.