* 2320640
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a High-Resolution X-ray Computed Microtomography System with In Situ Capabilities for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Douglas Menke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,177,779.00

An award is made to the University of Georgia (UGA) to acquire a high-resolution
x-ray computed microtomography (micro-CT) system with in situ capabilities that
will support the research, training, teaching, and outreach efforts of more than
30 investigators at UGA, Georgia Tech and Emory University in the biological
sciences, physical sciences, archaeological sciences, geological and
environmental sciences, engineering disciplines, and related fields. The ability
to characterize internal microscopic features in intact natural and engineered
materials in three dimensions (3D) and at high resolution will fill a critical
gap in regional and national imaging capabilities. This specific micro-CT system
will be the first of its kind hosted by an open-access facility, Georgia
Electron Microscopy (GEM) at UGA. GEM hosts a wide array of highly complementary
state-of-the-art microscopes that facilitate multidisciplinary use and
interdisciplinary collaboration, and it will provide physical and remote access
to high computing resources for CT data analysis. In addition to research
applications and the associated training of student users, the new instrument
will support UGA's academic mission by integrating x-ray micro-CT in more than
20 course offerings and numerous outreach efforts that target underrepresented
students in STEM. Micro-CT demonstrations and modules will be incorporated in
the existing activities offered by GEM, including tours and workshops, and the
instrument will be used to acquire data sets and generate 3D printed models
suitable for integration into K-12 lesson plans.

This state-of-the-art micro-CT system provides exceptional capabilities for 3D
microstructural analysis that include submicron absorption tomography imaging
down to 0.5 microns, tri-contrast interferometry that simultaneously provides
absorption, phase, and scattering contrast tomography imaging down to 3 µm, with
sensitivity down to 0.3 µm, and an optimized design that enables 4D imaging of
samples in controlled experimental environmental conditions. These unique
capabilities will make a major impact on research productivity, directly
supporting a large number and range of well-funded projects and enabling new,
high-impact research that falls into three broad categories: (1) high-resolution
imaging of 3D internal structures of biological, geological, archaeological and
engineered samples for research applications ranging from developmental biology
to functional polymers, (2) combining in situ experiments with time-lapse
imaging to visualize fundamental processes, such as material deformation and
fluid flow and transport that are essential to infrastructure resilience,
sustainability of water resources, and plant productivity, and (3) acquiring
data to develop the new generation of image analysis algorithms, phenotyping
frameworks and pore-scale numerical models. In particular, the ability to
perform phase-contrast tomography with the proposed instrument provides
unprecedented lab-based micro-CT imaging of low-density materials, thereby
pushing the frontiers of soft matter and life sciences research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.