* 2320685
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an Illumina NextSeq 2000 Sequencing Instrument
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Catherine Klapperich, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 639,794.00

This award supports the acquisition of an Illumina NexSeq 2000 next generation
sequencing system to be housed at the Design, Automation, Manufacturing, and
Process (DAMP) Laboratory at Boston University. The DAMP Lab is an automated
biology laboratory comprised of eight liquid handling robots that can run
thousands of experiments at a time in tiny wells of liquid. These robots do a
much better and faster job of transferring liquids from place to place than
humans can. The DAMP Lab performed thousands of COVID tests during the pandemic,
and now its instruments are used to create and study new molecular tools. The
Illumina sequencer will help researchers study the genomic sequences of these
new molecular tools. Small changes in the sequence can lead to big changes in
performance. Next generation sequencing has an unparalleled ability to see which
changes enhance or diminish function. This new instrument will help support the
design of better drugs and new diagnostics and biosensors.

The DAMP Lab at Boston University is a Core Facility that serves BU, Boston area
academics and industry, and has the potential to serve researchers across the
nation through our completely cloud based automated laboratory system. Access to
next generation sequencing technology will unlock new insights across the
convergent areas of biotechnology and bioengineering. Addition of the Illumina
NexSeq 2000 will impact three major areas of research at BU: Organoid Profiling,
Environmental and Water Monitoring, and Biosensing and Diagnostics. Over the
pandemic, Boston University built an automated molecular biology laboratory, now
part of the DAMP Lab, that is focused on accelerating synthetic biology
research. Addition of this instrument to the existing suite of automation will
dramatically increase the services we can offer users. This unique cloud-based
laboratory has already made many sophisticated wet biological protocols
accessible to laboratories and researchers who don’t have the in-house resources
or expertise to perform them – or who might not have a wet laboratory at all.
Addition of this instrument will open next generation sequencing (NGS) to these
same groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.