* 2320300
* Flexible kirigami sheets in uniform and disturbed fluid flow
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yahya Modarres-Sadeghi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 323,051.00

The research will investigate the behavior of kirigami sheets placed in fluid
flow. Research into applications of kirigami, wherein patterns of cuts are made
in a sheet of material, has increased dramatically across a wide range of
research areas in recent years due to the complex three-dimensional shapes that
simple two-dimensional kirigami patterned sheets can assume when forces are
applied on them. Despite the significant existing literature on kirigami
patterns, their use in fluid mechanics has been extremely limited. In this work,
the behavior of kirigami sheets placed in fluid flow is investigated. The
broader impacts of this project extend to being able to design and deploy
kirigami sheets with desired geometries, desired wakes, and for desired tasks.
This ability will enable several applications in flow mixing, flow control, and
underwater soft robotics. The findings of this research will be disseminated at
different levels by integrating the proposed research into the outreach programs
for K-12 students and by incorporating this research into classes. A galley
exhibition will be designed and built based on the results of this work to
render the invisible scientific phenomena tangible for a lay audience, and to
spark deep interest in fluid mechanics research for younger generations.

A kirigami sheet placed in fluid flow constitutes fluid-structure interactions
(FSI) at different scales: the cut-scale and the sheet-scale. The preliminary
results of this work have shown samples of a variety of three-dimensional shapes
that kirigami sheets assume when they are placed in flow. These results show
that kirigami sheets in flow can undergo static or dynamic flow-induced
instabilities as a result of buckling or limit cycle oscillations. This project
first focuses on investigating the behavior of previously designed kirigami
patterns placed in flow. Then the project focuses on designing new kirigami
patterns for fluid-specific applications and studying their behavior in uniform
and disturbed flows. The goals of this work will be achieved by conducting
several series of experiments where kirigami-patterned sheets are placed in
fluid flow. Their displacements will be tracked using high speed cameras, and
the resulting wakes will be quantified using bubble image velocimetry (BIV). The
results of this project will potentially impact areas such as flow control and
FSI by archiving the three-dimensional shapes and wakes for others in the
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.