* 2320876
* Collaborative Research: Strategic Leadership Systems: How Networks of Strategic Communication and Informal Influence Arise and Drive Firm Performance
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Dorothy Carter, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 61,727.00

Organizational success is often attributed to the elite group of executives atop
an organization and their ability to guide the organization into an uncertain
future. However, developing and implementing strategy typically requires many
members of both upper and middle management to communicate and shape strategy
through formal (top-down) and/or informal (lateral, upward) processes of
influence. Unfortunately, the patterns of communication and informal influence
that often arise among upper- and middle-level management groups can pose
problems for strategic effectiveness. Such leadership failures are common,
costly, and cannot be addressed without a better understanding of who will lead
and who will follow in the upper layers of organizations. Although prior
research has examined the characteristics of top executives to understand firm
effectiveness, scholars agree that how top managers and middle-level managers
need to interact to propel their firms toward greater success remains a "black
box". This project delves into this black box by advancing and testing new
theory related to the multilevel causes and consequences of the networked
patterns of leadership and communication processes that emerge in the upper
levels of organizations. By studying the complex dynamics inherent in the
leadership of large organizations, this project directly and positively impacts
each participating organization as well as the aggregate economy that relies on
these organizations.

This project leverages partnerships with the Center for Creative Leadership
(CCL) and the Gutierrez Energy Management Institute (GEMI) in order to conduct
survey- and interview-based research with upper- and middle-level managers from
approximately 50-75 organizations from a variety of industries (Study 1) and
approximately 25 organizations within the Energy Industry -- an industry that is
vital to national interests (Study 2). As a recruitment incentive, our research
team is providing tailored feedback for each participating organization in the
form of an hour-long virtual debrief presentation and personalized report
delivered to senior executives. To maximize internal validity, field study
results are being combined with a large-scale controlled laboratory experiment
manipulating the drivers of leadership and communication networks in
hierarchical multi-group systems (Study 3). Therefore, this research program
connects micro-, meso-, and macro-level organizational theories and
corresponding research methods in order to address critical and unanswered
questions related to the drivers and outcomes of informal leadership and
communication networks in the upper levels of organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.