* 2320473
* Equipment:MRI Track 2 Acquisition of a 3D X-ray microscope for advanced specimen-based organismal research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Morgan Chase, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,139,618.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will provide funds to acquire an
X-ray microscope to support cutting-edge research at the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) in New York. With over 170 working scientists, the AMNH
is a globally-leading research institution for the study of organismal
structure, function, systematics, and evolution, as well as anthropology and the
Earth and planetary sciences. The X-ray microscope is a next-generation imaging
device that allows visualization of the internal structure of objects, resolving
features as small as one-thousandth of a millimeter. This instrument will allow
high resolution 3D visualization of AMNH’s world-class natural history
collections, which includes 34 million scientific objects, primarily biological,
fossil, and geological specimens. The resulting research will yield significant
advancements across a wide range of topics, including the anatomy, evolution,
growth, development, and function of organisms, as well as climate change and
the evolution of planetary systems, across the fields of paleontology, zoology,
archaeology, ethnology, oceanography, and mineralogy. The new instrument will
contribute to training of the next generation of scientists via the Richard
Gilder Graduate School and affiliated programs (e.g., City University of New
York, New York University, Columbia University). It will increase accessibility
of AMNH specimens by allowing online sharing of digital data. It will also
contribute to exhibition and public educational programs by generating superb 3D
visualizations of important specimens, including minute details of tiny insects
and fossil specimens that cannot be extracted from the rocks they were preserved
in.

The 630 Versa X-ray microscope (XRM) is a micro- to nano-computed tomography
(CT) system with capabilities that are critical to the next-generation of
specimen-based research, including sub-micron resolution (true spatial
resolution down to 0.5 µm), high X-ray flux allowing faster throughput and
increased scan quality, and propagation phase-contrast to enhance edge-detection
and the distinctions between structures of similar densities for low-absorbing
materials. This instrument will extend the frontiers of specimen-based research
by significantly increasing achievable scan resolution and the quality of scans
that can be obtained at high resolutions within a wide range of intact specimen
sizes. The instrument will provide an important resource for researchers at the
AMNH as well as affiliated researchers across other institutions and consortia
in the New York City region. It will stimulate the next generation of
discoveries by expanding the frontiers of our research and training across a
wide user base. It will directly contribute to research programs across a wide
range of topics including the origins and early evolution of mammalian anatomy
and physiology, diversification of arthropods, skeletal function of extinct
hominins, effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms, processes of solar
system formation, the tracheal system of insects, microstructural anatomy of
animal tissues, the functional morphology of small-bodied vertebrates including
bats and fishes, and many others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.