* 2320710
* MRI Track 1: Acquisition of a Ka-band Polarization Radar for Atmospheric Process Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ryan Wade, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 779,640.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award is for the acquisition of a profiling
cloud radar. Cloud radars transmit shorter wavelengths than traditional weather
radars and are more sensitive to small scatterers, like cloud droplets and even
insects. The radar will be incorporated into the University of Alabama in
Huntsville’s (UAH) Mobile Atmospheric Profiling Network (MAPNet) facility which
is available for wide community usage. This radar will complement the existing
MAPNet remote sensing instrumentation and allow users to address a variety of
new science topics. The radar will be used for hands-on educational experiences
for students and enhance outreach activities.

This award is for the acquisition of a Ka-band profiling radar (KaPR) that would
be integrated into UAH’s MAPNet. MAPNet is part of the current AGS Community
Instrument and Facility (CIF) cohort and is available for deployment by members
of the scientific community supported by NSF. MAPNet currently lacks a cloud
radar, which would provide important information on cloud depth/top, cloud water
phase, refined estimates of cloud water content, precipitation characteristics,
and hydrometeor type. The specific instrument to be acquired is the ProSensing
dual antenna Quadratic Phase Coded, continuous wave radar. This new radar has
improved signal to noise ratio, lower range sidelobes, and a much smaller
minimum range. The research team has identified the following areas of study
that could be enhanced by the use of KaPR: cool season stratocumulus clouds,
convective system environments, cloud electrification, hurricane boundary
layers, aerosol-cloud interactions, convective snow bands, mammatus clouds, and
biological flyers.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program,
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.