* 2320301
* Equipment: MRI: Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment: Helium recovery for magnetic resonance facilities at UC Santa Barbara
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 287,576.00

This project offers a concerted plan to mitigate the potentially devastating
impacts of the helium supply crisis on magnetic resonance research and
instrumentation at UC Santa Barbara. The concerted effort brings together the
NSF-supported Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) MRSEC Spectroscopy Facility
and Terahertz Facility, that enable cutting-edge research in Chemistry, Physics,
Materials Science, Chemical Engineering, and Biology and serve over 50 research
groups and numerous industrial partners. The requested instrumentation is key to
preventing catastrophic instrument failure and loss of resources. Further, by
reducing the cost and contingencies associated with operating superconducting
magnets through helium recycling, the requested instrumentation has a decisive
impact on: 1) the ability of research groups to meet their research milestones
and maintain funding, 2) the ability to retain faculty with expertise in
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, recruit new faculty members in this area, and
train the next generation of scientists. The requested instrumentation is also
key to the development of a lab course offered in the context of the NSF-
supported “NRT: Integrative Training In Quantum Assembly & Technology
(INTRIQATE)” program, which aims to prepare graduate students for leadership in
a diverse quantum workforce. The medium pressure helium (He) recovery system
enables the magnetic resonance facilities of interest to operate near self-
sufficiency, removing contingencies on external He supplies and preventing
irreparable damage to eight superconducting magnets (which together are worth
several million dollars). The recovery system includes a He liquefier, a
compressor, a medium pressure recovery hub, a purification system, and a medium
pressure storage tank. This system replaces the current Liquefier in the
Spectroscopy Facility, resulting in a significant increase in He recovery from
~60% to ~90-95%. Importantly, by transferring the existing liquefier to the
Terahertz Facility, this acquisition creates the unique opportunity of
benefitting two major user Facilities. Among high impact research activities
enabled by this instrumentation, we highlight five here: 1) NMR and EPR studies
of ion and mixed conducting materials for electrochemical energy storage and
water purification systems; 2) Ex situ and in situ NMR insights into
heterogeneous catalysts; 3) Design of biomolecular MRI probes; 4) Filming
proteins in action using Time-resolved Gadolinium-Gadolinium Electron
paramagnetic Resonance (TIGGER) Spectroscopy; 5) Probing many body interactions
in low dimension, patterned spin architectures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.