* 2320495
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment at West Virginia University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Terry Gullion, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,989.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research in response to the solicitation of proposals that
promote the recovery, recycle, and/or reuse of helium, which was initiated by
the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022. West Virginia University is acquiring a
helium recovery system to capture and reliquefy helium from five NMR
spectrometers to support the research of Professor Terry Gullion along with
colleagues Gregory Dudley, Brian Popp, Jessica Hoover, and Carsten Milsmann.
This equipment supports research in the areas of synthetic organic and inorganic
chemistry, medicinal and structural biochemistry, physical organic chemistry,
and NMR methodology development. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy
is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of
the structure of molecules. Using the intrinsic magnetic properties of atomic
nuclei, it is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The superconducting magnets of these instruments rely on
regular deliveries of liquid helium to maintain their operation. However, the
instability in the helium supply due to global and national challenges
jeopardizes research programs relying on NMR spectroscopy. A helium recovery
system collects the helium boiloff from the superconducting magnets of NMR
spectrometers and then reliquefies the helium for reuse. This equipment supports
the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students, including
undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM and first-generation
students, at all levels in multiple departments and the surrounding community.

This award is aimed at supporting research and education at all levels.
Specifically, this helium recovery system collects the helium boiloff for
reliquefication and reuse from the superconducting magnets which sustains the
operation of the institution’s five NMR spectrometers. The NMR instrumentation
supported by this equipment enables research projects focused on chemical
synthesis and methodology, medicinal chemistry, and reaction technology
development. The research supported also involves the development and
mechanistic study of catalytic oxidation reactions and sustainable
(photo)chemistry with earth-abundant metals. Additionally, the recovery system
aids in supporting investigations focusing on the methodology development and
optimization using organometallic catalysis and the development of protein-
protein interaction inhibitors. Other research areas include the development of
new MRI contrast agents and single molecule magnets, NMR methodology
development, and the characterization of insect wing membranes using solid-state
NMR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.