* 2320587
* WoU-MMA: Development of the Optical Alignment Systems for the Medium-Sized Telescopes of the Cherenkov Telescope Array
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Amy Furniss, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,904,416.00

The Cherenkov Telescope Array Observatory (CTAO) is a forthcoming state-of-the-
art facility to study very high-energy gamma-rays and provide transformative
understanding of the most extreme objects in the Universe, including pulsars,
supernova remnants, gamma-ray bursts, and supermassive black holes at the center
of active galaxies. The CTAO is now entering the construction phase of the
project, with first science observations anticipated in approximately three
years utilizing the first pathfinder imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes
(IACTs) of the observatory. This award supports U.S. CTAO scientists in the
development, fabrication, and installation of the optical alignment systems for
the initial seven medium-sized CTA telescopes, including five at the northern
site at Rogue de los Muchachos Observatory, La Palma, Spain, one at the southern
site at the European Southern Observatory, Paranal, Chile, and the prototype
Schwarzchild-Couder telescope (pSCT) located at the Fred Lawrence Whipple
Observatory in Arizona. The awarded activities provide a unique instrumentation
training ground for students and early career researchers and a series of
workshops are planned to develop educational high-energy astrophysics materials
for K-12 schools. The leading U.S. contributions provided via this award provide
the foundation for broad access of U.S. scientists to CTAO and the next
generation gamma-ray discoveries.

The CTAO will utilize advanced IACT technology in large arrays of three
telescope apertures: large (23m), medium (10-12m) and small (4m). The medium-
scale telescopes targeted in this award involve a single-mirror, prime focus
Davis-Cotton design and a double-mirror, aplanatic Schwarzschild-Couder design.
The observatory will provide up to ten times increased sensitivity over current
instruments in measurements of astrophysical gamma-rays at energies between 20
GeV â€“ 300 TeV. With design improvements of a 3x increase in imaging area, the
CTAO will enable astrophysical sky surveys to be completed approximately 300x
faster than current facilities, revolutionizing high-energy gamma-ray follow-up
to multi-messenger astrophysics events, including those triggered by
gravitational wave and high-energy neutrino alerts. The initial five medium
telescopes at the northern site will be the most sensitive array in their
energy-band as a stand-alone instrument. Operating in conjunction with the four
large-sized telescopes currently being built on the site will form the largest,
most sensitivity array of IACTs yet assembled. The first medium-sized telescope
to be outfitted at the southern site will be the first IACT in the southern
portion of the Western hemisphere, providing important new sky coverage for
transient events such as gravitational wave counterparts. Finally, the high-
angular resolution of the novel pSCT design will provide unique future
additional reach to the CTAO program. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.