* 2320391
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer for Earth and Ocean Science Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Brian Popp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 209,705.00

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports acquisition of a state-of-the-art
isotope ratio mass spectrometer to be used for earth and ocean science research.
The instrument will be integrated into the existing stable isotope
biogeochemistry laboratory and will replace an obsolete and increasingly
unreliable mass spectrometer purchased in 1991 at the University of Hawaii at
Manoa. The equipment will be used principally for isotope analyses of nitrate,
nitrite and ammonium that are crucial for catalyzing new research capacity and
supporting existing research strengths in biogeochemistry in Hawaii. The new
isotope ratio mass spectrometer will contribute to University of Hawaii’s
educational goals by training researchers at every level (e.g., professors,
postdocs, students) for stable isotope analyses, though new collaborations,
teaching efforts, and a “seed analysis” program as well as provide support for
ongoing NSF REU programs and the UH Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Program. The isotope ratio mass spectrometer will also support the research of
three young faculty including two nā wāhine (women) of native Hawaiian ancestry.

Nitrogen inputs into groundwater aquifers in Hawaii and other volcanic islands
in the Pacific pollutes drinking water supplies. Identification of groundwater
contamination pathways is critically important for island environments like
Hawaii where 99% of domestic water supply is from groundwater. Submarine ground
water discharge of nutrient-rich waters can contaminate nearshore environments
as well as promote ecological changes in nearshore reef ecosystems. Knowing
pathways of ground flow in aquifers allows assessment of how land use relates to
groundwater contamination and isotope analyses of nitrate, nitrite and ammonium
can be used to identify sources and fates of nitrogen contamination in
groundwater and nearshore environments, which includes residential cesspools and
sewage injection into groundwater. Of the >110,000 residential on-site disposal
systems in use in Hawaii, the majority are cesspools that State-wide discharge
~265 million liters per day of minimally treated sewage effluent into
groundwater. New State of Hawaii regulations require that all cesspools must be
“upgraded, converted, or closed” by 2050. Cesspool sewage hotspots must be
identified and appropriate alternatives to residential sewage disposal
determined. Isotopic analyses of nitrate, nitrite and ammonium facilitated by
the new equipment will support scientific studies in Hawaii and on other Pacific
Islands that will address these challenges. Isotope analyses of nitrate and
nitrite in seawater are fundamental measurement used to quantify nitrogen
cycling in the ocean. Researchers at University of Hawaii have used 15N-labeled
nitrate and nitrite to study microbial nitrification in several marine
environments. Nitrification in the ocean plays a critical role in the nitrogen
cycle by changing the form in which N occurs—in turn influencing the
accessibility and availability of nitrogen to different groups of organisms and
processes. Studies using 15N-labeled substrates provide critical information on
rates of ammonia and nitrite oxidation, and when coupled with genetic analyses,
reveal important insights into the ecology and regulation of these
biogeochemically-important processes in all marine systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.