* 2320697
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Data-Enabled Predictive Control for Heterogeneous Mixed Traffic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yang Zheng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 203,000.00

This grant will fund research that enables advancements in transportation
efficiency and safety through the deployment of virtually connected and
automated vehicles among human-driven vehicles, thereby promoting the progress
of science and advancing the national prosperity. While potential benefits for
fuel efficiency and road safety from full vehicle automation and vehicle-to-
vehicle communication are maximized in a traffic system without human drivers,
mixed traffic scenarios with coexistence between human-driven vehicles and
automated vehicles will be the norm in the intermediate term. A major challenge
to the control of automated vehicles in such environments is the requirement
that the behavior of the human drivers either be reliably described using
explicit car-following models or accurately predicted using computationally
efficient, data-driven techniques, neither of which is currently possible. This
project aims to resolve this challenge by developing a new model-free, data-
efficient control and optimization framework that will enable fast decision-
making for efficient, robust, and safe coordination of multiple connected and
automated vehicles in mixed traffic systems. The results will be disseminated to
the research community and the automotive industry through sharing of open-
source software code and organization of a workshop with speakers from both
academia and industry. These efforts are closely integrated with educational and
outreach activities that aim to increase the participation of undergraduate and
high-school students in engineering research.

This research aims to develop the foundations of efficient and scalable control
designs for connected and automated vehicles that can meet real-time
computational constraints and guarantee safe performance in mixed traffic,
without explicit modeling of the behavior of human-driven vehicles. It
accomplishes this outcome by building a data-driven predictive control framework
in which system-level cost functions and constraints are synergistically
designed to handle unknown and uncertain traffic dynamics directly from
input/output data, and adaptive data library updates respond to time-varying
traffic conditions. Additionally, the research strives to develop algorithms for
scalable, online data compression and distributed optimization that exploit
cascading system structures to decompose centralized predictive control problems
into those of lower dimension without compromising control performance.
Extensive simulations and field experiments conducted in collaboration with an
industry partner will be used to evaluate the theoretical outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.