* 2320739
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an Atomic-Layer Deposition System with Remote Plasma Activation of Surface Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Abelson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 944,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
customized plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD) system, which will
be housed in a shared facility at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC). This instrument will provide regional and national access to its unique
capability of depositing various high-quality thin-film materials with atomic
precise thickness at low processing temperatures. It will be used by
investigators to develop multiple technologies critical for U.S. economic
development and national security, including microelectronics, 5G/6G wireless
communications, quantum information science, biotechnologies, and energy
storage. In addition, this PE-ALD system will be used in four undergraduate
courses in electronic materials and processing at UIUC, providing hands-on
training of the next-generation of scientists and engineers as future workforce
for U.S. semiconductor manufacturing industry. It will also enable the
development of a learning module about the ALD technique for K-12 students for
UIUC's Engineering Open House, and PE-ALD related summer research projects for
local high-school students from minority groups. These outreach events will
contribute to sustaining the diverse STEM talent pipeline.

A core capability driving nationally important innovations in next-generation
semiconductor and nanotechnology manufacturing is advanced nanoscale thin-film
deposition capabilities. ALD is a unique and powerful vapor-phase deposition
technique in which ultrathin, i.e., typically nanometer scale, films are
synthesized sub-monolayer by sub-monolayer by repeating two sequentially
executed half cycles involving self-limiting chemical reactions on a substrate
surface. By integrating a remote plasma source, flow-through vapor delivery
module, in situ ellipsometry, and load-lock connection with a glove box in a
single system, this custom-built ALD system provides the capability to
conformally deposit dense, pin-hole-free thin films of a wide spectrum of
materials, including metals, nitrides, and oxides. This can be done using
custom-synthesized precursors within a limited thermal budget, on both
conventional and air-sensitive substrates featuring complex surface topologies,
with precisely controlled material stoichiometry and thickness on the lattice
scale. The investigators will utilize these capabilities to deposit functional
thin film materials as the core component in high performance logic and power
transistors, ferroelectric memory, optical wave guide, quantum photonic devices,
quantum tunnel junctions, topological qubits, battery, thermal camouflage
devices, biosensors, and biomedical implants. This instrument will enable
research which will lead to transformative technologies in microelectronics,
quantum sciences, and biomedical engineering. It will also accelerate
development of new ALD precursors and the optimization of their deposition
processes.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the Advanced Manufacturing Program (AM) in the division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.