* 2320742
* When Merit Shifts: The Impact of Changes to Admissions Policies in Selective Public Schools
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Natasha Warikoo, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Antwan Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 256,252.00

This project investigates how changes in school admissions policies affect
perceptions of merit. The study examines the impact of a change in admissions
policy that increased the representation of historically underrepresented groups
in selective public schools. The project examines both the possibilities and
perils of shifts to more inclusive systems of selection, particularly in
organizations with a history of exclusion. The policy change studied in this
project has the potential to assist efforts to provide more equitable access to
high-quality secondary education. This study investigates how changes to
admissions policies in selective public schools affect students’ and teachers’
experiences, behaviors, and attitudes. The project focuses on two schools in a
city that shifted its admissions policy, now placing students in socioeconomic
tiers based on their neighborhoods’ socioeconomic status. The shift in policy
dramatically changed the demographic make-up of one of the city’s selective
public schools but not another. The investigators conduct participant
observation and 160 in-depth interviews with educators and students in both
schools, evaluating impacts on students' experiences and feelings of belonging
and on teachers' behavior and pedagogy. The project pays particular attention to
demographic differences and to differences between students admitted before and
after the changed admissions policy. The study also draws comparisons across the
two schools to understand the extent to which a changing composition shapes
ideas about deservingness of admission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.