* 2320468
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of an Analytical Aberration-Corrected Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Iman Ghamarian, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,500,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This major research instrumentation (MRI) project
enables acquisition of an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron
microscope (AC-STEM) housed at the University of Oklahoma (OU). The microscope
allows researchers to simultaneously collect information about the structure and
chemistry of a range of materials atom-by-atom. The AC-STEM system plays a key
role in broader plans for shared infrastructure to support research and
education in in a multi-state region, including Arkansas, Kansas, Nebraska, and
northern Texas. The AC-STEM is managed by the Samuel Roberts Noble Microscopy
Laboratory (SRNML) core user facility, ensuring the instrument widely
accessible. The microscope empowers a diverse community of researchers to
explore fundamental materials properties that underlie frontier technologies and
address critical societal challenges while training the next generation of
interdisciplinary science and engineering scholars. The instrument is also
integrated into a range of efforts to broaden participation in science and
engineering, including K-12 outreach, interactions with a regional minority-
serving career technology center, and activities providing research experiences
for undergraduates.

Technical Description: Specifically, the MRI project enables acquisition of a
30-200kV probe-corrected system which allows researchers to interrogate
materials with sub-angstrom accuracy to collect simultaneous image, diffraction,
and spectral data. The AC-STEM supports transformative research in quantum
technology and microelectronics, data-driven materials discovery, and
nanomaterials for sustainability, among other topics. Examples of research
activities facilitated by the instrumentation include atomic-level
characterization of single-spin qubits, core-shell nanoparticles for
nanophotonics, radiation-hardening of microelectronics, engineering novel alloys
with intentional defects and complex compositions, and analysis of catalysts
under reaction conditions that enable new sustainable environmental and energy
technologies, including plastic waste reduction and hydrogen energy production,
storage, and transportation.

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.