* 2320318
* Equipment: MRI Track 1: Acquisition of a LA-ICP-MS for Research and Research Training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Gunnar Kwakye, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 625,531.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding to Oberlin
College to acquire a laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma quadrupole mass
spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS), an instrument used to analyze a broad range of solid
(mineral and tissue) and liquid samples to deepen understanding of their
composition and significance. This highly versatile system will enable ten
faculty – six from three departments at Oberlin College and four from other Ohio
colleges and universities – to perform cutting-edge research and to train
undergraduate science students. Oberlin College Geosciences faculty and students
will map the distribution of trace metals in minerals in metamorphic rocks to
reconstruct their pressure-temperature histories, and, by examining isotope
clocks in the mineral zircon, study fundamental Earth processes such as mountain
building. Other faculty will apply similar techniques to fossils and modern
shells to better understand how these organisms respond to and record the
changing climate. The instrument will also be used to study chlorine pollution
in Lake Erie and to research erosion and changing land use. Faculty in
Neuroscience and Chemistry and Biochemistry will study the uptake of heavy
metals in brain tissue and the model organism Caenorhabditis Elegans (C.
elegans), research that can contribute to our understanding of strategies for
reducing the harmful impacts of environmental toxins. The LA-ICP-MS will enhance
the research productivity of the ten-member proposing team, which is majority
female and includes four early-career scientists and three members of
minoritized groups underrepresented in the sciences. Oberlin is a leading
educator of students who go on to earn PhDs in the sciences, and this instrument
will improve the research training of undergraduates, who will use it in upper-
level classes as well as in independent projects. It will also improve the
ability of Oberlin and the other participating institutions – Denison
University, The College of Wooster, and Case Western Reserve University – to
recruit and train a diverse group of students in scientific research.

The acquisition of an ICP-MS with tandem quadrupoles and gas reaction cell
coupled to a 193 nm laser ablation system with precise stage control will enable
faculty at Oberlin to perform cutting-edge research while recruiting and
training future scientists. The newest generation of LA systems supports high-
resolution (~3 μm) spatial analyses with a fast wash-out, which, when carefully
synchronized with a high-sensitivity quadrupole ICP-MS, allows for detailed
imaging of trace elements, opening up new avenues of research. Likewise,
substantial recent developments in tandem quadrupole and collision/reaction cell
mass spectrometry allow greatly increased sensitivity through the removal of
mass interferences. Science education at Oberlin is enhanced by the active and
productive research programs of individual and collaborative faculty, and access
to the LA-ICP-MS system will advance several research programs at the
institution, will enable Oberlin to attract and retain a top science faculty and
provide infrastructure for them to remain at the forefront of their disciplines
while continuing our mission of high-quality research training. Importantly,
undergraduate students will be primary users of the LA-ICP-MS, enabling them to
develop hands-on experience and skills useful for their future careers in
science

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.