* 2320338
* MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of Pulsed 9/34 GHz EPR Spectrometer for Quantum Science and Biochemical Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Thierry Dubroca, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,144,713.00

This award is jointly funded by the Chemical Instrumentation (CRIF) program and
the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. Professor Stephen Hill from
Florida State University and colleagues Geoffrey Strouse and Wen Zhu, together
with NHMFL Research Faculty Thierry Dubroca and Tomas Orlando are acquiring a
state-of-the-art pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer
operating at frequencies of 9 and 34 gigahertz, in magnetic fields up to 1.5
tesla. This spectrometer is used in various fields including chemistry, biology,
and physics. The spectrometer allows observation of transitions when electrons
in a magnet field are irradiated with microwaves. The spectrum obtained gives
valuable information about the composition of a sample. This information
provides insight on the environment near the atom and the properties of the
system. As such, the instrumentation is used to provide precise structural
details of chemically and biologically important molecules on length scales not
possible with nuclear magnetic resonance, including bond distances and angles,
as well as accurate information about the spatial arrangements of molecules
relative to neighboring ones. In addition, it is used to determine the dynamical
properties of magnetic electrons that are central to modern information
technologies, including quantum sensing and computing. The instrumentation
impacts research in wide ranging areas including biochemistry, organic and
inorganic chemistry, catalysis, materials chemistry and physics, as well as the
growing area of quantum information science. The instrument is an integral part
of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students in chemistry, biochemistry and physics at both FSU and the
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) . The reach of the
instrumentation extends to similar programs at the nearby campuses of Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University, an historically black university, and
the University of Florida. Integration of the instrument with the NHMFL user
programs also impacts the work of researchers and students throughout the US and
beyond, including the many participants of schools and workshops organized by
the lab.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on the following areas of study: (i)
obtaining fundamental understanding of the microscopic processes that limit the
coherence of molecular spin qubits, with the aim of designing molecules with
built-in protection against various sources of decoherence; (ii) linking
molecular qubits to form elementary quantum gates; (iii) development of
electrical and optical schemes for initialization and manipulation of spin
qubits that are essential for next generation quantum technologies; (iv) seeking
understanding of the intrinsic electronic structures and the role of extrinsic
defects in dilute magnetic semiconductor quantum dots, with a view to optimizing
plasmonic and spintronics properties of importance to future microelectronics
applications; (v) understanding peptide biosynthesis for design of next-
generation “evolution-proof” antibiotics and green catalysts; and (vi)
development of new dynamic nuclear polarization agents with properties that
optimize nuclear magnetic resonance signal enhancements, thereby greatly
increasing the sensitivity of this widely applied technique.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.