* 2320920
* CAREER: HCC: Developing Perceptually-Driven Tools for Estimating Visualization Effectiveness
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2028
* Danielle Szafir, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2028
* USD 549,851.00

Diverse people use visualizations to explore and communicate data across
applications ranging from personal finance and activity tracking to public
policy and scientific communication. New visualization techniques emerge as
society's reliance on data grows. The ways these techniques represent data
affect what people see in their data: different designs support different
statistical insight and can even mislead people by appearing to show patterns
that are not there. Designers lack grounded, actionable guidance for when and
how their visualizations might most effectively communicate the patterns they
see that matter most in their data. This project will work to develop data-
driven models, metrics, and tools that describe what people see in a
visualization and help them assess what it means and how it can help. Outcomes
are expected to help people creating or using visualizations to rapidly predict
what kinds of statistical patterns a visualization might communicate and the
potential for biases in these patterns. This includes significantly reducing the
time and expertise barriers for creating effective visualizations, leading to
more precise and trustworthy public communication through data. The project will
work to develop educational materials that teach best practices in visualization
evaluation. These activities will collectively make it easier to develop honest
and effective data visualizations across a range of goals and disciplines.

The project investigates three core technical objectives: (1) modeling how
people perceive different statistical properties of data across common
representations, by performing a series of experiments modeling how people
interpret statistical quantities in visualizations, leading to a curated corpus
of experimental data for visualization perception; (2) generating metrics that
describe the information people are most likely to gain from a visualization by
conducting a series of mixed-methods experiments, paired with data from the
first objective, to build models for probabilistically predicting visualization
effectiveness; and (3) integrating these metrics into an interactive web tool
for automating evaluation, by rapidly estimating the effectiveness of a given
visualization for communicating a target set of properties. A crossover between
visualization and vision science through interdisciplinary initiatives is
planned, which includes the development and dissemination of educational
materials released through open-source curriculum, an online course, and a
textbook.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.