* 2320386
* Northeast Noyce Professional Learning Network
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lisa Gonsalves, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 3,259,377.00

The project aims to serve the national need of supporting the growth and
development of highly effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. Effective STEM teachers inspire and engage students, provide them
with the skills and knowledge needed to participate in the STEM workforce, and
ultimately help them achieve their full potential. It is particularly critical
to build the capacity of STEM teachers to foster the frequently untapped talent
of students in high-need schools, where many students from historically
marginalized populations attend. To address this need, the project will
establish a regional professional learning network in the Northeast United
States. The network will increase opportunities for early career STEM teachers
to connect and collaborate with STEM colleagues from across the region,
including experienced master teachers. The network will complement STEM teacher
development efforts at individual universities and school districts with
professional learning activities to further promote the retention and success of
early career STEM teachers in high-need districts.

This project is a partnership between three institutions of higher education
with previously successful Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship projects: the
University of Rochester (NY), the University of Massachusetts at Boston (MA),
and Saint Josephâ€™s University (PA). Project goals include: a) connecting,
leveraging, and further developing the knowledge and expertise of master
teachers to benefit early-career STEM teachers; b) providing high-quality
professional learning experiences for over 600 prospective and practicing
teachers that includes two regional STEM teaching conferences, 22 professional
learning communities, 22 video clubs, 352 hours of coaching for early career
STEM teachers, and nine local professional learning institutes; and c)
connecting over 80 Northeast institutions of higher education offering STEM
teaching programs to collectively create the Northeast Noyce Professional
Learning Network. Among other things, this network will provide opportunities
for STEM teacher education leaders to share knowledge and understandings that
support continuous improvement of STEM teacher education programs. The project
will advance understandings of how teachers access networks to collaborate,
connect, and share through a robust program evaluation plan. The project
benefits society by translating knowledge into solutions as teachers learn about
and implement evidence-based practices in STEM education. This conference
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce), which aims to support talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.