* 2320148
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: Cyberinfrastructure-Enabled Machine Learning for Understanding and Forecasting Space Weather
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Katherine Herbert, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 46,996.00

Space weather (SWx) refers to the transients in the space environment traveling
from the Sun to Earth. SWx affects the life of human beings, including
communication, transportation, power supplies, national defense, space travel,
and more. In the recent decade, tackling the difficult task of understanding and
forecasting violent solar eruptions, which are sources of SWx, and their
terrestrial impacts has become a strategic national priority.
Cyberinfrastructure (CI) is an extremely important part of SWx research, as many
terabytes of data are generated daily from different sources. This collaborative
project between New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) and Montclair State
University (MSU) builds upon a National Science Foundation funded CI platform
for sharing CI enabled machine learning (ML) methods, tools, and resources for
SWx data exploration and event prediction. The project incorporates the skills
and lessons learned from the development of the NSF funded CI platform into a
course curriculum. By transforming research results and findings into teaching
modules, the project trains potential ML professionals to develop advanced CI
enabled methods for understanding, monitoring, and forecasting SWx. Both NJIT
and MSU are minority serving institutions with ample resources to support
underrepresented students. Experienced project leaders oversee diversity,
equity, and inclusion efforts for the project development.

This project makes contributions to CI training by (1) developing learning
modules for a new computer science graduate course, (2) providing students with
opportunities to gain hands on experience in implementing ML solutions for SWx
problems, (3) exposing students to advances in machine learning as a service,
operational near real time SWx forecasting systems, and predictive intelligence
with Binder enabled Zenodo archived open source ML tools, and (4) assessing the
teaching and mentoring methods using formative and summative approaches. The
principal investigators work with undergraduate students to develop CI resources
and improve the sustainability of CI enabled ML tools. SWx has a profound impact
on the Earth system. Building the SWx readiness merits substantial efforts on
several fronts, including research, forecast, and mitigation plan. The new
course nourishes graduate students, preparing them to become CI professionals
capable of contributing to SWx monitoring and predictive analytics in general.
The project provides training of the workforce in SWx research, which is
critically important in many areas such as safety of space programs, radio
communications and power grids. Knowledge generated from the project also has
broader applications in other areas of science. The program, while small and
pilot, can help address the need of CI professionals in New Jersey.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Astronomical Sciences within the NSF Directorate
for Math and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Research, Innovation,
Synergies, and Education (RISE) within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences
(GEO).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.