* 2320674
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer for biogeochemical and ecological education and research in an era of global change
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 637,661.00

This award will expand the analytical capability of the University of
California, Santa Barbara Marine Science Institute (MSI) to include advanced
chemical analyses of the greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O) and small organic
molecules through the acquisition of a new stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer and three supporting peripheral instruments. Currently, these
measurements can only be made in a small number of laboratories. The MSI
Analytical Laboratory, where the new instrumentation will be housed, is a
facility with a 45-year history of successful operation staffed by two full-time
professional technicians. This acquisition will catalyze cross-department
interactions and interdisciplinary environmental science by facilitating a space
where faculty and students from across campus using similar methods can interact
without being siloed by departments. UCSB is both an Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI) and an Asian American, Native American and Pacific Islander-
Serving Institution (AANAPISI), with several active undergraduate research
initiatives that reflect this unique status. The instrumentation will contribute
significantly to improving STEM education at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels across campus and ensure that students are trained to be competitive in
the global STEM workforce. UCSB leads two marine NSF Long-Term Ecological
Research (LTER) programs: Santa Barbara Coastal (SBC) and Moâ€™orea Coral Reef
(MCR). The new instrumentation will allow LTER researchers to tackle numerous
questions at the leading edge of ecological and biogeochemical global change
research. Through the SBC-LTER, researchers will use compound-specific isotope
analyses (CSIA) of amino acids to further unravel kelp forest food webs by
determining the sources of primary production supporting reefs. These
measurements will also provide insights into how material flows, food web
structure, and trophic cascades are impacted by fishing and long-term increases
in non-native and southern-affinity species following ocean heat waves.
Researchers with the MCR-LTER will use CSIA in amino acids to create improved
spatial and temporal models of land-based runoff to better understand how
anthropogenic nutrient inputs control reef dynamics. N2O isotopomer analysis in
combination with 15N tracer experiments will allow tracking the sources of N2O,
a powerful greenhouse gas, that are emitted to the atmosphere in coastal
upwelling systems. Sulfur isotopes will enable ground-breaking research on
marine organic matter sulfurization, which may contribute to carbon preservation
and sequestration in the ocean. Hydrogen isotope capability will facilitate
tracing the fate of cyanobacterial hydrocarbons using CSIA. Finally, in
terrestrial aquatic ecosystems, researchers will quantify the degree to which
organic matter degradation is conducted through microbial metabolism versus
direct photooxidation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.