* 2320957
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Quantum Research Workforce Development on End-to-End Quantum Systems Integration
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jessica Rosenberg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Significant progress has been made in the manufacturing of quantum computers in
recent years, leading to the emergence of quantum computers from high-tech and
startup companies such as IBM, Google, Intel, IonQ, PsiQuantum, Xanadu, and
ColdQuanta. Moreover, the number of quantum bits in a quantum computer
consistently grows from tens to hundreds. As such, the practical use of the
emerging quantum computing cyberinfrastructure for solving real-world problems
is just around the corner; however, the development of the quantum engineering
workforce has yet to keep pace, which creates a shortage of talent to use and
optimize the quantum system and significantly slows down the process of
exploring quantum frontiers to advance science and engineering. To fill this
gap, this project pilots an end-to-end quantum system integration training
program, which provides workshops to bring quantum newcomers into the field,
develops systematic courses to prepare undergraduates and graduates getting
ready for quantum engineering jobs and research, and offers tutorials to enable
the broad adoption of quantum computing tools and methods.

The goal of this project is to grow a diverse quantum-ready workforce and
broaden the adoption of advanced quantum computing cyberinfrastructure. To
achieve this goal, three engaging, gradually advanced, self-contained, and high-
impact training projects are built upon the PI and Co-PIs' existing courses on
introduction to quantum computing, and innovative research on quantum system
optimization, quantum machine learning, and quantum error suppression. These
projects are compiled into educational activities, including curricula, regional
workshops, and nationwide tutorials. Specifically, the proposed educational
activities include (1) updating an existing Mason course, entitled Introduction
to Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, to make it suitable for
engineering students and creating a new graduate course, entitled Quantum
Computing System Design; (2) creating a project-based workshop for diverse
quantum newcomers; and (3) developing hands-on tutorials to train people in the
use of quantum deployment tools. The team is collaborating with the IBM Quantum
Hub and the Quantum Computing User Program at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL), allowing the usage of quantum computers at various scales. All
educational activities aim to boost the adoption of new and advanced quantum
cyberinfrastructures by multidisciplinary students and researchers and to
formulate a quantum engineering research community.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations within the
NSF Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.