* 2320163
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a multi-modal x-ray diffraction and scattering instrument
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Katharine Flores, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 719,573.00

The ability to describe the structure of a material – from the arrangement of
atoms to the roughness of a surface – is foundational to the field of materials
science and engineering. Determining how material structure changes during use
or due to interactions with the environment is critical to understanding and
addressing challenges as diverse as climate change, clean and efficient energy
production and utilization, and disease detection. X-ray diffraction and
scattering (XRD/S) techniques are uniquely capable of probing a broad range of
structural features. The X-ray analysis system acquired in this project can be
easily reconfigured to perform several complementary measurements and identify
critical structural features responsible for a material’s behavior and
functionality. Examples of the research enabled by this XRD/S instrument include
improving the performance of materials used in batteries and ultra-thin
electronic devices; designing new environmentally friendly biopolymers;
developing inexpensive sensors to detect viruses and antibodies; discovering new
alloys for light-weight automobiles and aircraft; and identifying and mitigating
environmental contaminants in the water and air. At least 25 research groups
spanning 8 disciplines at 5 universities plan to employ the instrument in their
research. Additionally, the instrument will be a vital resource for training the
next generation of scientists and engineers in a diverse set of measurement
techniques. The instrument will be used by undergraduate and graduate students
in a hands-on materials characterization course sequence, as well as in
technical skills workshops that will be open to internal and external users.

The multi-modal XRD/S instrument will enable researchers to probe materials
structure in the following ways: • X-ray diffraction (XRD): XRD provides phase
identification, lattice parameters, and domain size. • Small- and wide-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS): SAXS provides information on size, shape,
ordering, and self-similarity of materials on the 1-100 nm length scale while
WAXS (often simultaneously) provides phase identification and an assessment of
crystallinity. • X-ray reflectometry (XRR): XRR evaluates roughness and film
thickness on flat surfaces. • Grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GI-XRD): GI-
XRD is a surface-sensitive XRD measurement, enabling determination of thin film
strain, disruption of surface crystallinity, and surface precipitates.

These modes are enhanced by a unique microfocus X-ray source for precisely
collimating the incident X-ray beam, which maximizes the beam intensity and
significantly reduces data collection times relative to conventional sealed tube
sources. Accessories include a high-resolution translation stage, a battery cell
and potentiostat, and an atmosphere-controlled heating/cooling stage, which
enable high-throughput, in situ, and operando observations of dynamic phenomena
crucial to understanding and manipulating materials behavior. These capabilities
will be brought to bear on a wide range of materials research problems,
including energy conversion and storage, geological and environmental systems,
bio-derived materials and other polymers, and accelerated materials discovery
and design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.