* 2320261
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of Data Observation and Computation Collaboratory (DOCC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Andrew Johnson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,548,545.00

The Data Observation and Computation Collaboratory (DOCC, ‘dock’) is a visual
data science instrument for University of Illinois Chicago (UIC) science and
engineering research and research training. Many UIC researchers are part of
multi-disciplinary teams investigating and contributing to solutions for
societal issues, in such fields as biology, cybersecurity, healthcare,
manufacturing, urban sustainability, and cyber-physical systems (e.g.,
autonomous cars). DOCC is a digital Project Room that enables domain scientists
and computer scientists to collaborate on real-world problems by providing them
with high-performance computing, high-resolution displays, and sophisticated
Artificial Intelligence (AI), data analytic, data simulation, image processing,
visualization, and virtual-reality software and services.

Societal challenges can only be addressed by research teams, with each
contributing expertise in complementary areas. DOCC’s Intellectual Merit is two-
fold: it provides onsite computing with adequate support, and it provides
collaboration software services. With respect to the former, DOCC is a
configurable computing environment that prioritizes real-time, interactive,
collaborative, data-intensive applications, but can be scheduled off-hours for
batch-mode processing. Users can execute codes faster, apply more sophisticated
analytics to large-scale problems, gain greater insights, and open new avenues
of research. With respect to the latter, DOCC’s collaboration software lets
researchers either sit around one of DOCC’s large tables and display walls or
video-teleconference in while simultaneously sharing and interacting with their
data on the large displays – which remote viewers can access online.

To encourage adoption and ensure Broader Impact, DOCC plans to have a visual
front end, enabling users to easily access familiar collaboration tools,
scientific notebooks, AI workflows, and popular visualization software.
Alternatively, users can add new AI models or create them from scratch. And
because DOCC is connected to the UIC research network, data and/or computer
codes can be ported to remote computer and cloud resources located on campus,
regionally, nationally, or internationally. DOCC personnel can assist new users
make their applications more robust, dynamic and configurable. DOCC can
transform scientific research, data exploration and discovery, recruit and
retain new faculty, make cyberinfrastructure more accessible to students, and
help educate the next-generation workforce. UIC is a Minority Serving
Institution, a Hispanic Serving Institution and an Asian American and Native
American Pacific Islander Serving Institution.

DOCC and its associated data will remain active for at least three years after
the completion of this project, as demand dictates. Software will be stored and
archived via EVL’s storage servers, as well as code repositories. The project
website is www.evl.uic.edu/docc

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.