* 2320428
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Desktop SEM-EDS for Advanced Material and Biological Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Murray, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 186,765.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. California State University East
Bay is acquiring a desktop scanning electron microscope with energy-dispersive
X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) instrument to support the research of Professor
Stephanie Zaleski and colleagues Marlin Halim, Ruth Tinnacher, and James Murray.
In general, SEM-EDS enables sensitive micro- to nanoscale structural imaging
combined with elemental mapping to study materials ranging from semiconductor
devices to microorganisms. This award facilitates research across diverse fields
such as nanoscience, art conservation, molecular biosensing, environmental
geochemistry and radiochemistry, and sensory biology. This award targets the
enhancement of educational, research, and research training for the highly
diverse undergraduate and master’s level student population at CSU East Bay
within the Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Biological Sciences,
Anthropology, Geography & Environmental Studies, Criminal Justice, Engineering,
and Physics. The instrument also enriches research and outreach work with
external collaborators at national laboratories, universities, community
colleges, high schools, and art museums.

This award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels.
Specifically, the instrument enables research focusing characterizing of
structure-property relationships of self-assembled gold nanoparticle films for
molecular sensing applications and investigating degradation phenomena in oil
paint films. Additional research projects include detecting Fe-associated
structures in sea slugs and understanding their role in geomagnetic sensing and
the characterization of Gd-aptamer loading density on metallic nanoparticles for
use as contrast agents and sensors. The instrumentation is also used to
investigate the nature of uranium adsorption onto clay and other mineral
surfaces for use in future nuclear waste repositories, and other environmental
geochemistry questions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.