* 2320385
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Direct Write Laser to Advance Semiconductor Research and Education at Norfolk State University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Doyle Temple, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 769,800.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
direct write laser system at Norfolk State University. This instrumentation uses
a versatile nanofabrication technique to directly pattern a material at very
small scales with high precision and accuracy. This will provide state-of-the-
art technology to enhance scientific research and education in the areas of
materials science and semiconductor technologies. The direct write laser system
will enable research that addresses fundamental issues in fields such as micro-
optics, data storage, microelectronics, and photonics. It not only advances
these fields but also supports education and diversity by equipping students
with valuable hands-on experience. By enabling students and researchers to
access this advanced instrument, the project promotes the progress of science
and enhances workforce development. Furthermore, the project benefits society by
fostering interdisciplinary research, innovation, and contributing to the
overall welfare and prosperity of the nation particularly with respect to
semiconductor research and workforce development.

This project will allow for the precise and accurate patterning of materials on
a micro or nano scale, benefiting diverse research efforts at Norfolk State
University. The instrument will include a powerful laser with optimized
parameters, such as wavelength and pulse duration. Advanced software will
provide precise laser control, allowing fabrication of intricate patterns and
designs. The integration of complementary tools such as electron beam
lithography into the direct write laser system will increase its versatility and
expand its potential applications. This system will drive advancements in
materials science, semiconductor technologies, and wearable biosensors by
providing exceptional precision, resolution, and compatibility with various
materials. It will allow scientists to investigate novel phenomena, create
innovative devices, and push the limits of scientific knowledge in
nanofabrication and related fields. It is anticipated that the instrument
acquisition will contribute to scientific advancement, foster interdisciplinary
collaborations, and establish Norfolk State University as a leading center for
nanofabrication research.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the Advanced Manufacturing Program (AM) in the division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.