* 2320649
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a GPU-Accelerated Computing Cluster for Advanced Optimization and Design in Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Annabella Selloni, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,399,000.00

This award supports the acquisition of a specialized high-performance computing
(HPC) cluster with state-of-the-art graphical processing units (GPUs) that offer
unique capabilities compared to existing resources. The instrument will benefit
hundreds of researchers within the Princeton community, external collaborators,
and program participants, accelerating scientific discoveries with beneficial
impacts on sustainability and human health. The instrument will catalyze
frontier research across diverse disciplines, such as chemistry, chemical
engineering, computer science, geophysics, mechanical engineering, neuroscience,
plasma physics, and psychology, to unravel complex phenomena and pioneer
transformative solutions to global challenges. In particular, the system
supports research in the design of new materials for healthcare and sustainable-
energy solutions, a deepening of our understanding of complex chemistry and
physics, development of low-cost imaging systems for medicine and sensing,
large-scale computations and analyses related to neuroscience, and more.
Additionally, the instrument will foster education and utilization of high-
performance GPUs through software dissemination and broadly accessible training
programs. Major initiatives include an annual GPU Hackathon with NVIDIA, summer
research programs for underrepresented undergraduate students and formerly
incarcerated youth, engagement with an accelerator program for development and
launching of startups led by students, and GPU-related workshops. These
activities will cultivate exceptionally strong and well-prepared candidates for
technical positions in industry, national labs, and academia. The instrument
will feature 10 computing nodes, each with AMD Genoa CPUs and NVIDIA H100 GPUs.
Importantly, the H100s offer enhanced asynchronous execution and substantial
speedups over current A100s (e.g., 6x on Tensor Cores, 7x on DPX instructions,
2-8x on AI model training, and 30x on AI inference). With these GPUs, Princeton
researchers and collaborators will leverage machine learning and high-speed
calculations to achieve remarkable progress in their respective fields. By
increasing throughput of molecular simulations, the machine will dramatically
accelerate work flows for computationally guided design of novel catalytic
materials, such as durable enzymes and polymer-MOF composites. GPU acceleration
will yield pioneering ab initio-based descriptions of molecular and interfacial
phenomena. The machine will also enable critical software developments towards
efficiently mapping the earthâ€™s interior, advancing inexpensive alternatives to
medical magnetic resonance imaging, real-time mitigation strategies for fusion
reactor control, and modeling complex combustion systems. Increased computing
capabilities will support the design of novel nanophotonic imagers that unlock
new applications in medicine or as optical diagnostics. The machine will further
bolster high-throughput quantitative characterization to inform the neurological
underpinnings of social communication and reward-seeking in animal models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.