* 2320568
* CCSS: Secure Dual-Function Radar Communication Systems Assisted by Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Athina Petropulu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 199,999.00

As next-generation wireless systems strive to incorporate sensing capabilities
alongside communication functionalities, the efficient allocation of spectrum
between radar and communication functions has become a prominent focus. One
promising solution is the utilization of dual-function radar-communication
(DFRC) systems. These systems leverage a single device and a single waveform to
enable simultaneous sensing and communication, resulting in improved spectrum
utilization, hardware efficiency, and power savings. To further enhance the
performance of DFRC systems in challenging channel conditions, an emerging
technology called Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces (IRS) can be employed. IRS
involves a planar array of numerous low-cost, real-time configurable elements
that intelligently manipulate the transmitted waveform, creating a smart
propagation environment. While DFRC systems excel at achieving high performance
in both sensing and communication, they are vulnerable to potential
eavesdroppers due to the embedded communication information within the probing
waveform. This project aims to develop novel IRS-aided DFRC system designs that
deliver reliable, high-rate information to the intended communication receiver
while minimizing the information accessible to eavesdroppers. Successful
implementation of secure DFRC systems will have wide-ranging benefits across
applications such as autonomous driving vehicles, unmanned aerial vehicles,
surveillance, search and rescue operations, and advanced manufacturing processes
involving networked robots.

This project addresses optimal IRS-aided DFRC system design and encompasses two
thrusts. Thrust 1 considers design in dynamic environments, such as urban
communication environments. A natural framework for dynamically optimizing the
system parameters in that context is Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL), since it
is adaptive, data-driven and does not require pre-annotated data. In Thrust 1, a
novel and principled deep RL framework will be developed that incorporates
domain knowledge and ensures convergence under gradient descent dynamics. An
off-policy actor-critic approach will be considered, and the role of the Neural
Tangent Kernel (NTK) of the critic network to the training stability of the deep
RL algorithm and its performance to unseen or rarely experienced events will be
investigated. Intelligent eavesdroppers will be addressed by formulating the
performance optimization problem as a multi-agent reinforcement learning problem
that considers both cooperation and competition. Thrust 2 considers DFRC systems
transmitting Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) waveforms and
introduces the novel concept of Directional Modulation via Time-Modulated IRS
(TM-IRS), which allows for more flexible secure system design. With TM-IRS, each
element of the IRS periodically turns ON/OFF across OFDM symbols. By carefully
designing the periodic activation pattern as well as the IRS parameters and the
transmit antenna weights, the signal can be delivered intact in a desired
direction while appearing scrambled in all other directions. TM-IRS offers a
large number of degrees of freedom for system design, thus enhancing the secure
operation of DFRC systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.