* 2320356
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a Hydraulic and Sediment Recirculation Flume to Advance Fundamental Research in Urban Stormwater and Fluvial Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Traver, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,412,970.00

As the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as heavy rains and
floods increase in the United States and worldwide, there is an urgent and
critical need for new experimental and computational tools to advance the
fundamental science and engineering knowledge needed to characterize,
understand, and mitigate the adverse impact of heavy rains and floods on water
quality and availability. This NSF MRI Track 2 award will enable Villanova
University (VU) to acquire a Unidirectional Sediment-feed Tilting Flume (USTF).
This new instrument will enable VU and its academic, municipal, and industrial
partners to carry out critically needed research on urban green stormwater
infrastructure, fluvial processes, urban flood mitigation, and impacts on built
urban environments. The USTF will facilitate collaborative research and
education with the partner institutions in two major themes: 1) green urban
stormwater infrastructure, and 2) river processes and impacts on urban
environments. The acquisition of the USTF will also support education and
training at the undergraduate, graduate, and professional levels in water
resources engineering, geo-environmental engineering, geochemistry, and
geomorphology, as well as facilitate research collaborations and increase
engagement with academic, municipal, and industry partners.

Managing urban stormwater has emerged as a critical challenge for many cities in
the United States as the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such
as heavy rains and floods increase. Stormwater worsens environmental impacts
related to flooding, sediment, nutrient, and pollutant transport that adversely
impact the urban environment and public health. Green stormwater infrastructure
(GSI) provides promising and cost-effective solutions for managing stormwater in
cities and urban areas. GSI consists of integrated soil, water, and plant
systems that intercept stormwater, infiltrate a portion of it into the ground,
and release a portion of it slowly back into sewer systems. This NSF MRI Track 2
award will enable Villanova University to acquire a Unidirectional Sediment-Feed
Tilting Flume (USTF) system with custom inserts to simulate GSI. The USTF will
be used to study urban stormwater infrastructure, fluvial processes, urban flood
mitigation, and impacts on built urban environments that are otherwise
unattainable through field studies or computational models alone. The
collaborative nature of this project will enable students from Villanova, Temple
University, Ohio State University, University of Maryland, Drexel University,
The College of New Jersey, Pennsylvania State University-Harrisburg, and Denison
University to work together on projects, furthering their educational and
research experiences. The project will also involve collaborations/partnerships
with a public utility (Philadelphia Water Department) and engineering firms
including Aterra Solutions, Herbert, Rowland & Grubic, NTM Engineering,
Princeton Hydro, Schnabel Engineering, and WSP Global.

This award was jointly funded by the NSF MRI and the CBET Environmental
Engineering programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.