* 2320406
* Collaborative Research: Equipment: MRI Consortium: Track 2 Development of a Next Generation Fast Neutron Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 08/31/2026
* USD 382,213.00

The study of neutron-rich atomic nuclei can reveal effects about how protons and
neutrons interact inside nuclei. These play an important role in the formation
of the elements in the universe and help scientists understand how the nuclear
core of atoms form. One of the ways to investigate these nuclei at the edge of
stability is to measure their breakup products, which includes the neutrons that
are not needed to hold the smaller nuclei together. The detection of neutrons is
challenging because they have no charge and only interact with the nuclear core
of atoms. This award will support the development, building, and commissioning
of a modular array based on plastic scintillator for the detection of fast
(between one third and one half the speed of light) neutrons. The new detector
array will significantly improve how precisely we can determine the neutrons’
position compared to current neutron detectors because it will make use of
state-of-the-art photo-sensors, and as a result enable nuclear structure
measurements with superior precision. The detector modules will be built and
tested to a large extent at the seven participating undergraduate institutions,
allowing undergraduate students to learn key technical skills and to contribute
to nuclear physics research in a meaningful way. Scintillation detectors, i.e.
detectors that measure the scintillation light that stems from subatomic
particles interacting within the detector, are widely employed in research,
industry, and medical imaging, so these skills can be applied in many crucial
fields.

Contemporary fast neutron detectors use conventional detector configurations of
long plastic scintillator bars read out by pairs of photo-multiplier tubes
(PMTs). The position of the neutron interaction is deduced from the time
difference of the signals measured by each PMT at opposite ends of the detector
bar, and from which detector bar has been hit. A different approach to
scintillation-light collection is pursued in this new detector using arrays of
Silicon Photo-Multipliers (SiPMs), overcoming the limitations of current designs
and resulting in improved position resolution for fast neutron detection. This
also allows a tiled design that offers much more flexibility in adjusting the
active area of the array to specific experiment needs. Invariant-mass
spectroscopy of neutron-unbound states in elements beyond oxygen requires such
an experimental setup with improved resolution. As one moves to heavier unbound
systems one faces higher level densities. To resolve these in the reconstructed
decay energy spectrum requires higher momentum (and thus position) resolution. A
high position resolution also improves the discrimination of double-scattered
events and allows the use of higher beam energies that are available at the
rare-isotope beam facilities such as the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB).
The completed instrument will serve the broad FRIB user community and enable
invariant mass measurements at the resolution that is required for heavier and
more exotic isotopes that are available with FRIB beams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.