* 2320493
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a university-wide computational cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jennifer Hines, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 592,212.00

This project is to procure a computer cluster for Ohio University (OHIO).
Researchers at OHIO will leverage the cluster to screen millions of chemical
compounds for their effectiveness against some disease to shortlist a handful of
potential therapeutic compounds that can be tested further in a laboratory. OHIO
researchers plan to use the cluster for numerous other applications, such as
improving electric car batteries, enhancing navigational aids of airplanes,
automating screening of medical images for tumors, mitigating rusting in oil and
gas pipelines, generating environmentally friendly construction materials from
coal, and identifying abnormal genes in the human body. Additionally, the
cluster will be utilized by educators across disciplines, allowing students to
develop strong data analysis skills necessary in fields spanning sciences,
engineering, and economics. OHIO is the leading institution for Intel
Appalachian Semiconductor Education and Technical (ASCENT) Ecosystem that aims
to train the workforce for the semiconductor industry. The ASCENT program will
rely on the computer cluster to train the students in data analytics and machine
learning. OHIO currently lacks its own computer cluster, significantly impeding
research and teaching reliant on such infrastructure. An in-house computer
cluster will enable a diverse variety of research that require quantum
calculations, molecular simulations, machine learning, big data analysis,
numerical optimization, image analysis, pattern detection, weather simulations,
and finite element analysis. The research enabled will result in significant
technological milestones, including but not limited to the design of new
corrosion inhibitors, drug discovery, transforming coal to a green source of
construction materials, creating a clean source of graphite for electric car
batteries, automation of medical image analysis to detect tumors, genetics, and
developing novel technologies for airplane navigation. The cluster will be an
important teaching tool as well. With the advent of big data and machine
learning as well as rapid developments in various computational fields, it is
essential that undergraduate and graduate students are trained in these areas so
that their skills meet the industry needs. OHIO is the lead institution for
ASCENT, which is a workforce development and training program to cultivate
skilled professionals for Ohioâ€™s semiconductor industry. An in-house cluster
will be pivotal for imparting training in database management systems, machine
learning, algorithms, optimization, and other semiconductor industry-specific
needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.