* 2320195
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Research and Teaching at Vassar College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jennifer Kennell, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 884,934.00

An award is made to Vassar College to acquire a confocal microscope to enhance
research and teaching in the New York Mid-Hudson Valley region, including at
Marist College and at the State University of New York at New Paltz. This
microscope will create new STEM research opportunities for undergraduates,
especially those from underrepresented groups, by enhancing ongoing and future
research projects and by facilitating programs across disciplines aimed at
increasing student diversity in STEM. Microscopy-focused community outreach
events, such as a “science cafe” to informally present research to the broader
community, will highlight the importance of basic biological research to an
inclusive audience. The microscope will enhance an already vibrant life sciences
consortium in the Mid-Hudson Valley, creating a regional resource that builds
community and brings together neighboring institutions and a diversity of
students for cutting-edge scientific discovery.

This award will fundamentally transform faculty research, faculty-mentored
undergraduate research, and advanced-level teaching in the New York Mid-Hudson
Valley region. The breadth of the capabilities of this confocal microscope
includes the ability to image biological structures at high resolution and in
3-dimensions, from molecules to living organisms. The microscope will be a
widely-used, multi-purpose device that augments the capabilities of numerous
researchers in a diverse range of disciplines, including biochemistry, cell
biology, developmental biology, microbiology, molecular biology, neuroscience,
and psychological science. The microscope will also be incorporated into the
classroom, including “hands-on” laboratory courses at both Vassar College and
Marist College. Through undergraduate research and training, this award provides
a state-of-the-art confocal microscopy platform for training the next generation
of scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.