* 2320884
* Water Science and Technology Board and Its Activities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2028
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF award will provide core support for the activities of the Water Science
and Technology Board (WSTB) of the Division on Earth and Life Studies of the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM). WSTB provides
an important convening function for discussion and sharing of knowledge among
academia, government, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector on
topics of relevance to water science, engineering, technology, and policy. WSTB
organizes two public meetings each year and oversees a range of consensus
studies, workshops, and other activities through agreements with federal
agencies and other sponsors. At its semiannual meetings, the Board invites
presentations, and coordinates discussions on significant and emerging water-
related topics of national and global importance. Proposed topics of discussion
during this award period will include the impact of climate change and
associated extreme weather events (e.g., droughts, floods, and wildfires) on
water quantity, quality, and availability from both a hydrological and
engineering perspective; innovative surveillance methods for contaminants of
emerging concern (CECs); environmental justice and inequities in drinking water
and wastewater resource allocation and management; and the co-production of
knowledge on water resources management in collaboration with relevant
stakeholders and holders of traditional bodies of knowledge including
Indigenous, rural, and underrepresented communities. During this award period,
WSTB will also leverage NSF core support funding to seek out opportunities to
engage with other federal agencies. This strategic engagement will enable WSTB
to better understand the federal water landscape and provide both WSTB and NSF
with opportunities to identify synergies on water related crosscutting grand
challenges and research needs as the Nation develops and implements a plan to
achieve water security under a changing climate.

Water is essential to the existence of all forms of life. In the United States,
the development of water infrastructure has expanded the control and immediate
availability of water resources well beyond their natural surface or subsurface
boundaries, but also often beyond their natural capacities for replenishment.
The societal need of clean water for potable, agricultural, and industrial
usages rely on continuing to advance technology, but also on a deep
understanding of the global water cycle and its interactions with other natural
Earth systems. This is becoming ever more urgent with climate change and
changing land use patterns (causing or exacerbating extreme weather events such
as drought, flooding, wildfires, and aridification), and with the increasing
contamination of surface water systems and groundwater aquifers with
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) such as PFAS and microplastic waste. The
Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB) was established in 1982 to oversee and
conduct water-related activities at the National Academies. This charge is
broad, covering all aspects of water science, engineering, technology, and
policy. As a standing body, WSTB combines decades of professional expertise with
a unique neutral convening forum that allows it to provide a scientific and
technological foundation for stewardship of water resources in the Unites States
and beyond. Broad themes that WSTB might explore during this NSF award period
will include impacts of climate change (such as drought, flooding, wildfire, and
aridification) on water availability and quality; environmental justice and
water equity for underserved populations; next generation drinking water,
wastewater, and stormwater systems; water reallocation and reuse; managed
aquifer recharge; impact of emerging contaminants (e.g. PFAS and micro/nano
plastics) on water quality and availability; floodplain management; water
systems engineering; aquatic ecosystem functioning and restoration; and legal,
economic, and regulatory aspects of waterbodies. These are examples of areas
where near-term input and engagement from the water science and engineering
community would be critical as the Nation develops and implements a plan to
achieve water security in the 21st century.

This award is co-funded by the NSF CBET Environmental Engineering and EAR
Hydrologic Sciences programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.