* 2320809
* Equipment: MRI: Track #1 Acquisition of a Differential Scanning Calorimeter to Support Modern Materials Research and Teaching at Western Washington University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Rider, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 173,150.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This major research instrumentation project funds the
acquisition of a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) at Western Washington
University. DSC is a technique for analysis of thermal transitions in materials
based on changes in heat into and out of samples as a function of time and
temperature. The data can be readily translated into fundamental properties of
materials, and thus it is a vital tool for materials research. The DSC and other
advanced instruments are maintained within the WWU instrumentation cluster
managed by the Advanced Materials Science and Engineering Center (AMSEC) which
provides core resources for investigators in a wide range of fields, including
polymer synthesis, polymer and composites engineering, materials chemistry,
biochemistry, biomaterial science, and environmental science. The DSC will also
find widespread use in the undergraduate STEM curriculum and to support hands-on
undergraduate research. This instrument will serve as a critical resource at
WWU, enabling thermal characterization in support of more than 10 research
programs, as well as becoming an integral part of a diverse educational
environment. The DSC also supports applied research with industrial partners
that promotes international competitiveness for manufacturers and speeds
development of materials in critical areas such as energy and sustainability.
TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) is a fundamental characterization method
used to measure thermal transitions such as glass transitions, crystallization,
melting, material thermal stability, reaction and phase-change kinetics, and
oxidative/thermal stability of a wide spectrum of materials. Compared to older
instruments, the new DSC delivers more reproducible data, with improved signal-
to-noise ratio and fidelity, with enhanced resolution and sensitivity, and with
increased sample throughput of up to a factor of three. In terms of usage, the
greatest demand comes from the following fields of research: polymer science and
engineering, materials characterization, nanomaterial and chemical synthesis,
and environmental science. Specific research projects that will immediately use
the DSC include vitrimer and covalent adaptive network materials development,
chemical synthesis of novel polymers and resins, aerospace composites
characterization (both thermoplastic and thermoset materials), materials
recycling and sustainability efforts, biomedical materials applications,
semiconductor materials with nanocomposites development, materials development
for additive manufacturing, and environmental fate and disposition of micro-
plastics. This award reinforces the mission of the NSF by supporting fundamental
materials research as well as applied industrial research in the national
interest, and it provides hands-on research training for researchers and for
undergraduates in lab classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.