* 2320256
* Topics in Protein and RNA Folding and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the he Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Molecular Biophysics program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Professor Devarajan
Thirumalai of the University of Texas at Austin will study the ways that
proteins and RNA interact with each other to control a number of biophysical
processes. In addition to DNA, which contains the blueprint of life, a myriad of
cellular activities are determined by the diverse shapes and conformations that
proteins and RNA adopt in different environments. Professor Thirumalai will
develop new computational methods for simulating the molecular factors that
determine droplet formation in disordered proteins and the mechanisms by which
RNA molecules, previously thought to be merely passive carriers of informations,
self-organize to form condensates. Professor Thirumalai will also work to
develop both a theoretical framework and simulation methods to understand the
molecular basis by which molecular motors, which carry cargo in cells, take
multiple steps on polar tracks. These studies have the potential to provide a
higher level of molecular understanding of complex biomacromolecular processes
of relevance in biophysics. The research project will involve training students
and postdoctoral fellows in interdisciplinary research areas, and will likely
have broad impact in related areas in chemistry and the study of complex
biochemical systems.

In this project, the Thirumalai research team will create new coarse-grained
models and computational tools to investigate (i) the conformational ensembles
of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), (ii) RNA folding, and (iii) the
stepping mechanism of kinesin motors. The research team will employ multiscale
simulations to investigate the effects of phosphorylation at specific sites on
the assembly of fibril-forming IDPs along with the impact of crowded cellular
environments on protein function. Regarding RNA folding, Professor Thirumalai
will develop computational tools to account for multivalent ions ions,
complimented by polyelectrolyte theories, and describe the thermodynamics and
kinetics of folding of ribosomal RNAs. New methods to understand the mechanisms
of cation-driven droplet formation and the associated dynamics in low complexity
RNA sequences will likewise be devised. Finally, the stepping of kinesin on a
microtubule (MT) will be simulated to address fundamental questions regarding
the symmetry of the motor head motions: whether the detached kinesin motor
passes the MT bound motor always on one side (symmetric walk) or alternates
between two sides (asymmetric walk). In order to answer this and related
questions, new models will be used to simulate multiple steps that kinesin takes
on a MT. The software developed in these studies for exploring complex systems
of biological importance will be made available for distribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.