* 2320081
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope with Cryogenic Imaging Capabilities for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shahid Karim, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

Non-Technical Description This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant
supports the acquisition of a transmission electron microscope (TEM) with
advanced functionalities, such as high-resolution imaging, cryogenic operation
and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The transmission electron microscope
is housed within the Imaging Instrumentation Cluster, in the School of Polymer
Science and Engineering at the University of Southern Mississippi. The system
fills a significant void in the morphological analytical capabilities available
to researchers at the University of Southern Mississippi, and across the state
of Mississippi - where previously no in-state cryogenic transmission electron
microscopy capabilities existed. The instrument is integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses and also used for demonstrations aimed at K-12 students
and teachers to enhance their interest in science and engineering. This
transmission electron microscope is an integral piece of equipment that allows
the School to remain as a leader in soft matter characterization and continues
to provide opportunities for collaboration, across multiple institutions
(doctoral research, primarily undergraduate institutions, and community
colleges), in both Mississippi and the greater Gulf Coast region.

Technical Description The acquired transmission electron microscope (TEM) is
configurated with a special emphasis on cryo-TEM suitable for the 3D
characterization of soft matter, biological samples, polymers, and
nanomaterials, as well as its speed and ease of operation. The multiple advanced
functionalities of the microscope accommodate the large and diverse user base
present internally, state-wide, and regionally. The instrumentation supports a
number of multidisciplinary, cutting-edge research projects at the University of
Southern Mississippi and across the state of Mississippi in fields as diverse as
materials science, chemistry, ocean science, and biology. Some examples of the
research that this instrumentation facilitates includes understanding the
assembly and interactions of macromolecules, probing the morphology of polymeric
materials, deciphering marine viral ecology, and characterizing the interaction
of materials and biological systems.

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.