* 2320933
* Automated Model Discovery for Soft Matter
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ellen Kuhl, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 201,168.00

In solid mechanics, a constitutive relation describes a material’s response to
external stimuli, such as forces. Constitutive modeling and parameter
identification are the cornerstones of the mechanics of materials and
structures. The current gold standard in constitutive modeling is to first
select a model and then fit its parameters to data. However, the scientific
criteria for model selection are poorly understood and depend largely on user
experience and personal preference. This award seeks to democratize constitutive
modeling through automated model discovery and make it accessible to a more
inclusive and diverse community. The main deliverable is an open source
discovery platform that will discover the best model and parameters, entirely
without human interaction. This open source platform will feature a new family
of neural networks, data, models, and parameters. It will be freely available to
a wide range of users, regardless of their institutional or financial resources.
As such, automated model discovery will lower the barrier of entry into the STEM
fields and foster a more inclusive and diverse scientific community. This
project has broad scientific, social, and economic impacts. It will democratize
constitutive modeling, stimulate discovery in the mechanics of materials and
structures, establish machine learning tools to characterize, create, and
functionalize soft matter, and train the next generation of civil, mechanical,
and manufacturing innovators to use these new technologies.

The goal of this research is to establish neural networks that autonomously
discover models for soft matter systems. Instead of using classical neural
networks that provide no insight into the underlying physics, this project
designs its own constitutive neural networks. To train, test, and validate these
networks, this project will generate an open source library with benchmark data
from dozens of living and engineered materials. All networks, data, models, and
parameters of this project will be freely available to promote engineering
education and advance scientific knowledge. This project has the potential to
induce a paradigm shift in constitutive modeling, from user-defined model
selection to automated model discovery. This could forever change how we
simulate materials and structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.