* 2320397
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Micro X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer to Support Multidisciplinary Research and Education in the Upper Midwest
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Heng-Hsuan Chu, Lake Superior State University
* Standard Grant
* Joel Abraham
* 09/30/2026
* USD 384,660.00

An award is made to Lake Superior State University to support the acquisition of
a micro X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (μXRF) with remote operation
capabilities. The μXRF enables high-resolution imaging and elemental analysis,
supports a consortium of 14 researchers at eight institutions and their
collaborators, facilitates external use for research, education,
engineering/industrial applications, and promotes a regional research community.
These capabilities enrich undergraduate education and training across several
scientific disciplines, create new opportunities for undergraduate research, and
enable the development of new coursework in microanalysis and plant nutrient
metabolism. A K-12 outreach program offered in collaboration with the Eastern
Upper Peninsula Intermediate School District provides hands-on education
opportunities and enhances recruitment of underrepresented students promoting
the development of a diverse regional STEM workforce. Work supported by this
award will provide practical benefits including improvement in phytoremediation
strategies, improved fisheries management practices, and analysis of French
colonial artifacts that will be incorporated into public displays at Fort
Michilimackinac, part of Mackinac State Historic Parks.

Research facilitated by this award will advance our understanding of plant
nutrient metabolism, phytoremediation of soils, freshwater ecology, forensic
science, organismal biology, geology, and characterization of historical
artifacts. The key capabilities of this instrument include elemental
quantification and mapping at tens of micrometers resolution under atmospheric
pressure, detection limits for heavy elements in the tens of ppm, light element
analysis, suitability for analysis of intact and/or living organisms, and high
throughput sample analysis. The superior resolution and detection limits
compared to XRF and other μXRF instruments will enable element quantification
and distribution in a diverse range of organisms. Imaging and quantification of
element distributions will enable the investigation of element mobility and
storage, enhancing research in plant mineral metabolism and localization of
metals in aquatic organisms. This instrument will also allow for the analysis of
the rare earth elements in local rock structures for use in rechargeable
batteries and of archeological artifacts at Mackinac State Historic Parks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.