* 2320735
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an HPC Cluster for Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Scientific Computing, and Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Adam Durst, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

A high-performance computing (HPC) cluster is being built through a
collaborative endeavor to support computation- and data-intensive applications
at Hofstra University, Adelphi University, and Nassau Community College. The
cluster will provide an environment that enables faculty and students to engage
in computer-related teaching, learning, and research activities that were not
previously feasible in an academic setting for a variety of disciplines. All of
the major users who conduct research on the HPC cluster will leverage its
capabilities to address long-standing questions in their fields to advance
knowledge and explore creative, potentially transformative concepts with this
cutting-edge technology.

The utility of a high-performance computing cluster to the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics fields is critical and will support the research
and teaching of more than twenty major users of the equipment, being an
interdisciplinary and collaborative group of faculty spread across six
departments at Hofstra University, Adelphi University, and Nassau Community
College. The impact of an on-site HPC cluster for research is exemplified by
some of the main areas of research to be addressed, including 1) revealing the
structural impact of electron solvation on molecules, 2) modeling acceptor-
acceptor interactions in p-doped semiconductors in support of acceptor-spin-
based quantum computation, 3) artificial neural network and accelerator co-
design using evolutionary algorithms, and 4) autonomous wound closure employing
advanced magnetic technology in the form of “printable” magnets.

From biology, physics, and chemistry to computer science and engineering, the
multidisciplinary utility of a HPC cluster is vital to continued exploration and
advancement. Each major user of the HPC cluster will involve undergraduate
students in computer laboratory experiments, and laboratory classes will be able
to model and simulate systems that were impossible previously. The outreach of
the HPC cluster will also include high school student research and teaching
experiences through the Hofstra University Summer Science Research Program. Some
of the projects conducted by the major users will be converted into course-based
undergraduate research experiences.

The HPC cluster will be maintained through the course of the grant and
thereafter in the Science and Innovation Center at Hofstra University. The
website for the HPC cluster will be www.hofstra.edu/starhpc and will be updated
regularly with information pertaining to research projects, major users, and
class curriculum involving the HPC cluster. A detailed explanation of the HPC
cluster, the information needed to use the HPC Cluster, and how to become a user
will be provided on the website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.