* 2320213
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Innovating Iconographic Analysis to Improve Understanding of the Relationship between Social Organization and Ritual in Indigenous American Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Vincas Steponaitis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 19,427.00

This project examines the role of ancient material objects in past American
Indian communities. Previous archaeological scholarship has often attempted to
understand Native artifacts and their significance using frameworks informed by
Western traditions. In contrast, this project interprets ancient American Indian
ceramics within the context of philosophical tenets espoused by contemporary
Native North American cultures. This approach generates novel insights into the
significance of Indigenous art, namely how such objects may have contributed to
the sacred and secular underpinnings of Native communities. Importantly, this
approach, which also includes frequent communication with modern American Indian
nations and their tribal historic preservation offices, demonstrates how North
American archaeological research focusing on Indigenous topics can be conducted
ethically and respectfully. This project ultimately strives to produce results
that can be used by descendant communities in ways that they deem most valuable
to their own people and tribal objectives. A virtual museum exhibit displaying
vessel photos, 3D models, and interpretive details produced and shared with
Native collaborators as well as other scholars and the general public as the
tribes wish.

The doctoral student specifically assesses the political and cosmological
significance of decorated ceramics produced by American Indians in the
Mississippi Valley of Arkansas and Missouri during the fifteenth century AD.
Here, potters living within a densely populated and highly contentious political
landscape created a large quantity of painted and engraved ceramic vessels that
depicted the Native cosmos, spirit beings, and culture heroes. An examination of
this art offers new perspectives on the relationships between politics and
religion among past Indigenous communities living in the American South. Using
an innovative combination of iconographic analysis, 3D modeling, and geographic
information systems, this project (1) describes fundamental aspects of
production, function, and imagery among these pottery vessels and then (2)
interprets the sacred and secular significance of this art corpus within the
context of American Indian philosophical tenets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.