* 2320690
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Compact Mechanical Testing System for Structural, Archaeological, and High-Temperature Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Tipton, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 249,925.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
mechanical testing instrument to enable new research and training efforts at The
University of Tulsa and its collaborators. This custom Psylotech µTS instrument
is a unique and highly capable platform for advanced mechanical testing. It
delivers more than 350 pounds of dynamic force, yet weighs only 11 pounds and
fits inside an electron microscope. Additionally, it can deliver more than 10
mechanical loading and unloading cycles per second, while heating samples up to
1600°C (hot enough to melt iron). This instrument will catalyze research efforts
at The University of Tulsa and provide the highest temperature capacity for
mechanical testing in the state of Oklahoma. Experiments with the instrument
will unite multiple disciplines, enabling advancements in lightweight metals for
fuel-efficient vehicles and airplanes, improvements in high-temperature
composites for hypersonic flight and space systems, insights into human
evolution and past climates through archaeological teeth, and illumination of
prehistoric human behaviors from anthropological traces in stone tools.
Undergraduate students will be engaged with research using this instrument
through the Tulsa Undergraduate Research Challenge program. There are also
outreach plans involving lectures and demonstrations at the Gilcrease Museum,
university and public libraries, primary and secondary schools, and events
hosted by the Tulsa Regional STEM Alliance.

This instrument will serve as an interdisciplinary resource to investigate
thermal and mechanical effects on a diverse range of materials. For example, the
instrument will help probe the mechanisms of the initiation, propagation, and
coalescence of transverse microcracks that lead to delamination and failure in
high-temperature carbon/carbon (C/C) composites, including C/C composites
synthesized at Tulsa with vascular/fluid channels. Additionally, the µTS
instrument will enable in-situ observations under combined heating and
mechanical loading to study residual stresses after isothermal solidification
from a transient liquid phase metal surface treatment process that was developed
at Tulsa. The instrument will also strengthen collaborations and catalyze new
research opportunities through high-resolution scanning electron microscope
digital image correlation (SEM-DIC) that couples with the high-rate in-situ
fatigue cycling of the µTS. Furthermore, the µTS will help answer questions of
anthropological and archaeological importance.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.