* 2320276
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of an Automated High-Throughput System for Combinatorial Design and Development of Complex Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nancy Sottos, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,596,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
automated system for high-throughput formulation and characterization of complex
polymer materials at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. This state-
of-the-art system integrates component dispensing, mixing, and processing with
high-throughput rheological, optical, and thermal characterization of materials.
The automated system will enable AI-guided, closed-loop approaches for the
design, discovery, and development of new polymeric materials for energy-
efficient manufacturing, multi-functional polymers, and new sustainable
thermoplastics and thermosets. The automated system is designed to accommodate a
variety of research workflows and will include in-line characterization
equipment including a rheometer and a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC).
Automation will enable data-driven discovery of new materials by drastically
increasing the number of samples created and analyzed (up to 50x increase) and
the data usability (up to 100x increase) by systematically generating annotated
datasets. Production of well-curated data will further increase the impact of
the research by promoting the publishing of data to open access national
repositories. The instrument will promote synergistic connections between
Illinois and external academic and industrial partners while leveraging existing
institutes and materials research efforts on campus. Overall, the high-
throughput system will fundamentally change how advanced materials are designed
and developed by enabling data-driven, closed-loop design and characterization
approaches for complex formulations of polymeric materials.

This research is aimed at advancing the rate of innovation in materials
discovery by enabling data-driven approaches in polymer science. The proposed
instrumentation will support the training of students and researchers to include
high-throughput, robotic, and data-driven methodologies, which is critical for
modern industry and advanced materials manufacturing. Automated instrumentation
fundamentally changes how materials research is conducted by enabling high-
throughput discovery campaigns, enhanced repeatability of experimental
measurements, and improved accuracy of data. Automated characterization will
further facilitate the use of artificial intelligence-based methods for
materials discovery by greatly expanding the chemical and physical properties
space that can be experimentally explored. This research will enable the rapid
discovery and development of high-performance polymer materials to address the
most pressing challenges in energy, sustainability, and advanced manufacturing.
This instrumentation will bring unique capabilities by accelerating fundamental
and applied polymer research, while further preparing the next-generation work
force for future careers in materials science, chemical engineering, aerospace,
data science, and related disciplines that rely on polymer materials. The
instrument will support educational outreach efforts and undergraduate research
laboratories while further engaging with students in the Worldwide Youth in
Science and Engineering (WYSE) camps and the Beckman Institute Open House
activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.