* 2320241
* Equipment: MRI: Track #1 Acquisition of an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,179,143.00

An award is made to the University of New Hampshire (UNH) to acquire an Orbitrap
Eclipse LC-MS system to (i) dramatically improve mass spectrometry (MS) capacity
and expedite research projects in diverse fields, (ii) facilitate hands-on
training and inquiry-based learning on modern instrumentation, and (iii)
establish a regional high-resolution MS facility. Equipped with more current
technologies, the proposed Eclipse LC-MS system will enable in-depth, conclusive
proteomics analysis with desirable sensitivity and throughput. This new
instrumentation will serve 26 research programs as major users from 11
departments and 3 colleges, bringing together a diverse group of researchers.
The highly interdisciplinary nature of the collaborative projects will provide
ample hands-on training opportunities for research scientists/post-docs,
graduate students, and undergraduate students on cutting-edge MS technologies.
In addition, a UNH summer MS workshop and a semester-long MS course will provide
expanded research training for graduate and undergraduate students at UNH as
well as at least 14 other colleges and universities in New Hampshire, Maine, and
Vermont, contributing to regional STEM education and workforce development. The
student population at UNH is 55% female and 30% first-generation students. With
a total population of just over 1.3 million, New Hampshire (NH) has a
significant rural population. Research can be a life-changing experience for
students, especially those from low-income demographics and rural areas. These
students will have the opportunity to train with state-of-the-art
instrumentation and realize their potential to pursue an advanced technical
degree. Furthermore, as the UNH professional master’s programs in Molecular &
Cellular Technology and Bioinformatic continue to grow, the requested Eclipse
LC-MS system will make a significant impact in developing a future STEM
workforce and supporting sustainable economic growth in the state of NH as well
as the northern New England region. Results from involved research projects will
also bring direct societal impacts in developing new energy sources and
bioengineering materials, elucidating disease etiology and therapeutic targets,
protecting environment and wildlife, reclaiming soil and natural resources,
improving agriculture practice, and enhancing food and nutrition management.

The research that will be supported encompasses a broad range of biology,
chemistry, ecology, and biomedical engineering-based projects at UNH and in
northern New England. Essential biological insights will be generated from these
projects towards mechanistic understanding of visual transduction, stem cell
trans-differentiation and tissue engineering, interactions among microbes,
plants and the environment, transcription regulation and chromatin structure,
signal transduction in neuronal cilia and hematopoietic progenitors, epigenetic
regulation and behavioral plasticity, protein folding and proteome homeostasis.
High-quality MS data will elucidate key regulators, modifications, interactions,
structure conformations, and signaling molecules and networks, which will
revolutionize research programs and enables breakthroughs in understanding
processes that would have otherwise been inaccessible. The requested
instrumentation will also aid in the development of novel reagents in solar fuel
production, as well as the design and development of enabling technologies and
platforms of biosensor and femto-flow electrospray ionization sources. These
impactful projects require MS instrumentation - equipped with current, modern
technologies - as a critical research tool. Through active collaborations
between UNH and regional biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, new
knowledge and improved practice will emerge in manufacturing specialty
ingredients used in personal and health care, in characterizing antimicrobial
natural products, and in understanding host-microbe interactions and metabolomic
responses towards environmental stressors. In summary, significant improvements
in MS experimental capacities, sensitivity, and throughput over current UNH
instrumentation will rapidly expand the application of MS and modern
instrumentation into a variety of research disciplines at UNH and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.