* 2320327
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a replacement electron microprobe at Brown University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Cooperdock, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 641,223.00

The instrument that will be funded provides a fast, easy way to analyze the
chemical composition of most solids. It does not destroy or affect the sample,
and can analyze spots as small as one micron (50 times smaller than the width of
human hair). Sample preparation is simple, and does not involve toxic chemicals,
and an analysis takes between 2 and 6 minutes. In addition to its ability to
analyze chemical composition, the instrument can also image the sample at the
micron-scale. These qualities make it incredibly useful to a wide range of
scientists, from geology and planetary science, to engineering, chemistry and
biology, to archaeology and even art history and preservation. Because it does
not involve using hazardous chemicals or complex, multi-step sample preparation,
it is also a great tool for teaching and for summer research projects, including
programs aimed at increasing diversity in the field.

The funds will be used to purchase a state-of-the-art, 5-spectrometer electron
microprobe with EDS and CL detectors. This will replace the existing (now
failing) microprobe that has been highly productive, and highly used, over its
20+ year history, serving researchers in a wide range of fields. The microprobe
has been an integral part of both graduate and undergraduate education. The goal
is to continue and expand this success, maintaining an open and high-quality
microprobe facility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.