* 2320711
* MRI: Track 1 Development of Large Optic Crystalline Coating Characterization Instrument (LOCCCI) for Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andri Gretarsson, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,077,454.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
"Gravitational wave astrophysics is one of the most exciting frontiers in
science.” states the National Academy of Sciences Decadal Survey (2020). This
award will help achieve a key advancement in sensitivity for gravitational wave
detectors and help resolve a noise source that has limited the field for the
past two decades. Since 2015, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO) has detected over 90 events, including the inspiral and
coalescence of binary neutron star and binary black hole systems. The most
recent improvements to the detector promise new observations on a weekly basis.
Nevertheless, LIGO’s sensitivity remains limited by coating thermal noise (CTN).
The research funded by this award will enable the development of crystalline
mirror coatings, which could reduce CTN by a factor of 10 compared to the
current mirror coatings. This significant advancement in sensitivity will allow
the detection of many more events at much higher sensitivity. Gravitational wave
observations have informed and inspired a broad range of astronomers,
physicists, students, and the general public. Many people are intrigued by black
hole and neutron star observations and their fascination helps raise the
public’s scientific awareness. This award will train undergraduate and graduate
students with skills that can be applied to research and to technical areas in
the broader economy. The team will continue to work hard providing these
opportunities to groups that have been historically disenfranchised. Finally,
the knowledge gained in this research will advance the areas of gravitational
wave astrophysics, precision optics, and the materials science of low-
dissipation materials.

Mirror coating thermal noise (CTN) limits the sensitivity of current
interferometric gravitational wave detectors in the central frequency band (the
region of highest sensitivity). The current mirror coating technology of ion
beam sputtered (IBS) amorphous oxides, which is used on all current
gravitational wave detectors has, over the past 15 years, seen only modest gains
in reducing the elastic loss that generates CTN. Fortunately, crystalline
GaAs/AlGaAs coatings (hereafter AlGaAs coatings) meet LIGO’s stringent optical
requirements and have a CTN estimated to be 10 times lower than the current
Advanced LIGO coatings. This gain in sensitivity will generate a dramatic jump
in event rate, which increases as the cube of the sensitivity range. It will
also allow nearby events to be observed with very high signal-to-noise ratio,
which may provide insights into the structure of neutron stars and additional
tests of general relativity. Finally, crystalline coatings exceed the
requirements for all planned future gravitational wave detectors. Thus, this
award funds an advancement in instrumentation that will benefit the field for
decades. However, challenges remain as AlGaAs coatings are birefringent,
experience crystal defects, and have only been made in small diameters. This
award will fund the LOCCCI instrument that will enable the development of low-
noise, large-diameter, crystalline coatings for gravitational wave detectors.
The LOCCCI instrument will be initially used to test these coatings at large
diameters (20 cm) for birefringence noise, crystal defect densities, and surface
uniformity. This investigation will then inform manufacturing improvements and
ultimately justify the development of the 30 cm coatings that will be deployed
in the detectors. This instrument will also test that the production coatings
conform to design specifications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.