* 2320699
* MRI: Track 1 Development of DarkQuest: A Dark Sector Upgrade to SpinQuest at the 120 GeV Fermilab Main Injector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* David Sperka, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2025
* USD 877,000.00

The search and understanding of dark matter is one of the great problems of
21st-century particle physics. Expanding the mass range and techniques by which
we search for dark matter is an integral part of the worldwide particle physics
program. This award will upgrade the SpinQuest spectrometer, creating the
DarkQuest Experiment and enabling the search for dark matter. The DarkQuest
experiment will be a proton fixed-target experiment with leading sensitivity to
an array of visible dark sector signatures in the mega-electron volt to giga-
electron volt mass range. These signatures include dark photons, strongly
interacting massive particles (SIMPs), and models that can explain the muon
anomalous magnetic moment. DarkQuest provides a unique opportunity to bring
hands-on particle physics experience, from assembly to commissioning to
operation, to a new generation of undergraduate and graduate students, including
members of a historically black university.

The SpinQuest experiment is a beam dump experiment that currently runs on the
Fermilab Main Injector with an incoming proton beam of 120 GeV. The experiment
is designed to measure the total spin contribution of the sea quarks within the
proton. The upgrade of SpinQuest with an electromagnetic calorimeter from the
decommissioned PHENIX experiment will allow for particle identification leading
to the observation of new signatures, including displaced di-electron final
states. An upgrade to the DAQ and trigger systems will further improve the
ability to detect dark sector signatures. Additionally, an upgrade to the
polarized target will enable new, unique measurements of nuclear properties.
DarkQuest can search for a wide range of new particles, such as long-lived dark
photons, dark scalars, axion-like particles, and DM excited states, leading to a
broad physics program. For light dark matter searches with displaced signatures,
searches will be enhanced by a factor of 100 over SpinQuest, allowing it to be
the world’s most sensitive displaced light dark matter experiment in the near
future. Moreover, DarkQuest will explore novel dark sector models in regions of
interest that have never been explored before.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.