* 2320461
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractometer to Support Primarily Undergraduate Research in the Greater Susquehanna Valley
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* William Dougherty, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,170.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Susquehanna University
is acquiring a diffractometer with a sealed-tube copper X-ray source, a charge-
integrated pixel array detector and a liquid-nitrogen-fueled low temperature
cooling device to support the research of William Dougherty Jr. (Susquehanna
University), Brian Smith (Bucknell University), and colleagues at both
institutions. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here will impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, catalysis, and materials chemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate masterâ€™s students in multiple disciplines including chemistry and
biochemistry at these institutions. The instrument will serve as a regional
resource for the greater Susquehanna valley benefiting faculty and students at
additional primarily undergraduate institutions including collaborative efforts
with Lycoming College, Elizabethtown College, and Wilkes University.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on the synthesis, structure determination,
and applications of small molecules, covalent organic frameworks (COFs),
nanomaterials, and supramolecular structures. The supported research will
advance the fundamental understanding of synthetic pathways, aid in the
development of new therapeutic platforms and imaging agents, provide insight
into the varied mechanisms of crystal growth and explore the relationship
between small-molecule design and the resulting electronic and structural
properties. The compounds under investigation have applications in material
science including the development of new catalysts, specialized filtration, the
generation of more efficient photovoltaic devices and the creation of selective
chemical sensors. Other proposed projects have applications in the field of
medicine through the generation of complexes with anti-bacterial, anti-
inflammatory and anti-cancer properties, efficient contrast agents for imaging,
and improving crystallization approaches in pharmaceutical formulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.