* 2320345
* Category I: Bridging the Gap Between AI/ML Computing Demands and Today's Capabilities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Laura Herriott, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,499,998.00

Advances in computing hardware and in artificial intelligence (AI) research have
led to AI-focused systems that have transformed the landscape of computational
research and of society itself. Much of today's AI research relies on access to
large volumes of data and advanced computational power, which are often
unavailable to researchers not located at well-resourced technology companies
and universities. This divide limits the ability of researchers to leverage AI
to tackle the big challenges in our society. It further constrains the diversity
of researchers and the breadth of ideas incorporated into AI innovations,
thereby contributing to embedded biases and other systemic inequalities found in
AI systems today. The National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will deploy and operate DeltaAI,
an advanced computing and data resource that will be a companion system to
NCSA’s Delta system. In doing so, DeltaAI will greatly expand the AI-focused
computing capacity available within the NSF-funded advanced computing ecosystem.
The DeltaAI system builds upon the efforts and successes of NCSA’s Delta system
in a way that is seamless and leverages the existing NSF investment in that
infrastructure. This approach is achieved by deploying DeltaAI using similar
system and storage hardware, and the same high-speed interconnect. A vast array
of next-generation graphics processors (GPUs) delivers a technological leap in
AI computing capability that will make DeltaAI the keystone in the NSF AI
computing portfolio for years to come. Advanced and modern web-based interfaces
will make the resource more usable by the growing community of research domains
employing AI methods in their research, and significant computing capacity will
make more resources available to a more diverse group of researchers.

The DeltaAI system features a large and uniform pool of compute nodes that will
enable advanced AI-based research, from single-node tasks to massively parallel
AI codes. The system’s use of larger memory configuration GPUs will make new
types of AI codes feasible that could not previously be undertaken. Taking
advantage of next-generation NVIDIA graphics processors, DeltaAI builds on Delta
by expanding what is already the most performant GPU computing resource in the
National Science Foundation portfolio. The compute elements of DeltaAI will
provide more than 300 next-generation NVIDIA graphics processors delivering over
600 petaflops of half-precision floating point computing, distributed across an
advanced network interconnect for application communications and access to an
innovative, flash-based storage subsystem. Expanding the capacity and
performance of the Delta storage subsystem, the DeltaAI storage environment will
further transform large scale data-enabled and AI-based research workloads.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.