* 2320158
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 600 MHz NMR with Cryoprobe for the Greater Rocky Mountain Region
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brian Michel, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,397,667.00

An award is made to the University of Denver to acquire a state-of-the-art 600
MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer with a Cryoprobe and a cooled
SampleCase. This instrument will support researchers at the University of Denver
and across the greater Rocky Mountain region, enabling new research ranging from
understanding biomolecular interactions to characterizing functional tools in
complex biological systems. This project will support modernization of
curricular activities in undergraduate (Organic lab sequence, Instrumental
Analysis, and Frontiers in Chemistry) and graduate courses (Organic Spectroscopy
and Biophysical Methods), greatly increasing the number of students exposed
modern 2D and multinuclear NMR experiments. High-school, undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers will benefit from training on state-of-
the-art equipment. This includes students in the SHINE@DU program, which
provides paid 8-week summer internships to local junior and senior high-school
students largely from groups underrepresented in the sciences. This project will
benefit the citizen science Foldit game, which will continue to improve via
validation of solved structures. Responsible stewardship and conservation of
finite helium resources will continue through helium recovery and recycling at
the University of Denver.

The new instrument will enable biomolecular and chemical research owing to
increased sensitivity, resolution, transceiver capability, and access that is
not currently possible at the University of Denver and is severely limited in
the region. This NMR will enable biomolecular researchers to (1) understand how
nucleic acids interact with proteins to inhibit aggregation, (2) investigate the
mechanism of how synthetic protein mimics modulate aberrant protein-protein
interactions, and (3) discover and characterize novel metallophores. Chemical
biology and chemical researchers will use the new NMR spectrometer to: (1)
elucidate the structures of complex polyheterocycles, (2) characterize and
investigate organometallic complexes as tools for probing biological systems,
and (3) identify and analyze end-groups of functional linear polymers. A number
of regional users, including researchers at primarily undergraduate institutions
and area start-up companies, will have remote and in-person access to the new
NMR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.