* 2320934
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: COMPrehensive Learning for end-users to Effectively utilize CyberinfraStructure (COMPLECS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Martin Kandes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,994.00

Advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI), comprising resources with capabilities beyond
those of desktop computing, plays an important role in nearly every scientific
and engineering discipline. Most CI users no longer need to write their own
software, relying instead on existing robust 3rd party applications.
Unfortunately, much of the available training still emphasizes software
development topics rather than the skills other than programming that are needed
to effectively use advanced CI. COMPrehensive Learning for end-users to
Effectively utilize CyberinfraStructure (COMPLECS) addresses this gap by
creating a coherent training program spanning foundational knowledge to the
practical skills that enable these CI users to make best use of these
specialized resources. The training consists of three tiers (multi-day
workshops, webinars and self-paced study), which gives participants a variety of
options that best fit into their schedules. Since workshop participation is
limited, preference is given to students and educators at minority serving and
primarily undergraduate institutions (MSIs and PUIs), and researchers from
domains that have not traditionally used advanced CI. Webinars and self-paced
learning are available to all. COMPLECS helps to build a better trained
workforce with skills that make them more effective researchers, while also
leading to improved utilization of NSF-funded CI resources.

COMPrehensive Learning for end-users to Effectively utilize CyberinfraStructure
(COMPLECS) helps CI Users acquire the skills and knowledge they need to
efficiently accomplish their compute and data intensive research. Training
topics include parallel computing concepts, intermediate Linux and shell
scripting, hardware essentials, batch computing, data management, best practices
in securing data and research, interactive computing, getting help and how to
work effectively with user support, code migration and installation, high
throughput computing and Linux tools for file processing. Except for several
foundational topics, the program is designed so that webinar and self-paced
study participants can take the training in any order. Materials are available
through GitHub repositories, Google drives and captioned recordings of webinars.
The evaluation plan consists of both formative components that allows the
program to be continuously improved and summative components to ensure that the
program is meeting its goals. COMPLECS makes a concerted effort to recruit
participants from underrepresented groups though coordination with ACCESS,
Campus Champions and other organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.