* 2320244
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Current Hardware to Enhance Computational Research on the ELSA High Performance Computing Cluster at The College of New Jersey
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Joseph Baker, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 935,340.00

In this project, The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) will acquire equipment to
significantly upgrade and enhance our Electronic Laboratory for Science and
Analysis (ELSA) High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster. As a primarily
undergraduate institution, TCNJ is nationally recognized for the engagement of
undergraduate students in research. School of Science faculty work closely with
undergraduates in their laboratories throughout the academic year and during the
summer in the Mentored Undergraduate Summer Experience (MUSE), with more than
75% of science graduates from TCNJ obtaining at least a semester of research
experience. Over the course of this project, nearly 100 undergraduate student
researchers per year will benefit by engaging in faculty-mentored research in
labs from all School of Science departments (Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Mathematics and Statistics, and Computer Science) as well as in Civil
Engineering. These research experiences are transformative for the students
enabling their training in computing as well as facilitating their research in
fields that include machine learning, astrophysics, biophysics, mathematical
biology, and bioinformatics. Beyond the research laboratory, science faculty
incorporate ELSA in their teaching, exposing 800-1000 undergraduates per year to
advanced computing. TCNJ is also committed to creating a research-intensive
environment for all STEM students by increasing success among underrepresented
students and those with high financial need, including those that are
transferring to TCNJ from local community colleges. The access to ELSA through
collaboration with Open Science Grid is stimulating research programs and
fostering alliances for collective impact.

The TCNJ ELSA cluster is a heterogeneous HPC cluster housed in the TCNJ HPC
Center. It is a state-of-the-art resource that will continue to meet the current
and future computational needs of TCNJâ€™s science faculty and undergraduate
students. The enhancements provided through this award will include the
acquisition of high-end GPUs, fast, modern CPUs with fast interconnects and
large memory capacities, and high speed network-based storage. The upgrades will
directly benefit the research programs of 18 TCNJ faculty members, allowing them
to continue to engage undergraduate students in transformative research
experiences. The objective in designing a system with both GPU nodes and CPU
nodes connected to high speed storage is to enable ELSA to run a diverse set of
research workflows that reflect the varied and interdisciplinary computational
research carried out by TCNJ faculty. The work of these faculty spans a range of
interdisciplinary themes including (1) computational physics, (2)
mathematical/computational biology, (3) genomics, (4) machine learning, and
other areas. Some of the examples of the diverse scientific efforts that the
cluster will support include molecular simulation studies of bacterial pilus
biomechanics, assessing the habitability of circumbinary planets, using
mathematical models to explore evolutionary tradeoffs in swimming performance
across marine invertebrates, employing genomic approaches to characterize novel
regulators of plant defenses against pests, and understanding how to reduce
training data annotation costs in machine learning. Ultimately, the enhancements
to the ELSA cluster in this project will significantly improve capacity for
scientific discovery, and help TCNJ faculty prepare undergraduate students to
leverage the increasingly powerful HPC resources of the future in their careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.