* 2320929
* CAS-SC: Understanding Synergistic Effects of Organic Mixtures for Electrocatalytic Hydrogenation for Fuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bryan Goldsmith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 557,722.00

This project aims to advance knowledge of electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH)
of bio-oil. Waste biomass (e.g., biomass sources separate from those that are
used for food) can be heated at high temperatures to form bio-oil, which
contains many of the important compounds for fuels, but with low energy density.
Using renewable electricity, ECH of this bio-oil can form chemicals that have
higher energy density and can be used as fuels. Thus, this project will study a
method to provide high energy density transportation fuels with net-zero carbon
dioxide emissions as an alternative to petroleum. The goal of this project is to
fundamentally understand how to simultaneously upgrade multiple organic
molecules relevant to bio-oil mixtures via electrocatalysis. Particularly, the
team will investigate conditions where the different organic molecules can help
one another in converting to the desired products. This research would enable
sustainable bio-based products, use renewable energy more efficiently to drive
chemical processes, help develop carbon-neutral processes for fuel production,
and use predictive modeling to understand electrocatalytic reactions. The
proposed education and outreach activities will engage underrepresented high-
school students in research and help 4th and 5th grade students understand more
about chemistry and why it is important and interesting, helping to foster the
next generation of STEM professionals.

The project goal is to understand the ECH of model bio-derived organic mixtures
to determine how multiple organic molecules can be simultaneously
electrochemically upgraded with high efficiency. This joint experimental and
computational project will investigate ECH of organic molecules (i.e., mixtures
of phenolics and terpenes) that are present in biomass-based feedstocks and
investigate how the reaction of these molecules in mixtures differs from that of
each molecule individually. This project will identify organic molecules that
synergistically enhance one anotherâ€™s conversion and understand the origin of
this synergistic enhancement on metal and alloy electrocatalysts, such that
electrochemical reactor design can be used to decrease the cost of fuels
produced by ECH of bio-derived organics. The three major tasks of this work are
to: (1) Understand ECH of model organic molecules in isolation; (2) Elucidate
how model organic mixtures enhance or slow ECH; and (3) Design systems for
simultaneous hydrogenation of organic mixtures. This research will elucidate
reaction mechanisms for ECH of bio-oil mixtures and generate knowledge about the
role of the applied electrochemical potential and water solvent for ECH using
quantum mechanical modeling and experimental kinetics measurements and
spectroscopy. Also, this work will clarify the role of co-adsorbed organics on
the rate and selectivity of electrocatalytic hydrogenation and identify rates of
electrochemical conversion to evaluate commercial feasibility compared to the
state-of-the-art. This research will generate fundamental knowledge that can be
used to enhance the efficiencies for bio-based fuel manufacturing processes at
scale using renewable energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.