* 2320171
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an Accelerating Rate Calorimeter System for Multidisciplinary Research, Education and Outreach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cheol Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 432,400.00

The project establishes a new experimental facility at the University of
Michigan – Dearborn. The main element of the facility, the accelerating rate
calorimeter (ARC), will enable new opportunities to conduct research, education,
and outreach in the area of management of thermal behavior of automotive
batteries at the participating universities. The thermal behavior is a
significant concern for the ongoing transition of the automotive technology to
electric vehicles. The problems of degradation of battery’s performance at low
and high temperatures, the danger of battery thermal runaway, overheating of
fast chargers, etc. continue to be major challenges. The universities
participating in the project are major feeders of engineering workforce and hubs
of fundamental and applied research for the automotive industry in the Southeast
Michigan, which includes the Big Three automakers and many of their suppliers.
The new facility will stimulate growth of research in the area of vehicle
electrification and battery technology. The facility will be incorporated in
instruction of at least ten graduate and undergraduate courses, thus helping to
build skills of future engineers, who will lead the nation’s transition to
electric mobility. Expanded research opportunities for students will be created.
The facility will also enable outreach activities to promote diversity, equity
and inclusion in the Detroit area to inspire STEM interest in K-12 students.

The proposed ARC system is an effective tool to quantify features of thermal
behavior, such as temporospatial temperature, reaction onset temperature, heat
capacity, heat release rate, pressure rise rate, and gas generated under regular
and extreme conditions. It will create new knowledge in numerous
interdisciplinary areas, including battery degradation and safety, battery
material development and testing, battery health monitoring, chemical gas
sensing, CO2 adsorption, power electronics, and grid applications. The ARC
system will enable exploration of exothermic runaway reactions from hazardous
and reactive chemicals at a laboratory scale by simulating abusive extreme
conditions such as nail penetration, crushing, overcharging, external short
circuit, etc. The sealed chambers of the ARC will guarantee safe operation. A
major advantage of the ARC in comparison with typical isothermal calorimeters is
its smaller response time. This will allow us to measure very small heat
releases and, as an example, quantify runaway explosive decompositions for a
wide range of materials and devices, such as batteries, power electronics, and
chemical materials. Acquisition of the proposed ARC system will enable more than
20 faculty at the University of Michigan - Dearborn and neighboring
universities, all located in the Southeast Michigan, to conduct new research
activities. The proposed instrument will also support interdisciplinary research
collaboration among the participating universities and between the universities
and industries, such as Ford Motor, GM, and Stellantis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.