* 2320716
* Collaborative Research: Chemo-Physics and Molecular Design of In-situ Hydrogel-MXene Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shaoting Lin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 335,789.00

Colorectal cancer (CRC) has a significant global impact, affecting 2 million
people worldwide and standing as the third leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the United States. Technologies that enable in-situ monitoring of
biomarkers closely related to the development and progression of CRC are highly
desirable for timely diagnosis, early intervention, and personalized treatment
of CRC. However, the complicated chemical, biological, and mechanical factors
within complex physiological environments present substantial challenges in
achieving specific, sensitive, and durable early detection of CRC. With support
from the Biosensing Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program in the Division of Chemistry, the research groups of Prof. Shaoting Lin
(Michigan State University), Prof. Chenglin Wu (Missouri University of Science
and Technology), and Prof. Xinyue Liu (Michigan State University) aim to
overcome these challenges by developing in-situ hydrogel-MXene biosensors
capable of detecting low-level CRC biomarkers (e.g., carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA)) in simulated intestinal environments. The in-situ hydrogel-MXene
biosensor will potentially lead to a big leap in bioelectronics, offering
transformative impacts in disease diagnostics and paving the way for
personalized healthcare. In addition, this project is expected to foster the
development of the next-generation workforce in emerging biotechnologies through
multi-institutional and interdisciplinary efforts including the integration of
new topics in undergraduate courses and the promotion of STEM fields to
encourage more students to engage in these areas of study.

The goal of this project is to integrate selective-permeable hydrogels with
MXene-based field-effect transistors for developing high-performance hydrogel-
MXene biosensors that can achieve in-situ detection of low-level colorectal
cancer (CRC) biomarkers (e.g., carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)) in simulated
intestinal environments while mitigating the influence of mobile ions. To
achieve this, this project will leverage molecular design of reversible
interaction, network topology, and fixed charge in hydrogels to modulate
hydrogel-intestine interactions for selective biomolecular transport and to
regulate hydrogel-MXene interactions for improved field-effect sensing
performance. Specifically, this project will leverage the synergy of network
elasticity and reversible interaction in hydrogels to independently modulate the
transport of target and non-target biomolecules, thereby enabling selective and
enhanced transport. In addition, this project will harness the combined efforts
of molecular design, atomic simulation, and DFT calculation to optimize the
design of network topology and fixed charge density of hydrogels, thus
maximizing the Debye length, reduce the capacitance, and tune the bandgap at the
hydrogel-MXene interface. Finally, this project will incorporate the explored
hydrogel design principles to build a high-performing hydrogel-MXene biosensor
capable of quantifying CRC biomarkers in simulated intestinal environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.