* 2320748
* MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of Agilent 8700 Laser Direct Infrared (LDIR) Chemical Imaging System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Melissa Lenczewski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 414,523.00

The Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will provide funds to Northern
Illinois University (NIU) to acquire, operate and maintain an Agilent 8700 Laser
Direct Infrared (LDIR) Chemical Imaging System for detection of microplastics in
the environment. Microplastics are ubiquitous in the environment. As the human
population continues to increase, so too does the production of disposable
packaging materials and single-use items. Microplastics are rapidly accumulating
within our natural environment. The LDIR is a cutting-edge technology that
provides a new method that advances our ability to detect microplastic
particles, determine their size, and acquire detailed information about each
particle type detected. Microplastics will be examined from creation to
detection, transport in the environment and into food webs, bioaccumulation in
humans, impact on health, degradation, and finally environmental remediation.
The LDIR will provide an excellent resource for training graduate and
undergraduate students on both instrumentation and research projects in general.
Graduate students will utilize this instrument for MS and PhD projects across
multiple departments and colleges. Further, NIU has an undergraduate research-
training program, Research Rookies that pairs undergraduates with interest in
learning about science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) research
with faculty working on research projects. NIU also hosts a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) that focuses on increasing diversity in the
hydrosciences; projects for the REU will include microplastics.

LDIR provides a new method for spectral analysis and chemical imaging. Utilizing
the unique properties of the light source, a rapidly tunable Quantum Cascade
Laser, the LDIR first scans the area of interest in the sample to determine the
presence or absence and records the location of particles in the sample analysis
area. It then examines each individual particle and obtains a spectrum, compares
it to the spectral library for classification, and updates the results. The
instrument will measure impacts of microplastics in different media (air, water,
sediment) and lead the way in determining the impact of this contaminant of
emerging concern. The multi-media and multi-scale nature of potential research
projects utilizing the LDIR will make this a unique center. Access to the LDIR
will enable NIU researchers to form collaborations with regional, US-wide, and
international teams working toward a better understanding of the fate and
transport of microplastics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.