* 2320330
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Electrochemical Impedance Spectrometer for Research in Glass with Undergraduates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Caio Bragatto, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 213,945.00

Non-Technical Summary

This major research instrumentation project, jointly funded by Division of
Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), funds the acquisition of a electrochemical impedance spectrometer
(EIS). This acquisition allows the undergraduate students and faculty of the
Physics Department at Coe College and their collaborators to drastically expand
their research by allowing electrical characterization of solid and liquid
samples at temperatures of up to 2200 oF (or 1200 oC), under controlled
atmosphere. To do so, the equipment measures the phase differences between the
input voltage and the output current being applied at the sample, at different
frequencies. The results are then statistically compared to electrical circuits
who present a similar behavior, and that data is used to calculate the
electrical properties of the sample. The work will also allow for the training
of twelve undergraduate students, as they will have regular access to it every
summer. Additionally, students will also be exposed to the instruments in
certain advanced classes, such as Materials Science and Advanced Laboratory. The
equipment will also be used in collaboration with organizations from Coe College
that represent underrepresented groups in STEM fields to promote this career
perspective and attract more future scientists to the field.

Technical Summary

The new electrochemical impedance spectrometer system at Coe College will be
composed of a high-performance modular measurement system (responsible for the
dielectric, conductivity, electrochemical, impedance and gain phase measurements
in the frequency domain), with a frequency range of 3 micro-Hz to 20 mega-Hz
thanks to its wide impedance test interface. Two furnaces accompany the system –
a Novotherm temperature control system for sample cells with a temperature range
of +25°C to 400°C and a turnkey high-temperature system, with a temperature
range of +25°C to 1200°C but designed to operate ideally at temperatures above
300 oC. The turnkey furnace can also operate under a controlled atmosphere. More
specific to the proposed project, the EIS equipment will be used to characterize
glasses and glass-ceramics with unusually high alkali content, measure the
electrical properties of glasses that are usually hard-to-prepare, help with the
development of possible commercial compositions with the advance of predictive
artificial intelligence, and used to help develop a new methodology for
obtaining crystal growth in glass ceramics. The EIS system will expand
drastically the characterization capabilities of the materials research groups
at Coe College; and continue the growth of the institution as a national
undergraduate materials characterization hub. Additionally, the characterization
work on the system will impact other local and national academic institutions,
local companies, domestic and international collaborators, as well as REU
students, and RET high-school teachers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.