* 2320728
* Equipment: MRI: Track #1 Acquisition of a Physical Property Measurement System for Interdisciplinary Research and Education on Next Generation Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 647,968.00

The creation of next-generation materials is essential for a broad range of
applications, as well as tests of fundamental physical and chemical theory.
Complete characterization of the properties of these new materials is required
in order to realize and deploy them in a variety of technologies. This project
uses a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS), a versatile
and highly configurable instrument to measure electrical, magnetic, thermal
transport, and thermodynamic properties of materials over a broad range of
temperatures and pressures. As such, the instrument addresses an array of
problems spanning the basic science, applied science, and engineering of new
materials and devices. The instrument is advancing the fundamental physics,
chemistry, and materials science of superconducting materials, quantum
materials, thermoelectrics, energy storage materials, superhard materials, novel
nanoscale materials, and semiconductor and superconductor-based electronic
devices. The instrument is enabling research and student and postdoctoral
training supported by numerous research grants of Senior Personnel at the
University of Illinois Chicago (UIC) and of many collaborators at other
institutions. The instrument is integrated into the student education and
training activities of UIC, an urban minority-serving Research 1 institution
near downtown Chicago, and is accessible to a large number of external
collaborators both nationally and internationally.

The instrument is enabling progress in the discovery, characterization, and
synthesis of a variety of new materials over a broad range of pressures and
temperatures. In particular, the system is advancing experimental studies of
room-temperature superconductivity to megabar (>100 GPa) pressures, including
efforts to create such materials at or near ambient pressure; unconventional
superconductors and topological materials such as Weyl semimetals; synthesis and
characterization of complex oxide thin films; novel electronic and magnetic
oxides, including studies of the effects of charge transfer, strain, and spin-
state transitions on the properties of these oxides; the effects of embedded
nanoparticles on thermal transport properties of oxide thermoelectrics; qubits
based on two-dimensional materials such as novel lateral heterostructures or
novel structures; layered two-dimensional heterostructures of transition metal
dichalcogenides; wide band gap materials such as gallium nitride and diamond,
and the discovery of next-generation functional superhard materials.
Experimental work is guided in part by theorists who are actively involved in
the planning of these efforts. The proposed system is cryogen-free, and the
specific configuration includes four-probe direct current (DC) resistivity,
alternating current (AC) electrical transport (resistivity, Hall effect), AC
magnetic susceptibility, DC magnetization, and thermal transport (conductivity,
Seebeck coefficient, thermoelectric figure of merit), and has special
capabilities for measurements in extreme conditions. The system is integrated
into the UIC Research Resources Center (RRC) and complements an array of other
materials analysis capabilities available in the facility. The RRC is a
centralized core facility that provides access to any internal and external
(including industrial) users for an hourly fee. Such instrument access is
managed via an online booking system and instrumentation access is available
24/7.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.