* 2320641
* Equipment: Acquisition of a laser direct-write photolithography system
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Loan Bui, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,390.00

Lithography is the most expensive and most critical step in the fabrication of
semiconductor electronic and optical integrated circuits. The ability to
reproduce millions of identical copies has advantages in manufacturing but in an
R&D/educational setting we typically only need a handful of prototype copies.
The current method of chip prototyping requires outsourced manufacturing of
photomasks for each lithography step. The proposed laser lithography capability
will eliminate the photomask step and enable researchers to directly print
lithography patterns on a chip or wafer, thereby significantly accelerating
research progress and reducing development cost. The difference in technique and
corresponding advantages is analogous to mold replication vs 3D printing. Just
like advances in electronics, mechanics and software have enabled high-quality
3D printing, recent advances in UV lasers, focusing optics and mechanical
positioning accuracy have enabled direct-write photolithography. This project
brings together a diverse group of researchers from Engineering and Science to
make advances in several areas such as semiconductor materials, photonic and
biotechnology chips, imaging science and advanced lithography process
development. This tool is also ideal for incorporating hands-on experience for
graduate and undergraduate students studying semiconductor manufacturing. This
capability will become an integral training module for our semiconductor
manufacturing workforce development initiatives and will augment our successful
and on-going relationships with community colleges and minority-serving
institutions in the region.

The Raith PicoMaster 150 direct-write laser beam lithography (LBL) system will
enable rapid prototyping of complex devices in hours instead of weeks with
significantly lower cost by circumventing the need for the intermediate
photomask step. With the ability to achieve feature sizes down to 300 nm, this
equipment will help advance our current education, research, and industry
partnerships in integrated photonics and electronics. This project brings
together a diverse group of researchers from the Departments of Electro-Optics &
Photonics, Electrical Engineering, Engineering Technology, Physics and Biology.
Specific research activities that will immediately benefit from this tool
include nano-patterned phase change materials (PCM), photonic integrated
circuits (PIC), wide bandgap electronics, soft/wearable electronics, novel
spectroscopic imaging, and lab-on-a-chip biomedical devices. Additionally, we
will collaborate with Raith to explore resolution enhancement techniques such as
self-aligned double patterning (SADP), which could enhance the optical
resolution of the tool down to 100 nm. The proposed lithography capability will
enable fast turnaround of designs made by students for immediate fabrication in
our cleanroom. It will allow devices such as MOSFETs and photodetectors to be
designed and fabricated during a single semester course. This will enhance the
experiential learning of our graduate and undergraduate students, which was not
previously possible due to the lengthy lead-times and costs associated with the
photomask-based lithography process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.