* 2320848
* Research Infrastructure: MRI: Track #1 Acquisition of a Next-Generation X-ray  Photoelectron Spectrometer for Materials Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Shannon Boettcher, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,083,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

The surface of a solid material controls the interactions of the material with
its environment, for example in absorbing pollutants, making chemicals, or
storing electrical energy in battery electrodes. The molecules and atoms at the
surface, and how they are connected through bonds, determine much about how
these materials function. Understanding these surface molecules and atoms allows
materials to be improved for various applications. With support form the
Division of Materials Research, this Major Research Instrumentation project will
enable the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) as a shared
instrument at the University of Oregon (UO). It will be used by student
researchers, research faculty from UO and other regional universities, and
outside partners including regional industry, to study important materials for
energy, the environment, biomedicine, and next-generation electronics. For
example, the instrument will be used to understand how to create more efficient
catalysts for producing hydrogen fuel from water and to create plastic materials
that interact with biological cells in controlled ways. The instrument is
integrated into multiple graduate and undergraduate-level courses that prepare
students for rewarding careers in the high-technology industry. It is managed by
expert UO staff, who provide instruction in data collection and analysis, and
acquire data for users who need data only occasionally.

Technical Summary

This project supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art X-ray Photoelectron
Spectrometer (XPS). The instrument includes a high-energy X-ray source (Ag),
traditional soft X-ray sources, a combined atomic/cluster argon ion sputtering
source, integrated Raman spectroscopy, and a variable-temperature measurement
stage. The instrument is housed in a multi-user facility (CAMCOR â€“ Center for
Advanced Materials Characterization in Oregon) that is staffed by experts who
ensure that the tools are utilized to their fullest extent and maintained
properly. CAMCOR is actively used by diverse researchers at the University of
Oregon (UO), across the Pacific Northwest, and nationwide. At the UO and at
Oregon State University, the tool accelerates work in chemical catalysis,
quantum 2D materials, biomaterials, battery science, and self-assembling solid-
state heterostructures. Specific science projects include the following: A new
photoelectrochemical mapping method will be developed that uses spatially
sensitive shifts in the elemental binding energy of catalyst materials to
directly sense changes in electric potential on photoactive semiconductor
absorbers, thereby driving the fundamental understanding of photochemical
reactions. Degradation modes of alkaline ionomers used in advanced alkaline
membrane electrolyzers will be analyzed. Mechanisms in water electrolysis
catalysts will be studied with quasi-in-situ coupled XPS and Raman spectroscopy.
The influence of surface chemistry on dissipation in 2D nanoelectromechanical
systems for mechanical memory storage and all-mechanical light detection will be
measured. Responsive linear polymers and crosslinked hydrogel networks that
incorporate biochemical and chemical functionalities to tune cell-material
interactions or drug delivery profiles will be developed and measured. The
interfacial chemistry of electrodes associated with metal electrowinning for
decarbonizing steel production will be analyzed. The chemical properties of
flash-frozen solid-electrolyte layers in advanced beyond-Li batteries will be
characterized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.