* 2320335
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Nexsa G2 XPS Surface Analysis System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alevtina White Smirnova, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,097,251.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a Nexsa G2
XPS Surface Analysis System from ThermoFisher Scientific. This unique system
will significantly impact the research centers and programs at the South Dakota
School of Mines and Technology as well as the whole South Dakota region. At the
national level, the Nexsa G2 will impact two NSF Industry-University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC) Sites at Northeastern University and Syracuse
University. Acquisition of the Nexsa G2 XPS will advance many different areas of
fundamental and applied multi-disciplinary research focused on organic,
inorganic, and biomaterials, their advanced manufacturing, and analysis of
processes at surfaces and interfaces. This equipment will benefit research and
development at the U.S. Ellsworth Airforce Base, involve IUCRC industry
partners, and enrich instrumentation capabilities for local fast-growing high-
tech companies. The Nexsa G2 XPS system will enhance education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students at South Dakota Mines and other South Dakota
universities through the incorporation of principles of Nexsa G2 spectroscopic
methods in the curriculum. The instrument will also aid the cutting-edge
education of students at other universities through direct hands-on or distance-
learning experiences. Individuals from the largest minority group of American
Indian students from South Dakota Tribal Colleges and Universities will also
have the opportunity to engage with the Nexsa G2 XPS system through pre-college
orientation, summer bridge programs, research, and education.

The Nexsa G2 XPS system reveals fundamental mechanisms at surfaces and
interfaces in inorganic, organic, and biocomposites by using four co-incident
spectroscopic techniques to analyze the chemical composition, electronic
structure, and phase transformations. Specifically, the system allows further
enhanced analysis of coatings, adhesion, wettability, corrosion, and
biocompatibility. Interchangeable sample plates for solids, glasses, 2D
materials, and biomaterials make this system attractive for multiple users from
academia, industry, and national laboratories. Depth profiling has advantages
for the analysis of covalent bonds and atomic vibrations at interfaces in
multilayer structures and nanocomposites. Collected in-situ, data maps will be
used for evaluation of chemical interactions between atoms, mechanical
deformations, interfacial bonding, morphology, ionic transport, and
crystallinity. Specific topics to be investigated by the Nexsa G2 XPS system
include chemical agents, biosensors, metallic glasses, and functional materials
deposited by additive manufacturing techniques such as aerosol-jet printing,
thermal deposition, or supersonic cold spray. Relevant to energy storage
materials, this system provides invaluable information about mass-transport
mechanisms at surfaces and interfaces.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.