* 2320174
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF/TOF Mass Spectrometer for Research and Training at College of Charleston
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jay Forsythe, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Professors Jay Forsythe, Michael
Giuliano, Brooke Van Horn, Wendy Cory, and Yu Gong from College of Charleston
will acquire a matrix-assisted laser desorption / ionization – tandem time of
flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry is a powerful
technique to detect and characterize chemical species in sample mixtures.
Specifically, MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry is well suited for analyzing
molecules of numerous types – biological polymers, synthetic polymers /
plastics, pharmaceuticals, dyes – and to provide essential information on their
structural composition. This instrument will enable new research directions,
encourage new collaborations, and boost research training not only for a diverse
undergraduate student and researcher population at the College of Charleston but
also for students and researchers across the Lowcountry region of South
Carolina.

This award is expected to enhance research and education throughout College of
Charleston and beyond. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry involves the conversion of
chemical species to gas-phase ions that are accelerated through a field-free
region under high vacuum. Ion mass-to-charge (m/z) values are then obtained from
flight times. The instrument will provide greater than 10,000 resolving power
(full width, half maximum) and low-ppm mass accuracy in reflector TOF mode;
these capabilities are critical for a variety of research projects such as the
fate(s) of pharmaceuticals in the environment, biocompatible materials, and the
structure, function, and evolution of polypeptides. In TOF/TOF acquisition mode,
ions in flight are selected and fragmented for structural analysis. Collisions
with neutral gas such as argon increase the efficiency of fragmentation and,
thus, the level of structural detail. Impacts of this award are far-reaching and
include but are not limited to increasing participation of underrepresented
persons in research through the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LS-AMP) program, better preparing students for future careers in clinical,
industrial, or R&D labs by providing hands-on training with modern
instrumentation, and access for other institutions in the region with no or
limited mass spectrometry resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.