* 2320212
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Micro-Computer Tomography System
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joel Bumgardner, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art micro-computer tomography (micro-CT) scanner to enhance
research and education at the University of Memphis and nearby institutions.
This instrument can rapidly and cost-effectively produce three-dimensional
images of the porous structure inside objects without destroying or altering
them. It is equipped with sophisticated software that can analyze the
arrangement and distribution of pores within objects ranging from millimeters to
micrometers in size. The acquisition of this instrument is strategic for the
University of Memphis, directly impacting a large group of faculty members
across seven science and engineering disciplines: Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Chemical
Engineering, Material Sciences, Physics, Chemistry, and Earth Sciences. Through
the acquisition of the instrument, the University of Memphis will be able to
establish a cross-institutional collaboration network, connecting researchers
from the University of Memphis with neighboring institutions and industrial
companies in Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas, Kentucky, and Missouri,
including the University of Mississippi, Arkansas Tech University, University of
Alabama, University of Missouri, LeMoyne-Owen College, Union College, and Rhodes
College. This instrument will also contribute to the advancement and
modernization of curricula for both undergraduate and graduate students. It will
enable training of globally competitive workers capable of conducting advanced
micro-CT investigations and designs required by several modern industries. In
addition to benefiting graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, this
instrument will expand mentoring opportunities for undergraduate students,
specifically underrepresented minorities and those with disabilities.

This micro-CT instrument will enable large group of faculty members to conduct
fundamental and applied research in multiple areas of science and engineering,
such as investigating (a) impacts of emerging microplastic pollution on soil-
water dynamics, (b) bone and tissue healing using biomaterials, tissue
engineering, and regenerative medicine engineering, (c) biofilm structure and
biomaterial modifications to decrease biofilm formation, (d) additive
manufacturing of low-modulus metallic alloys, (e) defect-strength relationship,
fatigue and fracture of additive manufactured metals, (f) hierarchical
transition metal-oxide-based supercapacitors, (g) 3D-printed hydrogel scaffolds
for drug delivery, (h) soil pore microstructure influence on soil CO2 cycling,
(i) soil cracking and healing dynamics under varying climate condition, (j)
dispersion state of graphene nanoplatelets in thermoplastic and thermoset
polymers, (k) numerical modeling of fracture in human bone structure due to
osteoporosis, and (l) biofilm accumulation on plastic plumbing materials and
interactions with heavy metals. This instrument will significantly increase
research quality and productivity, enable new research areas, and enhance the
educational commitment of the University of Memphis and the regional
institutions.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology Program (BMMB) in the division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.