* 2320509
* Equipment: MRI: Track #1  Acquisition of electron spin resonance spectrometer for radiation exposure dating
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kathleen Rodrigues, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 440,562.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) award supports the acquisition
of an electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometer and standalone X-ray irradiator
that will be used for geological and archaeological dating at the Desert
Research Institute (DRI) in Reno, Nevada. ESR dating is one of a family of
‘radiation exposure’ dating methods that relies on the accumulated radiation
dose stored in a material to determine its age. Other methods in the family
include optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) and thermoluminescence (TL),
both of which are currently supported at DRI. ESR dating offers two main
advantages over OSL and TL: (1) the method can be applied to a much wider range
of materials including, but not limited to, quartz, tooth enamel, and
carbonates, and (2) its applicable dating range spans the last 2 million years,
far surpassing the capabilities of luminescence dating methods. Importantly,
acquisition of this ESR spectrometer will establish DRI as one of only two North
American institutions with ESR dating capabilities and will vastly increase the
number of opportunities for research collaboration and innovation. This new
instrumentation will also enhance DRI’s strong track record of undergraduate and
graduate student research training and provide new opportunities to attract and
train geochronologists from across North America.

Acquisition of a Bruker EMXmicro continuous wave X-band ESR spectrometer and
benchtop X-ray irradiator (X-ray Dose ESR Version, Freiberg Instruments) will
enable a number of multi-disciplinary research projects that address questions
spanning a variety of depositional environments and timescales over the
Quaternary period. Some of these projects include: (1) defining the timescales
and drivers of Quaternary terrace formations along the Rio Grande valley, New
Mexico, (2) refining radiocarbon chronologies based on lacustrine shells, (3)
paleohydrological modeling of mid- to late- Pleistocene pluvial lakes in the
Great Basin, (4) constraining long-term slip rates and the timing of extension
in the Great Basin, and (5) reconstructing Antarctic sedimentary provenance
using paired ESR and luminescence analyses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.