* 2320600
* MRI: Track 2 Development of a Platform for Accessible Data-Intensive Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jane Greenberg, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,997,550.00

Low-cost, high-performance sensors are producing an explosion of data in every
field, from the mysteries of the cosmos to the tiniest particles. Despite this
abundance of data, the absence of robust infrastructure and tools impedes the
ability to effectively analyze and utilize it. The Development of a Platform for
Accessible Data-Intensive Science and Engineering (DISE) will be a system for
data management, sharing, and analysis that allows automatic data collection and
curation, instant access for computational analysis, and research result sharing
for reproducibility. The system will pave the way for new research in data-
driven science â€“ and scientific outcomes. A key issue that DISE addresses is the
complexity and cost of data movement from storage to analysis sites, especially
in cloud-based scenarios. DISE aims for a more cohesive system integrating data
storage and analysis. By making research findings more accessible to the public,
DISE will provide increased return on research investments to the research
community and society at large. Critically, DISE will serve to train the next
generation of scientists in data-intensive research, ensuring accessibility for
diverse learners, and contributing to an equitable scientific community.

DISE aims to advance data-intensive science and engineering and make research
more accessible and reproducible, fostering equitable outcomes across all
societal sectors. DISE will introduce an innovative platform that facilitates
automatic data curation from scientific instruments, detailed metadata querying,
intelligent tiering for instant data accessibility for computational workloads,
interactive access to Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)-accelerated resources,
hosting and sharing of containerized research products and deployment of self-
healing micro-services for real-time data analysis. The platform will be
equipped with a 2-petabyte scientific data management system, a 500-terabyte
all-flash high-performance parallel file system, and GPU-accelerated
computation. These features promise not only to streamline data management but
also to facilitate input/output operations per second (IOPS) intensive
workflows, including data mining, data-driven research, foundations in AI, data-
intensive computation for good, and reliable and trustworthy AI. DISE is
dedicated to aiding the exploration of new areas of study by utilizing community
data repositories while simultaneously fostering the growth of the upcoming
generation of scientists skilled in data-intensive research. DISE will also
improve access to research data and computation, thus increasing the return on
prior research investments. The automated curation feature of DISE is set to
revolutionize how research data is organized and shared, making it accessible
and interoperable beyond the originating researchers. Additionally, DISE is
committed to providing high-performance GPU resources to foster data-intensive
science. The platform will connect with researchers across various disciplines
and intends to further expand its reach by automating data curation from shared
user facilities. In addition, the use of GPU-accelerated computing resources via
an easily accessible JupyterHub will aid in educating and training the next
generation of researchers. Finally, DISE is committed to promoting diversity in
the field by providing equitable access to resources and partnering with
institutions such as Morgan State University to train a new generation of
diverse data-intensive scientists and engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.