* 2320437
* Equipment: MRI: Track # 2 Development of a high-speed super-resolution stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) microscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Lingyan Shi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2028
* USD 291,000.00

Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) microscopy is a nonlinear optical imaging
method for visualizing chemical content based on molecular vibrational bonds.
SRS imaging technique has been rapidly developed in the last decade as a
powerful spectral imaging tool, leading to significant discoveries in the life
sciences. The state-of-the-art (SOA) SRS instrument has a spatial resolution of
about 300nm and wide-field temporal resolution of about 30Hz, which is limited
by the diffraction nature of the light and the relatively weak Raman scattering
signals. A multidisciplinary team at University of California, San Diego (UCSD)
with complementary expertise will develop the first super-resolution (SR) and
high-speed SRS microscope, a metamaterial-enabled structured illumination
microscope (MESIM), with >5X resolution enhancement and >100X Raman signal thus
giving speed enhancement compared to the SOA. The new instrument may lead to new
discoveries in life sciences and biomedical fields, including cell metabolism,
neuroscience, medicine, and microbiology.

The MESIM will be located in the Qualcomm Institute at UCSD, where it will be
maintained during and after the award period. The instrument will be available
to faculty members from UCSD and other academic institutions, and government and
industrial collaborators and users. Intellectual merit A super-resolution high-
speed imaging tool with vibrational bond sensitivity is critical not only for
fundamental research to visualize new structures, identify new phenomena,
understand life relevant activities, and create new diagnosis methods, it can
also provide tremendous benefit to investigations of new disease treatment
recipes. Most importantly, it can serve as a platform for development and
practice of new approaches for efficiently probing and monitoring dynamics in
nanoscales with molecular specificity and could evolve into an industry
standard. Broader Impacts The broader impacts of this research are potentially
wide-ranging. New imaging science and technology extend the knowledge boundary
and could impact this age of biology by improving the quality of life.
Construction of the proposed MESIM will be serving a wide area of Southern
California, and the proposed microscope will benefit users throughout this and
other geographic areas. The project will also play a significant role in the
education and development of human resources in science and engineering at the
graduate and undergraduate levels, helping to train future scientists and
engineers in this multidisciplinary field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.