* 2320167
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE North American School for Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Hamed Hassani, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The 2023 IEEE North American School for Information Theory (NASIT 2023) will be
held at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, USA, from June 19th to
June 23rd, 2023. This grant provides support for the expenses of school
participants from the United States such as graduate students and postdocs.
Attendees will benefit by learning from senior colleagues, presenting their own
research in poster sessions, and expanding their network with their community.
Each award will cover registration, accommodation, and travel.

The IEEE North American School (NAS) for Information Theory is an annual event
of the IEEE Information Theory Society; 2023 will be the 15th year the school
will have held the event. The NAS provides a supportive environment where
foundations for learning and long-term future scientific collaborations are
established. NAS delivers interactive education for graduate students in
mathematics, engineering, and computer sciences. It presents students the
opportunity to meet and learn from senior researchers in academia and industry
who present long-format tutorials. Student and post-doc participants present
their research results in poster sessions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.