* 2320038
* MRI: Track 2 Development of Astrophysics Enabled by High Order Advanced Keck Adaptive Optics (HAKA)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rebecca Jensen-Clem, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,649,787.00

An object seen at the bottom of a swimming pool appears blurry. A similar
blurring occurs as astronomers look through the earth's atmosphere. A solution
is the use of adaptive optics (AO), which uses a mirror that changes its shape
to remove the blurring. One of the limitations to how well the blurring can be
removed is determined by the number of actuators behind the deformable mirror.
Keck Observatory has an adaptive optics system in use. This project will replace
the existing Keck deformable mirror with one that has eight times more
actuators. The resultant system will allow an improvement in most instruments
currently used on the telescope. This will improve observations of old and cold
exoplanets and improve ability to image the surfaces of the moons of Jupiter and
Saturn. This project and the research team will indirectly support programs that
provide training in astronomical instrumentation, such as the Akamai Internship
Program and AstroTech summer school.

The W. M. Keck Observatory is equipped with AO technology and a set of AO-fed
science instruments. However, the AO system’s hardware linchpin – the deformable
mirror (DM) – is now over twenty-five years old and its small number of
actuators limits the overall AO performance. The High order Advanced Keck
Adaptive optics (HAKA) project will replace the existing 349-actuator DM with a
state-of-the-art 2800-actuator DM on the Keck II AO system. The HAKA-enabled
science program will be carried out with a suite of existing and upcoming AO
science instruments. HAKA will enable the direct imaging and spectroscopic
characterization of dozens of exoplanets that will be too close to their host
stars to be accessible to JWST and too cold to be accessible to today’s ground-
based high contrast imaging instruments. HAKA will also enable Keck II’s AO
system to operate in the z-band. This provides improved capability for Solar
System science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.