* 2320489
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 500 MHz solid/liquid-state NMR to Expand Interdisciplinary Research and Education at Howard University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Amol Kulkarni, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,089,981.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Howard University is acquiring a
500 MHz solution and solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer
equipped with a broadband probe and a triple-resonance solids probe to support
the research of Professor Steven Cummings along with colleagues Amol Kulkami,
Dharmaraj Raghavan, Sung Kim, and Timothy Ramadhar. This instrument facilitates
research in the areas of catalyst design, biochemistry, polymer chemistry,
nanomaterials, and medicinal chemistry. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument enhances the educational,
research, and research training at all levels in multiple departments at Howard
University, a Historically Black University (HBCU). This instrument further
propagates research and educational opportunities between the Minority-Serving
Institutions in the region including Morgan State University, Bowie State
University, and Gallaudet University.

The award of the 500 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as characterizations of metal-
organic frameworks, biological systems and materials, and nanoparticles.
Specifically, the instrument impacts research focused on fusing carborane
chemistry with carbene and pyridinate ligands. The instrument is also used for
structural investigations of complex bioactive compounds by structural and
mechanistic analysis of the crystalline sponge method. Additionally, this
instrument enables the composition analysis of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm.
Other investigations include the metabolome and composition analysis of exosome
in search of markers for Type 1 diabetes, and the determination of the binding
mode of small molecules to the protein NLRP3 inflammasome. In response to global
helium supply challenges and the 2022 CHIPS and Science Act, the acquisition of
this instrument includes a superconducting magnet with a low loss cryostat
reducing the institution’s consumption of helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.