* 2320994
* I-Corps: Digital Device to Improve the Safety of Extraventricular and Lumbar Cerebral Spinal Fluid Drainage
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Joshua Medow, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a reusable management system and disposable tubing that may cut
current costs while improving the standard of care by reducing patient
discomfort, reducing medical errors associated with extraventricular and lumbar
drain use, and reducing nursing management time. Extraventricular and lumbar
drain systems are used in approximately 60,000 patients annually in the US with
a market of $1.04B in 2021. The research team has performed discovery interviews
with neurosurgeons and ICU nurses, which have validated the need for
customizable drainage control and improved management efficiency. The
postoperative management of extraventricular and lumbar drains is primarily a
nursing responsibility, consisting of hourly checks and manual releveling
whenever patients change position. The use of conventional extraventricular
drains add significantly to a nurse’s workload, especially since they are
mandated to ensure close supervision with a nurse-to-patient ratio of 1:2. To
improve the state-of-the-art, this technology takes continuous pressure
measurements, compensates for patient movement to minimize discomfort and harm
to patients from over or underdrainage, provides far more customizable control
for patient optimization, and uses a much less expensive disposable.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an external cerebrospinal
fluid drainage system that provides customizable drainage control for
neurosurgeons, requires less intervention by nurses, and makes cerebrospinal
fluid drainage safer for patients. The device in development is used to drain
cerebrospinal fluid from the brain via an extraventricular drain or from the
spine via a lumbar drain, and to aid in the diagnosis and treatment of elevated
intracranial pressure. State-of-the art drainage systems connect to an existing
ventricular or lumbar catheter that has been placed by a neurosurgeon to drain
cerebrospinal fluid and measure pressure using a hospital’s existing standard
pressure transducer. This technology’s disposable tubing line connects to
existing brain and spine catheters and pressure transducers using industry
standard Luer locks. The technology and its disposable parts are never placed
inside humans. The sterile disposable tubing is manually secured to the
technology’s controller system externally. The closed drainage system is not
disrupted, limiting infection risk to the patient.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.