* 2320798
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Multi-Material 3D Printer for Additively Manufactured Electronics to Enable Interdisciplinary Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sanku Mallik, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 770,100.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
additive manufacturing based multi-material, 3D printer at North Dakota State
University (NDSU). This instrument enables the creation of additively
manufactured electronics that can bring numerous innovative solutions to the
electronics industry and create virtually endless opportunities in terms of
applications. 3D printing is at the forefront of new product design and
technical innovation. It can produce complex, highly integrated geometries as
well as perform material and design optimization, which opens new opportunities
for high performance products. The printerâ€™s additive manufacturing capability
will enable significant advancements in research and educational at NDSU and the
state of North Dakota. This includes a range of research and educational
projects as well as training of future scientists and engineers at the graduate
and undergraduate levels. The training opportunities will further be extended
for underrepresented groups through the existing programs and collaborations,
such as the Nurturing American Tribal Undergraduate Research and Education
summer camp and engineering summer programs organized by NDSU College of
Engineering and Society of Women Engineers for high school students. The
acquisition of the printer will also enable research and training opportunities
for students at a collaborative primarily undergraduate institution, Mayville
State University.

The DragonFly IV, 3D printer provides a hybrid printing system by using
simultaneous deposition of dielectric and conductive inks to enable the
production of additively manufactured electronic circuits such as multi-layer
PCBs, radio frequency antennas, embedded semiconductors, sensors, and other
components for various applications. Acquisition of this printer will impact a
range of major projects including 1) radio frequency based sensors and antennas
for Internet of Things, 2) multi-factorial arbitrarily shaped electromagnetic
device design such as metamaterial antennas and reconfigurable intelligent
surfaces, 3) component prototyping for bioinstrumentation design, 4) cell
quality sensing platform development for engineered living systems, 5) tumor
penetrating polymer nanoparticles design and testing, 6) field-deployable
polymer based sensors using the integration of 3D printed electronic circuits
and stimuli responsive polymer scaffolds, and 7) crop production optimization in
controlled environment agriculture. The wide variety of these projects indicate
the ability of DragonFly IV in enabling interdisciplinary collaborative research
across the NDSU campus and beyond.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.