* 2320201
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer to Enhance Nanomaterial Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shengnian Wang, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 128,826.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer (NTA). The instrument will be used to measure the
size and concentration of nanomaterials. Given the importance of these
properties, the instrument capabilities will benefit research on a broad range
of nanomaterial applications. It will enable the formulation of nanomaterial
products for better quality and performance. The exposure risks of nanomaterials
to humans or the environment will also be assessed with this instrument. The
instrument will impact regional collaborations on research, education, and
training along the ~100-mile I-20 corridor in North Louisiana. The institutes
involved include the only engineering program, the only school of pharmacy, one
of the only two public medical schools, and one well-known Historically Black
University in that region. Research from eight groups will be enabled by the
instrument, benefiting 5 post-doctoral researchers, 31 graduate students, and 60
undergraduate students. Instrument training will be disseminated through courses
offered on the four participating campuses. The instrument will engage a diverse
set of students in research training.

Compared to other techniques on size and concentration measurement, the NTA
instrument allows real-time analysis of polydisperse samples with a size range
of 10 nm - 1 µm. This makes it a useful tool to promote the research
productivity and competitiveness of faculty in the involved institutions and
their NSF-funded projects. Specifically, it will enhance: (1) biomanufacturing
extracellular vesicles with high throughput and large quantity, and their use in
sensing biological signals of host cells and cell therapy; (2) quantifying and
regulating formula, surface properties, and types of novel pharmaceutical
nanocarriers for drugs, genes, and vaccine applications; and (3) assessing
formula of nanocarbon in 3D printing ink, and monitoring nanoplastics in water
as well as their removal performance in novel filtration systems. This
instrument also allows the team to train highly qualified professionals to meet
the present and future needs of the workforce in healthcare, pharmaceutics,
advanced materials, nanomanufacturing, and environmental protection. Its success
will benefit these industries and business sectors located in Louisiana to
improve its economy and environment.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.