* 2320718
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Expansion of the Molecular Education and Research Consortium in Undergraduate Computational Chemistry (MERCURY)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Maria Gomez, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The instrument is a high-performance computer (HPC) which adds to the HPC
Research Consortium in Undergraduate computational chemistRY (MERCURY)
resources, and enables 13 more research groups to benefit, expanding the
consortium to 47 computational chemists and physicists at 41 different
institutions. The objective is to increase the number of undergraduate students
participating and benefiting from this stimulating and highly productive
environment. The projects utilize the tools of computational chemistry to solve
significant research problems and build on the progress and momentum of the
original MRI grant, awarded in 2001, which allowed the consortium to purchase an
HPC and assisted in formally establishing rigorous, accessible research programs
at member institutions. The consortium faculty have research programs in
computational chemistry, spanning the fields of biochemistry, biological,
bioinorganic, biophysical, environmental, inorganic, materials, machine
learning, nanoparticles, physical, physical organic, photochemistry, polymers,
and solvation effects. Projects utilizing HPC resources include fundamental
research aimed at designing better solid state batteries, developing better
thermal energy storage systems, understanding how non-covalent interactions
impact materials science and atmospheric chemistry, understanding the
biomechanical properties of bacterial filaments, learning how intrinsically
disordered proteins influence more structured proteins and DNA, understanding
the functional determinants of rotavirus pathology, explaining reaction dynamics
occurring within high energy tandem mass spectrometry, developing better
anchoring groups for dye-sensitized solar cells, understanding the role of
molecular crowding on enzyme inhibition, and others.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.