* 2320977
* CyberTraining: Pilot: HPC ED: Building a Federated Repository and Increasing Access through Cybertraining
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Mary Thomas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The pilot will allow for the discovery, identification, and sharing of High
Performance Computing (HPC) training materials across a multitude of providers
and users. While there are considerable resources for learning about HPC topics
online, the overall environment is highly fragmented and challenging to
navigate. The project aims to create a federated repository of training
materials with metadata, quality assurance, and roadmaps that can be accessed by
both computational resource providers and computational scientists to discover
and use these materials. Training providers can list their resources through the
repository (HPC ED) and make them accessible to a multitude of portals across
the United States and beyond. Examples of organizations that will benefit are
Kean University, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, which will train students to
use their local computational cluster, and DesignSafe, a Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure facility, which will train their engineering
community on how to use a multitude of HPC resources.

HPC ED will pilot a federated training repository that can be leveraged by
members of the cyberinfrastructure community to provide access to the best
training resources while maintaining relationships with their user base.
Throughout the cyberinfrastructure community, many resources are available to
train faculty and young scholars about the successful utilization of
computational resources for research. The problem that HPC ED addresses is that
training materials abound, but with little information about the quality or
relevance of offerings. The federated repository will identify and vet training
resources from this broad set of offerings and provide metadata and
characterization that support the successful discovery and utilization of
training resources, and their incorporation into portals for research computing
groups at universities, HPC centers, schools, domain-centered institutions, and
elsewhere. Local centers will be able to include content identified in the
repository and offer it to their local faculty members with local branding and
identification side-by-side with their locally developed offerings. In turn,
their training offerings can be vetted and shared with the broader computational
science community, increasing their reach and impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.