* 2320296
* Coupling Biocrusts and Vegetation Dynamics to Improve Predictions of Dryland Change
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2027
* Rachata Muneepeerakul, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 09/30/2027
* USD 950,580.00

Environmental changes worldwide have pushed ecosystems towards their limit, and
there is a growing need to better predict ecosystem responses to these external
pressures. Prior work suggests that spatial patterns found in many ecosystems
change in a predictable way when approaching a tipping point. These spatial
patterns can be harbingers of imminent whole ecosystem change. Drylands have
been used as pivotal systems in developing such a theory. The theory predicts
that as the climate becomes drier, patterns of dryland vegetation shift from
bare gaps in homogenous vegetation to labyrinthine or striped vegetation cover,
then to a spotty pattern, before catastrophically shifting to a bare state.
Operationalizing an early warning system of ecosystem change using such spatial
patterns requires accurate characterization of significant feedbacks; otherwise,
“false alarms” could lead to costly resource misallocations. Unfortunately,
predictions from current theory are limited to only a small area of drylands
globally. This is likely because models currently ignore biological soil crusts,
or biocrusts. Biocrusts are associations between soil particles and living
microorganisms (e.g., cyanobacteria, lichens, mosses, bacteria) that live within
or immediately on top of, the upper few millimeters of soils. Biocrusts can
cover more surface area than vascular plants and play a critical role in the
dynamics of water, energy, and nutrients. They also alter core processes that
underlie vegetation spatial patterns. Neglecting biocrusts poses significant
uncertainties in predicting dryland change driven by climate. Current theory of
ecosystem spatial self-organization considers only one homogenous assemblage of
organisms, in the case of drylands, vascular plants. Conceptualizing drylands as
an integral biocrust-vascular plant complex requires new theories and models
that integrate inter-specific interactions (e.g., competition, facilitation) and
spatial self-organization. This research develops such theories and models,
using drylands as a focal study area.

The project investigates biocrust patch dynamics by (1) manipulating rainfall
regimes in the lab and tracking biocrust patch formation and (2) monitoring
drylands of the U.S. Southwest. Dryland pattern formation models link vascular
plants with biocrusts. Comparing these models, with prior models that do not
consider biocrusts, elucidates the role of biocrusts in dryland resilience and
predicts how ecosystem state (e.g., productivity) and spatial patterns change
with altered rainfall regimes under climate change. Lastly, multi-source remote
sensing imagery and deep learning approaches guide large-scale biocrust mapping.
The resultant models predict changes to drylands in the U.S. Southwest over the
next few decades of anticipated climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.