* 2320091
* MRI: Acquisition of a dual-acquisition high-density EEG with transcranial electrical  neuromodulation for psychophysiological research.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Joshua Carlson, Northern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 413,282.00

This National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award funds the
acquisition of a high-density electroencephalogram (HD-EEG) system with high-
density transcranial electric stimulation (HD-tES) neuromodulation technology
and time-locked dual acquisition capabilities at Northern Michigan University
(NMU). EEG is a non-invasive measure of the brain’s electrical activity with
excellent (millisecond level) temporal resolution. Neuromodulation with HD-tES
offers a non-invasive method of experimentally manipulating brain activity with
high precision to assess the causal link between neural activation and human
behavior. When two (or more) EEG devices are time-locked this method, known as
hyperscanning, allows for insight into the neural mechanisms underlying social
interactions. The instrumentation supported by this award is an integrated
system with HD-EEG, hyperscanning EEG, and HD-tES functionality. Northern
Michigan University, NMU, is a rural predominantly undergraduate institution
with a large number of first-generation and low-income students. The
instrumentation supported by this award will significantly enhance the research
environment at NMU and in doing so provide critical training opportunities for
underrepresented undergraduate students in innovative and emergent neuroscience
techniques. The research supported by this award integrates across HD-EEG,
hyperscanning, and HD-tES methodologies—representing a new frontier in human
neuroscience research that has the potential to transform the field by testing
for cause and effect brain-behavior relationships in dyadic social environments.

This award supports collaborative research projects involving faculty and
undergraduate students in the areas of affective and cognitive neuroscience as
well as social-cogniton, behavioral, and applied fields of psychology. EEG based
measures of reward processing have been extensively studied in the context of
adaptive and maladaptive behavior. Yet, the underlying neural generator of these
reward-based EEG signals remains a point of contention. The instrumentation
supported by this award provides a unique opportunity to electrically stimulate
potential neural generators via HD-tES and assess the causal effects of
neuromodulation on EEG measures of reward processing. The causal effects of
neuromodulation on reward processing are studied in multiple contexts including
simple bidding tasks, cognitive training protocols, and operant renewal
paradigms modeling relapse behavior. The research supported by this award
utilizes the hyperscanning capabilities of the instrumentation to assess the
neural correlates of intrinsic motivation as a function of psychological need
fulfillment vs frustration via dyadic social interactions involving cooperation
and competition. Hyperscanning is also used to assess differences in EEG-based
measures of performance-monitoring in dyadic social environments. Studies
explore the extent to which HD-tES targeting of reward processing and
performance monitoring sources can be used to modulate intrinsic motivation and
cooperation as well as task performance in cooperative vs competitive dyadic
social interactions. In short, the research enabled by this award integrates
across HD-EEG, hyperscanning, and HD-tES methodologies with the aim of better
understanding the cause and effect relationship between the neural systems
involved in reward processing and performance monitoring on human behavior in
social contexts

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.