* 2320237
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 600MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research, Teaching, and Outreach
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Orion Berryman, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,397,480.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research. The University of Montana is acquiring a 600 MHz
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with a triple-resonance
probe, a double-resonance broadband probe, a variable temperature unit, and an
automated sample changer to support the research of Professor Bruce Bowler and
his colleagues: Klara Briknarova, Orion Berryman, Travis Hughes, and Daniel
Decato. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of structural biology,
biophysics, supramolecular chemistry, organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry,
and medicinal chemistry. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in several departments at the
University of Montana. It will directly impact the research of 12 laboratories
and will impact students in two upper division lab courses and several graduate
courses. The new instrument will also be available for use by regional tribal
colleges in Montana and surrounding states.

This award is aimed at supporting research and education at all levels. The 600
MHz NMR spectrometer coupled to the triple-resonance probe will be used for
evaluating rational mutations for stabilizing proteins and for studying the
structure and dynamics of Fibronectin. The double resonance broadband probe will
serve research efforts employing fluorine NMR to study nuclear receptors. This
probe will also enhance studies of abiotic foldamers through proton-fluorine NMR
correlation experiments. The variable temperature capabilities will expand the
scope of the studies surrounding transient high valent first row transition
metal complexes designed to activate carbon-hydrogen bonds. The autosampler will
permit high throughput evaluations of ligand protein interactions using
saturation-transfer difference (STD) NMR elucidating fundamental ligand binding
events with C-type Lectin receptors. The 600 MHz NMR system will also serve a
variety of users within the disciplines of medicinal chemistry, natural
products, materials science, and polymer chemistry. In response to global helium
supply challenges, the acquisition of this instrument includes a superconducting
magnet with a low loss cryostat reducing the institutionâ€™s consumption of
helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.