* 2320389
* Equipment: MRI Track 1: Acquisition of a Laser Ablation Time of Flight Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for UCSB Researchers and Educators
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Jackson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 883,268.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
integrated Laser Ablation Time Of Flight Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass
Spectrometer (LA-TOF-ICP-MS) system for research and teaching at the University
of California Santa Barbara (UCSB). This instrumentation will facilitate the
investigations of fourteen UCSB faculty and researchers, their students, and
collaborators. It will also enable access for a broad range of researchers and
students elsewhere in California and globally. The new analytical capabilities
of this system will improve the quality of undergraduate learning and
instruction in earth science and allied fields, provide new opportunities s for
undergraduate and graduate research projects, and form the basis for the
creation of novel and engaging analytical geochemistry coursework. The PIs on
this award actively participate in the Geochemical Society’s capacity-building
grants program, and the NSF-funded ‘Advancing Geochronology Science, Spaces, and
Systems’ (AGeS3), which fund research opportunities for underrepresented
students as well as scientists from developing countries.

The LA-TOF-ICP-MS system enables rapid three-dimensional imaging of elemental
and isotopic variations in geological and biological materials at the micron
scale with minimal sample preparation. Key capabilities of this system include
the ability to scan the entire mass spectrum from sodium to uranium in less than
30 microseconds, and the routine production of quantitative images at a rate of
up to 1000 pixels per second at detection limits in the parts-per-million range.
Specific research objectives include: 1) dating complexly zoned minerals to
understand a range of magmatic, metamorphic, sedimentary, and tectonic
processes, 2) characterizing the often-complex distribution of U in carbonates
to obtain better U-Pb ages, and; 3) retrieving detailed paleoclimate proxy
records from carbonates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.