* 2320496
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Instrumentation for Marine Metal-Organic and Metalloproteomic Analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,842.00

In environmental sciences, the organic and inorganic components of natural
molecules have generally been considered separately. Yet it has become clear in
recent decades that the organic-inorganic interface is critically important in
biological systems: from the inorganic perspective, there are essential uses of
metals in all life forms due to the unique chemical properties metal ions
provide. For example, iron and manganese are essential in photosynthesis,
copper, iron, and molybdenum are co-factors in multiple key nitrogen cycle
reactions, and cobalt, zinc, and even cadmium are critical to carbon uptake and
intracellular transformations. And from the organic perspective these metals are
typically bound by a wide variety of organic molecules. This project will
support the acquisition of a modern mass spectrometer system that contribute to
a system capable of interrogating both the organic and inorganic chemical
complexities. The instrumentation will contribute to understanding of ocean
biogeochemical cycling through the analysis of large, coordinated sampling
efforts such as GEOTRACES (including in the upcoming Antarctic GP17 expedition),
AtlantEco, and other collaborative projects, measuring metal-ligands and
microbial proteins across large regions of the oceans. The proposed
instrumentation will also benefit researchers within the ocean science community
through a variety of collaborative studies including an ongoing collaboration
with a HBCU, as well as through the dissemination of novel organic-inorganic
methods. Data produced by this mass spectrometer will be shared on public
repositories and incorporated into the Ocean Protein Portal, a web resource that
makes ‘omic data accessible to non-expert users used in both research and
education activities including class-based research projects.

The hybrid instrument developed in this project will enable interdisciplinary
inorganic-organic studies. Specifically, the acquired orbitrap mass spectrometry
instrumentation will be coupled to an inorganic plasma mass spectrometer via a
custom multidimensional chromatographic system allowing simultaneous
characterization of complex organic molecules and their metal contents. The
resulting instrumentation will enable advances in areas of metal-ligand and
dissolved organic matter characterization, metalloproteomics, and metaproteomics
and will enhance new collaborative research studies on marine bioinorganic
chemistry in the ocean sciences. Knowledge gained in these areas will improve
the understanding of controls on Earth’s biogeochemical cycles through the study
of nutrient stress biomarkers, biogeochemically relevant (metallo)enzymes, and
metal cycling and bioavailability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.