* 2320315
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Dynamic Mixed Gas Sorption Analyzer-Mass Spectrometer to Enable Advanced Separation, Sensing, and Catalysis Research
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Fatih Dogan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 588,275.00

Accurate measurement of the magnitude and dynamics of gas/vapor sorption on
nanoporous materials under diverse operating conditions is an essential step in
evaluating the performance of new materials used in various separation, sensing,
catalytic or purification applications. With renewed focus on the importance of
understanding materials behaviors under complex environments, the researchers at
Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T) to acquire
instrumentation that enables multicomponent gas/vapor sorption over nanoporous
materials. The acquired system will be used to bridge fundamental knowledge gaps
relevant to energy-intensive separations, gas/bio-aerosol sensing, size-
selective catalysis, and carbon capture/utilization.

This Major Research Instrumentation award is to acquire a dynamic mixed
gas/vapor sorption analyzer, integrated with a dynamic sampling mass
spectrometer (VGS-DSMS) plus an automated breakthrough reactor (ABR), called
VGS-DSMS-ABR suite. The suite – owing to its ability to perform binary and
combined equilibrium-dynamic characterization of nanoporous materials of various
types – will advance research in many areas relevant to design of new materials
and performance-optimization of existing materials used as sorbents, sensors, or
catalysts in energy and environmental processes by providing a comprehensive
means of assessing sorption characteristics and establishing property-
performance correlations for nanoporous materials. The proposed VGS-DSMS-ABR
suite will not only bolster current-and-future research projects geared towards
design and performance-optimization of materials, but also support several
education, training, and outreach activities at Missouri S&T and 10 partner
institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.