* 2320694
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Structure Determination of Molecules and Materials at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bangbo Yan, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 346,506.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, jointly funded by the Division
of Materials Research (DMR), and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), supports the acquisition of a single crystal
X-ray diffractometer system, which is central to several research projects at
Western Kentucky University (WKU). In addition, collaboration with faculty at
three other universities (California Baptist University, Lipscomb University,
and the University of Findlay) expands and provides access to a wider group of
personnel. This advanced equipment plays a crucial role in addressing
fundamental inquiries in the fields of chemistry, physics, and geology that
demand accurate and precise measurements of the three-dimensional structures of
crystalline compounds and minerals. Further, it offers valuable training and
research opportunities for undergraduate students at WKU, high school students
at regional high schools, including Gatton Academy students who are gifted
students pursuing their high school courses in a residential setting on the WKU
campus.

The system features a microfocus sealed-tube Mo source, a multi-axis goniometer
with optical encoders and all axes within a sphere of less than 7 micrometers, a
photon area detector supporting shutterless data collection, an air-cooled
generator, and a low-temperature device for sample temperatures between 80 K and
400 K. The software suite provided with the system consists of a comprehensive
suite of reliable routines for collecting and integrating frame data from single
crystals and for solving, refining, displaying, and publishing structural
results. Projects supported by this instrument advance the state of knowledge
for 1) metal-oxo chemistry and photocatalysis on how to generate heme-like metal
complexes and how to control their structures to control their photocatalysis;
2) metal-organic framework chemistry on how to tune their structures to gain
desired photocatalytic or electrochemical properties, 3) organic molecular
chemistry on solid-state packing styles of phenanthroimidazole-based
derivatives, and how to synthesize perfluorinated fused-ring pyridazines,
halogenated tricyclooctanes/tricyclodecanes, and amino acid analogs, 4) solid
state chemistry on how to make metal oxides and double Perovskites, 5) types,
distribution, and structures of rare minerals at Mammoth Cave National Park.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.