* 2320737
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray Ionization-Quadrupole Time of Flight Mass Spectrometer for Central Michigan University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Choon Lee, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 460,000.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Professor Choon Young Lee and 7
other faculty (Drs. Benjamin Swarts, Anja Muller, Bradley Fahlman, Anton Jensen,
Douglas Swanson, Janice Tomasik and Dale LeCaptain) from the Chemistry and
Biochemistry department at Central Michigan University (CMU) are acquiring an
Electrospray Ionization (ESI)-Quadrupole Time of Flight (QTOF) Mass Spectrometer
(MS) that is equipped with two soft ionization sources (ESI for readily
ionizable molecules and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization for not readily
ionizable molecules), an HPLC, a Diode Array Detector, and an autosampler. Mass
spectrometry (MS) is an essential analytical method used to help identify and
characterize unknown chemical species in complex samples through accurate mass
measurement. Hence, its availability is vital to chemists who synthesize new
molecules. The departmentâ€™s research strength lies in advanced materials
synthesis, such as dendritic molecules, carbohydrates, polymers, and battery
materials. Therefore, an MS that can provide a wide range of molecular weight
information and that uses soft ionization techniques allowing the intact
molecules to be detected without undergoing fragmentation, will facilitate the
accurate mass measurements of various large complex molecules made in the
department. Acquisition of the state-of-art ESI-QTOF MS will enable researchers
in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at CMU to be efficient in their
research and train undergraduate/graduate students on a cutting-edge instrument
that will help them acquire skills to succeed in post-graduate study or
employment.

The award of the ESI-QTOF MS is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. The ESI-QTOF MS that offers a broad mass detection range, accurate mass,
high resolution/sensitivity, and broad experimental capabilities, will
facilitate and impact diverse leading-edge research projects at Central Michigan
University. It especially impacts areas involving synthesis of new molecules in
chemistry, biochemistry and polymer/materials science. The award of an ESI-QTOF
instrument will be used in the analyses of (i) novel powerful, biorelevant
macromolecular antioxidant dendrons and dendrimers synthesized through chemical
reactions; (ii) carbohydrate- and lipid-based chemical probes that are
synthesized to study the glycolipid rich mycobacterial cell envelope and
understand mycobacterial physiology; (iii) polymers designed for a variety of
applications, such as waste-water treatment, skin scaffolds for burn victims,
and fuel cell membranes; (iv) new battery materials synthesized for energy
storing applications; (v) enzyme-catalyzed reactions between flavins and enes to
better understand their mechanisms of action; and (vi) nano-drugs synthesized by
conjugating drug molecules to PAMAM dendrimers or encapsulations to overcome the
current problems small drug molecules have. The ESI-QTOF MS instrumentation with
MS/MS function also will allow the department to perform proteomic and
metabolomic studies as well as determine fragmentation/degradation patterns for
the large molecules like dendrimers and polymeric materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.