* 2320669
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Confocal Raman Microscope for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Elaine Haberer, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,698.00

Non-technical Description: This project funds the acquisition of a scanning
confocal Raman microscope. The microscope enables researchers to map out the
composition of a sample by detecting the Raman spectrum at different spatial
locations. The Raman spectrum acts as a chemical fingerprint for different
molecules or crystal lattice structures. Combined with a scanning probe
capability, the new instrument allows researchers to map out the sample
composition with nanometer spatial resolution. To maximize the number of users,
this instrument is integrated into the Analytical Chemistry Instrumentation
Facility (ACIF) at the University of California, Riverside (UCR). The instrument
is also incorporated into upper-division undergraduate laboratory classes in
three different departments: Chemistry, Environmental Sciences, and Materials
Science and Engineering. Each year, more than 200 advanced undergraduate
students gain experience by performing experiments that illustrate the
applications of Raman microscopy. This experience helps the undergraduates, who
are predominantly first-generation college students from underrepresented
groups, move on to careers in high-technology fields or to postgraduate study.

Technical Description: Researchers across many disciplines require tools that
can characterize the composition of their samples on nanometer to micrometer
length scales. In order to characterize complex, heterogeneous samples, it is
necessary to perform chemically sensitive spectroscopy measurements (Raman and
photoluminescence) with a high spatial resolution (optical and atomic force
microscopy). The Raman instrument is highly automated with enhanced capabilities
that include polarization sensitive detection, broad-spectrum photoluminescence
measurements, and nanometer-scale chemical resolution through Tip-Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (TERS) that permit it to accommodate the ever-increasing research
demands from researchers working in diverse fields. It is enabling the
development of materials with novel capabilities, including photoactivated
organic crystals, magnon-based heat transport, high band-gap semiconductors, and
semiconductor clusters. The creation of new materials, such as topological and
strain-activated superconductors that are promising candidates for quantum
information processing, is accelerated because samples can be quickly
characterized. Engineers are characterizing practical materials such as virus-
based biosensors and battery architectures with nanometer resolution, while the
composition of microplastic samples is assessed to gauge their environmental
impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.