* 2320998
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: T3-CIDERS: A Train-the-Trainer Approach to Fostering CI- and Data-Enabled Research in Cybersecurity
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peng Jiang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

This project aims to respond to the urgent need for well-prepared cybersecurity
researchers and professionals in the nation by increasing the literacy,
accessibility, and adoption of advanced cyberinfrastructure techniques, tools,
and platforms in cybersecurity and cyber-related disciplines. The project team
develops “T3-CIDERS”, a Train-the-Trainer program, which will train teams of
faculty, researchers and graduate students across multiple states, who will
subsequently disseminate knowledge and skills on advanced cyberinfrastructure to
a broader group of students and researchers within their own institutions and to
K-12 audiences, especially those within underrepresented communities. The
training program reaches a wider audience through an interactive, open online
learning environment, broadening the accessibility of computational and data
science across various scientific and engineering disciplines. The T3-CIDERS
program facilitates the preparation of current and future cybersecurity and
cyber-related researchers, engineers, and practitioners with advanced
cyberinfrastructure and data analytic skills, which have become increasingly
important for developing secure and resilient digital infrastructure. Given its
multi-level educational structure and ubiquitous societal needs for advanced
cyberinfrastructure in cybersecurity, this project is expected to have
significant and wide-ranging societal impacts, particularly in the areas of
workforce development, innovative curriculum, and developing capabilities of
supporting diverse and underrepresented groups.

This collaborative project furnishes a unique Train-the-Trainer Approach to
Fostering CyberInfrastructure- and Data-Enabled Research in CyberSecurity
(T3-CIDERS), a program to train faculty, researchers, and students to develop
solid CI competencies through a train-the-trainer program designed to be
synergistic with research, teaching, and learning activities. The project
develops comprehensive technical cyberinfrastructure (CI)-focused and
pedagogical train-the-trainer (T3) modules designed for effective CI education
of a broad and diverse range of learners. Leveraging the groundwork laid by the
NSF-funded DeapSECURE program, this project will augment the existing DeapSECURE
CI modules by developing new fundamental and application-oriented resources
tailored for advancing cybersecurity research. A core component in this project
is a novel T3 module, designed to cultivate cybersecurity researchers and
professionals into skilled trainers, enhancing both their instructional design
capabilities and technological aptitudes. This learner-focused approach aspires
to foster a community of practice (CoP) and promote CI integration in
cybersecurity research and education. Moreover, to extend the project's reach
and longevity, an online adaptation, T3-Online, will be developed as an open
educational resource to facilitate broadening project outcomes into other
domains of science and engineering. The success of the project will drive
interest and understanding of CI as essential tools in state-of-the-art
cybersecurity research, flatten the student learning curve for CI technology and
provide a national leadership in CI training for cybersecurity research.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Cybercorps Scholarship for Service, Directorate for STEM Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.