* 2320160
* Leveraging releasable aryl diazonium ions to probe biochemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hamish Christie, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,759.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, John Jewett from the University of Arizona is studying
releasable reactive species to probe biological systems. Everything within
biology can be analyzed based on its chemical composition. Reactive chemical
probes form chemical bonds with molecules, both small and macromolecular-such as
proteins or DNA, and these reactions are important because they can report back
on the state of the system (healthy versus diseased, growing versus quiescent).
Aryl diazonium ions (ADI) are a unique class of highly reactive molecules that
the Jewett lab has learned to harness by rendering them deliverable using
masking functional groups. These ADI could be leveraged to report on biological
systems using fluorescence as an output to detect the chemical environment or
enzymatic activity. The Jewett research team will also investigate the
multifaceted fate of ADI once they enter a complex biological environment. In
addition to their utility as biochemical tools, the study and synthesis of these
compounds will serve to train undergraduate and graduate students. Moreover,
this class of compounds generally exhibits fascinating color changes,
fluorescence, solubility changes, and other properties that make them well
suited to integrate with outreach goals. Dr. Jewett will develop an outreach
program for a local school district with the goal of empowering elementary
school students with safe experiments that they can carry out at home.

Aryl diazonium ions (ADI) are powerful hypothesis-generating biochemical tools.
A better understanding of ADIs is required to optimize their utility. One piece
of this proposal seeks to develop a class of fluorogenic molecules with multiple
mechanisms and inputs for activation. Multiple inputs could imbue these
molecules with power to provide advanced spatiotemporal probing of the
environment or of enzymatic status within a biochemical system. Additionally,
the proposed research seeks to understand the nature of the reactivity and
selectivity of ADI in living systems. While ADI have been used for decades for
bioconjugation of proteins, or to degrade DNA, a holistic view of these
disparate reactivities has not been undertaken. Following the synthesis of a
small library of ADI, competition studies between disparate classes of
biomolecules will be analyzed by NMR, mass spectrometry and gel electrophoresis.
These studies could culminate in intracellular delivery of certain ADI using a
triazabutadiene strategy. The findings of these studies may potentially impact
the future of how this class of reactive probes is used for biological systems,
from modifying purified proteins to probing whole organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.