* 2320991
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: Building a strong community of computational researchers empowered in the use of novel cutting-edge technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Paola Buitrago, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 61,825.00

This project will educate computational researchers in the efficient use of
novel cutting-edge hardware. As computational hardware rapidly evolves, it can
be hard to keep pace with these changes. It is, however, crucial to do so, since
the efficient use of advanced systems ensures progress and thoughtful use of
valuable resources such as computing time and power. In this program,
participants will learn how to use the newest technologies that NSF makes
available to the national community, as well as key concepts and technologies in
high-performance computing. They will also work on challenges they are facing in
pursuing their research and studies while being mentored by experts. The program
is targeting graduate students and postdocs from the S&E (science and
engineering) community, although people with higher seniority can also apply.
Nearly all disciplines in S&E heavily use computational resources. Hence, this
program is targeting a wide range of applications and users.

The goals of this Cybertraining program are manifold: (i) improve researchers'
ease and productivity when working with cutting-edge, specialized computing
technology, (ii) grow a well-informed community of computational researchers,
familiar with the newest technologies, (iii) ensure they are capable of handling
them and porting applications, and (iv) ensure proper and efficient usage of the
testbeds. The recent growth in data-enabled science and engineering coupled has
ushered in a new generation of cyberinfrastructure (CI) technologies. Federal
agencies have invested in testbed architectures that allow researchers to
explore new avenues of computing, and vastly improved performance holds promise.
With a focus on fostering innovation in CI, these testbeds include complex
features which make them harder to use by all but experienced users. Graduate
students and postdocs, the largest users of CI, however, require a scaffolded
approach to ensure that they are able to perform this migration while making
meaningful progress toward addressing their research problems. Furthermore,
there is an unmet need for a training platform for interested researchers to
experience all the testbed technologies simultaneously, and select the one that
is best suited to support their scientific workflows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.