* 2320948
* I-Corps: Continuation and Expansion of Training and Evaluation Support
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 9,057,860.00

The I-Corps program aims to increase the economic and societal impact of NSF
research funding and other research funding by facilitating translation of
technologies from the laboratory and enabling commercialization. In addition,
the I-Corps Program is designed to begin to equip scientists and engineers with
skills and experience in developing economically scalable business models for
technology commercialization. Program participants focus on learning and using a
structured process that enables them to gather input from users and potential
customers to evaluate and define a translational path from fundamental research
into applications that have commercial potential and societal benefit.
Approximately 50% of I-Corps teams go on to form companies operating in a broad
range of sectors including health, energy, materials, agriculture, and
information technology. This structured, repeatable program engages a national
community of institutions and faculty to deliver training that results in
economic outcomes. Through the proposed work, VentureWell will support the
training of more than 2700 additional individual I-Corps participants. The
proposed effort also will generate additional I-Corps instructors to increase
the diversity of the faculty pool, enhance the program pedagogy, and advance the
systematic data collection and tracking of teams immediately participating in
the program.

NSF established the I-Corps entrepreneurial training program in 2011 to train
NSF-funded and other researchers how to evaluate the commercial potential of
their scientific research in science and engineering. VentureWell's evaluation
of program outcomes and tracking of program impact in a systematic, timely way
has been critical to the operation of a consistent, effective, high-fidelity
program at scale, and to the measurement of long-term program results. The core
intellectual merit of this work is the insight provided into the program's
impact—both economic outcomes and participants' career and research
outcomes—over time. To gain this insight, VentureWell evaluates the
instructional delivery of each cohort, administers a longitudinal outcomes
survey, and tracks venture outcomes independently to verify program impact data.
The processes and data systems that efficiently track outcomes and provide
insights into the development of technology-based ventures are a product of this
work as well. Through the work proposed starting in FY 2024 and ending in FY
2026, VentureWell will support the virtual training of the National I-Corps
Program and the Beat-the-Odds Boot Camp while facilitating the curation and
dissemination of the pedagogical learnings to enable further development of the
National I-Corps instructors. VentureWell will continue to facilitate work
within the National Innovation Network (NIN) to disseminate effective course
practices, outcomes, and impact enabling the NIN to effectively adopt and
institutionalize these approaches. This support will further NSF's goal of
advancing I-Corps as a foundational entrepreneur training program to reach
innovators across the country.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.