* 2320872
* Enhancing Science Learning and Collaboration through Social Metacognition
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stephanie Halmo, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 347,757.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing science learning
and collaboration for undergraduate students in biology and biochemistry. The
Nation’s ability to stay on the leading edge of scientific development hinges on
a STEM workforce with well-developed collaboration skills. Some evidence
suggests that successful collaboration depends on social metacognition, or the
awareness and regulation of another’s thinking. Social metacognition occurs when
one person stimulates metacognition in another. This happens when one person
monitors or evaluates their own understanding or another’s understanding out
loud for others to hear. This project will use both qualitative and quantitative
methods to analyze audio and video data from introductory college biology labs
and biochemistry classrooms to determine how social metacognition and students’
perceptions of social metacognition impact collaboration in these contexts. This
project will result in fundamental knowledge and understanding of how social
metacognition impacts collaboration. Additionally, this project will allow the
principal investigator (PI) to develop skills in fundamental STEM education
research through mentoring and formal learning opportunities.

The goals of this project are to generate fundamental knowledge about social
metacognition’s impact on collaboration and to build capacity in the PI to
conduct high quality fundamental STEM education research. To meet these goals,
this mixed methods project will 1) characterize social metacognition that occurs
across science contexts and its impact on collaboration, and 2) determine how
students’ perceptions of naturally-occurring social metacognition vary across
different science contexts. To accomplish the first objective, statistical
discourse analysis, a form of dynamic multilevel hierarchical linear modeling,
will be used to test hypotheses about how social metacognition and other
explanatory variables impact collaboration in two science class contexts. The
use of statistical discourse analysis will enable strong inferences to be made
in a field that traditionally centers qualitative methods. To accomplish the
second objective, individual students from introductory biology labs and
biochemistry courses will be shown selected video clips of naturally-occurring
social metacognition from their group work sessions and asked to recall what
they were thinking and feeling in the moment. Through this stimulated recall
method and the lens of politeness theory, student perceptions of social
metacognition will be identified. Student perceptions of social metacognition
are currently missing from the field and this information has implications for
the development of social metacognition interventions. A professional
development plan that includes coursework and mentorship from experts in social
metacognition, statistical discourse analysis, and stimulated recall methods
will ensure the primary investigator builds the knowledge and skillset needed to
carry out the project. This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is
designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM
education research in the core areas of STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.