* 2320189
* MRI: Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment: An integrated system for helium capture and recovery for the Oregon State University NMR facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Patrick Reardon, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,408.00

An award has been made to Oregon State University (OSU) to acquire and install
an integrated system for helium capture and recovery for the OSU nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) facility. Helium is an inert gas and is the only
element in the periodic table that is a non-renewal resource. Helium is mined,
often with natural gas, and once released into the Earth’s atmosphere, it is
lost to outer space. Helium is in high demand because it is used for a variety
of applications in industry and research, including production of semi-
conductors, operation of quantum computers, cooling medical equipment like
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cooling research equipment like NMR
spectrometers. Unfortunately, helium supply is volatile, leading to wide price
fluctuations and periods of limited availability. Therefore, it is important
that researchers recycle helium whenever possible. OSU’s NMR facility uses over
1000 liters (L) of liquid helium annually to maintain its five NMR
spectrometers, including the two highest field spectrometers in Oregon. The
facility provides access and support for NMR spectroscopy to OSU and other
academic institutions including primarily undergraduate institutions, and we
support industrial users across the Pacific Northwest region. This effort will
support over 150 users and their associated research projects, which span a wide
array of scientific investigations in the fields of biochemistry, chemistry,
environmental science, materials science, food science, agricultural science,
forestry, and engineering. The principles of helium recovery will be
incorporated into NMR classes offered by the OSU College of Science and in guest
lectures provided by the facility Director in other classes. The NMR facility
frequently offers tours to prospective students and visitors, and helium
recovery will be highlighted during these tours. Cost savings from reduced
liquid helium purchases will be used to support high-risk, high-reward pilot
projects that use the NMR facility. By reducing our helium, increased helium
will remain available for use by other critical services, such as medical MRI.

This project will allow the OSU NMR facility to capture and recycle the helium
used to cool the superconducting NMR magnets in the facility and ensures the
ongoing operation of these instruments. Of the more than 1000 L of liquid helium
used annually by the NMR spectrometers, this project will enable recycling of at
least 90%. This will greatly insulate the facility and its instrumentation from
helium supply disruptions, which are happening with increasing frequency. To
achieve this high level of efficiency, the system will capture helium during
both liquid helium refills and normal operations. This project will also examine
the feasibility of capturing and transporting helium from instruments located
too far from the main facility to perform direct capture via piping. We call
this ‘distributed recovery’, an application for which there is limited technical
data available. These results will lay the foundation for determining the
feasibility of distributed helium recovery, which could provide access to helium
recovery for smaller institutions. This project will support multiple ongoing
research efforts in biology that are investigating the Hippo signaling pathway,
mechanisms of motor protein function, viral replication, and membrane repair.
The project also supports research in materials science, developing new
materials for carbon capture, environmental remediation, batteries and new
chemistry for the synthesis of fine chemicals. The results of the project will
be made publicly available on the NMR facility website and through peer-reviewed
publications when appropriate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.