* 2320897
* Travel: Emerging Scientist Travel Support for the 10th International Symposium on Radiative Transfer by International Centre for Heat and Mass Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Yildiz Bayazitoglu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

Radiation is an important discipline in the field of heat transfer and impacts a
range of fields including solar-renewable energy, thermal management in space,
global warming and high temperature microelectronics as examples. The award will
cover travel expenses of ten graduate students and post-doctoral researchers,
and five junior faculty members from institutions in the United States to travel
and participate in the conference entitled, "10th International Symposium on
Radiative Transfer (RAD-23), Thessaloniki, Greece," which will be held during
12-16 June 2023. This is a prominent radiation conference/symposium and is well-
attended by radiation researchers from across the world. The attendees will be
supported in-full or in-part, and the organizers will make a concerted effort to
select these participants from underrepresented groups in the interest of
broadening participation. The participants will actively participate in the
conference via paper presentations or organizing sessions. They will provide a
short report on the impact of the conference participation on their professional
development.

The chief intellectual merit of this conference lies in the exchange of
scientific ideas, presentations of frontier and emerging research, and exposure
to a diverse array of topics in the field of radiative heat transfer. The
conference will be attended by both leading and young scientists in radiation
from around the world, who will discuss present and future directions of
research and research challenges. The conference will foster cross-fertilization
of ideas among researchers in cutting edge areas of radiation and will address
challenges involved in advancing the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.