* 2320040
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Ablation - Inductively Coupled Plasma - Triple Quadrupole - Mass Spectrometer (LA-ICP-QQQ-MS) System For Research and Education
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kurt Sundell, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 744,396.00

This Major Research Instrument award supports the acquisition of an Agilent 8900
Triple Quadrupole – Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometer (ICP-QQQ)
coupled with the Coherent ExciStar XS Excimer laser 193nm (LA) with large object
chamber (LOC). This LOC-LA-ICP-QQQ next-generation research instrument will open
new frontiers of research in archaeology, biological sciences, environmental
sciences, forensic anthropology, and geosciences. This project benefits an
international group of 28 researchers and 14 cooperating institutions in
multidisciplinary groups to conduct unique materials analysis and enable diverse
research at Idaho State University (ISU). The instrument will allow chemical
analysis of elements ranging from 2–275 atomic mass unit. This instrument will
serve as a research and teaching system for all faculty, students, researchers,
and staff at ISU. This instrument will be operated and cared for by the Center
for Archaeology, Materials, and Spectroscopy Idaho and the Department of
Anthropology in the College of Arts and Letters. The instrument will be open to
all researchers across campus for grant funded and student research projects.
This shared instrument will serve to increase faculty and student scholarship,
attract outside researchers, and promote collaboration. It will attract and
retain diverse and exceptional faculty and students, enhance teaching and
learning, and foster community support. The availability of this shared
instrument gives the ISU community the opportunity to explore research questions
that are not currently possible in the region. This is especially true for the
substantial proportion of female, rural, Indigenous, Hispanic, and low-income
students at ISU that often look for employment outside of academia. The LA-ICP-
QQQ instrument will be used to recruit minority students to our graduate
programs who can conduct original research under mentorship of the co-PI group.
We will train and engage students in understanding how they can apply
sophisticated techniques to answer challenging questions about the past and
today in both the natural and social sciences, as well as to help plan for
improved futures in our region.

The acquisition of this instrument is a significant improvement in the
analytical capabilities of ISU. The Excimer laser is unparalleled in its
capability with high-precision, non-destructive and rapid analysis, reduced
contamination, and depth profiling. All of this when coupled with the LOC allows
for the most accurate analysis for challenging samples across disciplines. The
Agilent 8900 is a multi-tool mass spectrometer allows the research groups to
conduct an array of analyses for liquids, solids, and gases. It introduces
analytical capabilities such as low-level determination of previously difficult
elements, separation of direct isobaric overlaps, and fast, trace analysis of
emerging nano-scale materials to extend the application of ICP-MS into new
frontiers of analysis. Several examples of these projects are: investigation of
numerous human behaviors including technological development, decision making,
and mobility worldwide through the tracing of stone tools to their geologic
sources; conduct numerous geochronology analyses, determine U-Pb
crystallization/cooling ages of rocks, Lu- Hf data, assess profiles of soil
chemistry at archaeological sites, reveal changes in volcanic sediment
composition through time, and fingerprint trace element geochemical signatures
in various rocks and minerals in river systems; help solve numerous forensics
missing persons cases, including those of unidentified migrants, by applying new
trace element analytical techniques; examine how interactions among biological,
geological, and chemical systems impact human health via groundwater consumption
and contamination; and investigate the pivotal role that heavy metals play in
the virulence of bacteria, particularly among invertebrate hosts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.