* 2320765
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF/FTIR System to Support Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biological and Computational Sciences at an HSI
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Julia Shamshina, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,549.00

An award is made to the University of Houston – Clear Lake (UHCL), a Hispanic
Serving Institution (HSI), to obtain an integrated matrix-assisted laser
desorption – time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-ToF MS) / Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (FTIRspec) system. This award will establish a user-
laboratory shared by UHCL, the Lunar Planetary Institute, Texas Tech University
and several other institutions in the region, including the NASA Johnson Space
Center, Texas Southern University (a Historically Black University) and the
University of Houston-Downtown (a HSI). To align methods between users, a
virtual lab simulation of sample preparation protocols will be refined. The
primary users will be undergraduates in course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs). Students’ projects will include identifying antibiotic-
resistant bacteria and tracking the source of fecal contamination in estuarine
systems, identifying bacteria that can improve the yield and sustainability of
row agriculture and identifying bacteria found in NASA facilities and
spacecraft. Participation in these CUREs will improve outcomes for hundreds of
students, from groups who have been traditionally underrepresented in science,
by engaging them in authentic research early in their degree plan. Mass spectra
students and researchers generate will be shared through a dedicated server to
provide a resource to the scientific community.

Cultivation of many bacteria that have been previously considered unculturable
appears possible with novel strategies; however, evaluation of these approaches
depends on comparisons of dozens of libraries with hundreds of isolates in each
library. Systematic comparisons of libraries with sequencing-dependent
techniques, like 16S rRNA gene sequencing, is prohibitively expensive. Given
these challenges, host-associated microbiomes, and microbial communities in
general, remain poorly described “black boxes,” with few representative
isolates. MALDI-ToF systems enable users to process thousands of isolates a week
for pennies per isolate. This high throughput proteomics method can readily
differentiate species of bacteria and, when coupled to a deep database of mass
spectra, will accelerate the discovery of bacteria with beneficial traits, like
plant growth promotion. Integration of FTIRspec increases the resolution of the
system to a level comparable to whole genome sequencing. This will facilitate
identifying the source of microbial contamination of built and natural systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.