* 2320804
* SBIR Phase I:  Ammonia and Syngas Impurity Tolerance for High Temperature - Proton Exchange Membrane (HT-PEM) Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Michael Waller, FALCON FUEL CELLS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Mara E. Schindelholz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,310.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the development of a fuel-flexible, high-temperature
proton exchange membrane (HT-PEM) fuel cell that can operate on two carbon-free
fuels: ammonia and syngas, both produced from waste biomass. The fuel-flexible
HT-PEM fuel cell is uniquely suited for rapid adoption as a complete system that
can run on a variety of fuels with only minor modifications to its fuel reformer
design. The initial market for this technology is small to mid-sized unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), and these were valued at $1.1 billion in 2020 (expected
to grow 240% by 2029). Due to the stringent weight and durability requirements
in the UAV market, adoption of this technology in mobile and stationary power
applications including backup power, marine power, and remote power generation
is anticipated. Investigation of these fuel/technology combinations have not
been widely researched and will contribute to the displacement of fossil fuel
combustion technologies, lead to increased economic competitiveness of the
United States, and support the national defense.

The intellectual merit of this project stems from the HT-PEM fuel cells' ability
to run on a diverse set of upfront fuel sources with only minor modification of
the final assembled system, while still providing the key attributes required in
most applications. For widespread adoption of new electricity generating
devices, remaining fuel agnostic is a key technological trait, as proven by the
enduring success of the internal combustion engine. The HT-PEM fuel cell can
serve as a similar core technology, contributing to the global transition from
fossil fuels. Nevertheless, there exists minimal research when operating a HT-
PEM fuel cell on reformed ammonia and syngas generated from waste biomass, two
popular renewable fuels expected to be widely used during this transition. The
key question for this research is: what is the maximum concentration of
impurities commonly found in reformed ammonia and syngas that will still allow a
HT-PEM fuel cell to be technically and commercially viable? The key objectives
are to outline the HT-PEM fuel cell performance while operating on ever
increasing contaminant levels and identify the stop-loss mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.