* 2320875
* Exploiting fully coupled fluid-structure interaction: optimal wing heterogeneity and efficient flow state estimation in flapping flight
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Andres Goza, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,463.00

Insects can fly up to 35 mph, execute dizzying turns and maneuvers, and migrate
over ten thousand miles amid incredibly large flow disturbances. These feats
have driven the design of bio-inspired robotic vehicles, with potential
applications in disaster recovery, efficient and environmentally friendly air
package delivery, and improved safety in commercial flight. To realize these
applications, robotic flyers must become more maneuverable and robust to
disturbances. The research has two goals or questions to build towards these
next-generation aerial vehicles: (i) Current robotic wing designs borrow
inspiration from natural flyers, but the aerodynamic utility of features such as
veins, reinforced leading edges, and asymmetric wing shapes remain unknown. If
these properties were optimized for aerodynamic performance, what structurally
heterogeneous features would arise and how similar or different are these from
those found in insects? (ii) Next-generation aerial vehicles require improved
sensing of flow disturbances. Can the passive wing deformations from flight be
leveraged to estimate the surrounding flow behavior, and could such an
estimation framework yield hypotheses about whether insects possess similar
estimation paradigms?

This project will use adjoint-based optimization to determine optimal wing
heterogeneity in canonical flapping flyers. This optimization will use high-
fidelity, fully coupled fluid-structure interaction simulations. Where possible,
mechanisms that clarify how the optimized properties yield beneficial changes to
key flow structures will be drawn. Optimal results will be compared to
properties of biological flyers to assess whether they benefit aerodynamic
performance (without assuming so beforehand). A state estimation paradigm that
leverages neural-network architectures will be developed to assess whether
accurate flow state information can be obtained from wing deformations. The
intellectual merit of this work lies in the identification of aerodynamically
optimal wing properties and the associated fluid-structure mechanisms that
explain how these properties benefit aerodynamic performance, as well as the
development of plausible state estimation paradigms from passive wing
deformations. The technical broader impacts are the development of more
maneuverable and disturbance-robust micro-air vehicles, as well as new
hypotheses about the aerodynamics of insect flight. Educationally, this program
will be integrated into an undergraduate research internship with students from
under-served populations via the McNair Scholars Program, as well as a
collaboration with the UIUC Chicago Science & Engineering Program. In this
latter collaboration, students from Minorities in Aerospace, an organization co-
founded by the PI, will teach K-12 students from under-represented groups and
their families the coding, control ideas, and implementation of a basic drone
flight sequence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.