* 2320476
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Deep Reactive Ion Etching System for Enhanced Semiconductor Processing Capability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Bei Fan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 963,461.00

Abstract Michigan State University (MSU) has maintained a strong tradition and
continuing trend in conducting fast-growing cutting-edge multidisciplinary
research areas critical to the success of Chips and Science Act 2022 and
Critical and Emerging Technologies, like semiconductors, microelectronics,
energy, sensors, biomedical technologies, quantum technologies etc. This project
seeks to request an Oxford PlasmaPro 100 Estrelas Deep Reactive Ion Etching
(DRIE) system - targeting precision, rapid, flexible, high-aspect-ratio deep
silicon etching to create diverse micro/nanostructures to accelerate these
cutting-edge research areas at MSU and in Midwest Michigan. The Estrelas DRIE
instrument is a unique cutting-edge deep silicon etching system that offers
exceptional flexibility and throughput to fabricate various micro/nanostructures
on semiconductors with fast speed (etch rate > 28 µm/min), and high aspect ratio
(> 70:1). The instrument will be housed at the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Research Cleanroom (ERC), a multidisciplinary shared research
facility available to both MSU and external users. With the Estrelas DRIE, MSU
will become a regional hub for providing advanced and flexible semiconductor
processing support to users from MSU as well as other institutes and local
companies in Midwest Michigan. The instrument will immediately benefit a diverse
team of investigators and their cross-disciplinary research projects from 4
different departments and 2 colleges at MSU and other institutions including
Fraunhofer USA Center Midwest, University of Nevada Las Vegas, and University of
Buffalo. The associated research is expected to produce numerous patents to be
translated into practical use. Besides research benefits, the Estrelas DRIE will
serve as an educational tool for training interdisciplinary researchers and
engineers in semiconductor, micro/nanoengineering, biotechnologies, energy,
physics, environmental science, etc.

The requested Estrelas DRIE will stimulate the development of MSU’s rapidly
growing research areas, including semiconductors, microelectronics, energy,
sensors, biomedical technologies, quantum technologies etc. The capabilities of
the requested Estrelas DRIE will open many new avenues of research in the
following major areas: (1) Wide bandgap semiconductors: diamond semiconductor
nanomembrane transfer to create diamond-on-GaN power devices; (2) Renewable
energy harvesting and storage: understanding of mechanical degradation of next-
generation high-capacity electrodes; novel engineered surface development for
enhanced electricity generation when liquid flows over surfaces; (3) Sensors,
MEMS and Systems: VO2 thin film coated MEMS spectrophotometer to re-direct a
light beam to different places; low-cost and highly sensitive fiber-optic
temperature sensors; (4) Biomedical technologies: neural miniaturized implants
for seamless communication with the brain and the nervous systems; high-
bandwidth silicon-based neuroprobes to assess a large number of neurons;
wearable microfluidic systems to monitor personal exposure to airborne;
intelligent micro robots integrated with multifunctional microdevices; (5)
Quantum technologies: diamond nanopillars to enhance photon extraction
efficiencies as the carriers for quantum information; diamond membrane for
quantum applications. The requested Estrelas DRIE is an essential enabling tool
that will not only address the critical need of a diverse group of researchers
to expedite their current/future research, but also promote multidisciplinary
collaborations between engineers and scientists within the department, across
MSU, and beyond the institution. Additionally, the requested Estrelas DRIE
instrument will expand the existing micro/nanomanufacturing capabilities at MSU
and serve the needs of broad micro/nanoscale science, engineering, and
technology. By accelerating these state-of-the-art research areas, the
instrument will also serve as an important tool to create scientific training
and artistic works to attract students, especially from the underrepresented
groups, to pursue STEM education and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.