* 2320092
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of a Helium Liquefaction and Recovery System for METRIC NMR Laboratories at NC State
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Xiaoyan Sun, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 434,002.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs in response to the
solicitation of proposals that promote the recovery, recycle, and/or reuse of
helium. North Carolina State University is acquiring a helium recovery system to
capture and reliquefy helium from eight NMR spectrometers which support the
research of Xiaoyan Sun along with colleagues Peter Thompson, and Joseph
Barycki. This equipment supports research in the areas of chemistry, biology,
biochemistry, and materials science. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. Using the intrinsic magnetic
properties of atomic nuclei, it is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The superconducting magnets of these instruments
rely on regular deliveries of liquid helium to maintain their operation.
However, the instability in the helium supply due to global and national
challenges jeopardizes research programs relying on NMR spectroscopy. This
helium recovery system collects the helium boiloff from the superconducting
magnets and then reliquefies the helium for its reuse. This equipment also
supports the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students, including
undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM, at all levels in multiple
departments and the surrounding community. The equipment aids in stabilizing the
helium supply in the region by sharing recovered helium with neighboring
institutions.

This award is aimed at supporting research and education at all levels.
Specifically, this helium recovery system collects the helium boiloff for
reliquefication and reuse from the superconducting magnets thereby stabilizing
the operation of the institutionâ€™s eight NMR spectrometers. The NMR
instrumentation supported by this equipment enables research projects including
those focused on studying the effects of coherent electronic motions occurring
in energy and electron transfer in classes of multi-chromophoric synthetic
platforms. The recovery system aids in supporting the investigation of
temperature and concentration dependent characteristics of pre-crystallizing
solutions. Additionally, the acquisition of this equipment supports the
characterization of free base and iron chelates and designer paramagnetic
ligands in donor-bridge-acceptor biradical complexes. Other research projects
supported by this equipment include the synthesis and use of N-aryl peptides as
novel precursors for peptide ligation reactions and the ability to probe the
changes in dehaloperoxidase dynamics as a function of substrate binding and
type.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.