* 2320757
* Category I: Stampede3 -- Modernizing and Evolving The Largest ACCESS Compute Resource
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* John Fonner, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2024
* USD 24,499,999.00

Computing, for simulation or data analysis, is a fundamental enabler of all
fields of engineering and science supported by the National Science Foundation.
The Stampede and Stampede2 projects deployed enormously successful
supercomputers that have delivered billions of processor hours of computer time
to thousands of NSF funded projects, enabling key insights in diverse areas,
from engineering the latest drug discoveries to studying the formation of the
earliest galaxies and supermassive black holes. This proposal from the Texas
Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin will
continue the Stampede legacy and deploy a new comprehensive supercomputing
environment with the latest processors and accelerators with high-bandwidth
memory technologies. The Stampede 3 system nodes will be more than quadruple the
performance of the current Stampede 2 nodes in many of the dimensions that are
most important to scientific computing: computing capability, memory bandwidth
and capacity, and network bandwidth. Stampede 3 will not only serve today’s
researchers but will continue the community on an evolutionary path toward many-
core processors and accelerated technologies, better preparing the community for
the next generation of supercomputer systems. Stampede 3 is designed around
Intel’s Xeon Max processors with high-bandwidth memory and a small number of
Xeon Max GPUs, while also leveraging a portion of the most recent Stampede 2
hardware. Stampede 3 will maintain the familiar programming model for all of
today’s users, and thus will be broadly useful for traditional simulation users,
users performing data intensive computations, and emerging classes of new users.

The project will continue the successful partnership between Dell, Intel, and
TACC. TACC and its partners have unmatched expertise in operating large scale
computing systems for the scientific community. In addition to supporting the
system, the project will continue to offer 24x7 operations and superior support
from High-Performance Computing experts familiar with a broad range of
scientific applications. Through its lifetime, Stampede 3 will be a critical
large scale research instrument for 10,000+ of the nation’s scientists and
engineers, deliver groundbreaking innovation, and be a platform for thousands of
young researchers to master computational engineering and science skills at
scale. The system will be deployed in the second half of 2023 and is scheduled
to operate from early 2024 until early 2029.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.