* 2320375
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: CyberInfrastructure Training and Education for Synchrotron X-Ray Science (X-CITE)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2026
* USD 318,000.00

NSF Major Research and User Facilities like Cornell High Energy Synchrotron
Source (CHESS) enable research in a variety of science and engineering areas.
These facilities provide instruments, data, modeling, computing, and physical
capabilities to the broad community of researchers, engineers, students,
educators, and the public. However, effectively utilizing the computing
capabilities and data resources offered both by the scientific facilities
themselves and by the national computing and data services, has been a steep
challenge for scientists. The lack of computing and data expertise prevents the
scientific community from fully harnessing the power of these capabilities to
expeditiously transform data into insights and knowledge. This project develops
an innovative training program for the community of scientists using the CHESS
synchrotron X-ray facility, who conduct research in materials science, physics,
chemistry, biology, environmental science, and other domains. The training
materials and associated training activities help reduce barriers to the use of
CHESS instruments, data, and tools and enable scientists to effectively utilize
the national computing resources and services, such as those offered by the NSF.
The project increases computing skills, awareness, and literacy for researchers
with limited computing expertise, thereby accelerating the scientific
innovations in synchrotron X-ray science.

Lack of focused cyberinfrastructure (CI) training opportunities often makes it
difficult for scientists to harness the full potential of the instruments, data,
tools, and CI resources offered by large scientific user facilities like the
Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and by the broader NSF ecosystem
of CI resources and services. The X-CITE project brings together PIs with
expertise in CI as well as X-ray and related domain sciences to develop an
innovative training program targeting the X-ray science user community. The
training program covers five relevant thematic areas: programming essentials,
systems fundamentals, distributed computing with the CI ecosystem, X-ray science
software, and issues of data curation and FAIR. These are offered in a multitude
of modes like self-paced training with notebooks, videos, and CI catalogs,
office hours, in-person instruction sessions, CHESS user workshops, and
tutorials at domain conferences. X-CITE promotes community building by
developing a coordination network comprising (a) different domain science
communities that leverage X-ray facilities, (b) similar user facilities, and (c)
national CI resource providers, to disseminate and socialize the training
materials, to communicate the CI needs for the X-ray science community, and to
exchange best practices for CI training. The X-CITE training program reduces
time-to-science for this important scientific community and democratizes access
by accelerating adoption of CI tools and resources available both internally at
CHESS and from the NSF CI ecosystem. X-CITE increases CI skills, awareness, and
literacy for X-ray science researchers, positively impacting trainees with
limited CI expertise, from underrepresented communities, and representing a
multitude of scientific disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.