* 2320552
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Broad Beam Ion Mill for Advancing Research and Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Horstemeyer, Liberty University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 203,255.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
broad beam ion mill that is used to prepare samples for examination by electron
microscopy. The development of new technology often requires greater
understanding of how materials are constructed and change at a very small scale.
Traditional sample preparation by abrasive polishing can actually obscure or
destroy the features that are most important. This instrument will be used to
preserve those features and study them in detail. This broad beam ion mill
acquisition will support research in nanostructured alloy development for high-
strength, lightweight structures, low-cost and efficient catalysts and
electrodes, and advancing additive manufacturing processes to extend the
materials catalog. Liberty University primarily serves undergraduate students in
its science and engineering programs, and this instrument and associated
analysis will be incorporated into all levels of those programs to better
prepare future scientists and engineers. In addition to being a critical
component of cutting-edge research, the instrument will also be used in new
graduate-level opportunities at Liberty University. As part of Liberty
University’s commitment to engage a diverse range of students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics, the instrument will also be used to
support outreach and recruitment in local schools, especially those which serve
historically underrepresented communities in these fields.

The development of new materials and processes by trial and error is time-
consuming and expensive. Integrated computational materials engineering is a
method that optimizes materials for applications through the interplay of
simulation and experimental validation to accelerate innovation. Having the best
possible microstructural data is crucial to this process. The ion mill will be
used to create cross-sections and planar surfaces with minimal damage to
preserve nanoscale features after various mechanical and chemical processes to
illuminate chemistry-structure-process-property relationships. This data will be
compared to computational predictions incorporating the internal state variable
approach to multiscale modeling. The research enabled will pair together faculty
with expertise in computational and experimental engineering with local industry
and include interdisciplinary work in biomedical applications with the College
of Medicine. The ion mill will be used synergistically with Liberty University’s
world-class microscopy facilities, including a first-of-its-kind in-situ heating
and mechanical testing stage for use in the electron microscope.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.