* 2320355
* Excess Vacancy Enabled Transformations in Light Metal Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Timothy Weihs, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 463,327.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Innovating processes for lightweight metal alloy manufacture advances public
welfare and secures the national defense by enabling efficient production of new
materials that provide strength without adding weight in applications from
vehicles and protective equipment to space exploration. This award supports
basic scientific studies regarding how atomic structures respond to extreme
conditions of temperature and strain that result in defects called vacancies,
where atoms are missing from the metal’s crystal structure. This research
advances the understanding of why and how vacancies cluster with solute atoms
that differ from the primary metal, gathering into small bubbles called voids
and encouraging the formation of strengthening particles.

Multiple experimental techniques are used: positively charged particles are used
to measure defects; atom probe reveals locations of different elements in the
crystal structure; and electron microscopy images show larger scale features
such as voids. Simulations predict how vacancies, solute and voids interact to
better interpret the experimental data. These simulations also provide estimates
of how the rate at which voids form, varies with temperatures, vacancy
densities, and solute chemistries and densities. Experimental data are used to
guide the choices of simulations and to check the validity of the simulations.
In the process, this work advances simulation capabilities.

This project engages undergraduates from Morgan State University, a nearby
historically Black university, to foster the success of a newly emerging program
that provides access to engineering degrees not currently offered at that
university. The investigators also are planning to host an “Extreme Vacancy
Engineering” workshop.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The proposed research program aims to accelerate the development of new light
alloys and processing routes by expanding our fundamental understanding of how
vacancy supersaturation alters the thermodynamics of vacancy clustering,
vacancy-solute complex formation, and void nucleation in ways that promote
solute clustering and intermetallic precipitation. Alloys over a range of
compositions are subjected to quenching and deformation to enhance vacancy
densities in a controlled manner. Analysis is performed using an emerging
computational methodology, transition interface sampling, coupled with targeted
characterization using positron annihilation spectroscopy, atom probe
tomography, and transmission electron microscopy in concert with molecular
dynamics and Monte Carlo simulation. Experiments are leveraged to guide
simulations and simulations to interpret experiments. The work aims to build a
thermodynamic understanding for key processes in the form of free energy
pathways that eschew classical nucleation theory assumptions in out-of-
equilibrium systems.

This research program engages undergraduates from Morgan State University, a
nearby HBCU, to foster the success of a newly emerging 3+2 program that opens
new pathways into materials-related engineering majors. A workshop on “Extreme
Vacancy Engineering” is also anticipated to promote an emerging field of
materials processing and design

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.