* 2320773
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Plasma Focused Ion Beam-Scanning Electron Microscope (PFIB-SEM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,240,000.00

This award provides support to Northwestern University (NU) for a state-of-the-
art plasma focused ion beam scanning electron microscope (PFIB-SEM) for
interdisciplinary research, hands-on training/education, and societal outreach.
Functioning as a nanoscale scalpel, PFIB enables site-specific sectioning of
variety of materials and structures at high throughput and fidelity. This allows
for microscopic and detailed examination of these sections for their structural,
chemical, and related attributes that often influence technological useful
properties and fundamental scientific phenomena. Such an FIB-SEM system is akin
to a multi-functional ‘Swiss Army Knife’ tool, that facilitates form-function or
structure-property relationships from the nano- to the micro-scale in a vast
range of materials, devices and systems. The PFIB-SEM will be housed at the NU
Atomic and Nanoscale Characterization Experimental (NUANCE) Center, which is the
lead facility of the Soft and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental (SHyNE)
Resource of the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI)
network. It will serve the broader Midwest research community and be an
important asset for the entire NNCI network. PFIB will be the centerpiece for
periodic workshops, hands-on training and open house, towards workforce
development. Several hands-on demos and modules for training will be developed
for access to external users, including local industries and Chicago Museums.

The PFIB-SEM is functionally versatile and will offer diverse capabilities for
high throughput site-specific nanoscale material sputtering and deposition, dual
electron/ion mode of operation enabling depth-profiling and 3D/4D tomography,
among others. Its analytical capabilities span multimodal imaging and energy
dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping. Such diverse yet integrated
capabilities coupled to localized nanofabrication/deposition will impact many
research programs — from understanding the molecular basis for environmental
remediation enabled by “hard-soft” materials interfaces to unravelling the
origins of decoherency in quantum qubits. The PFIB-SEM will enable large area
milling for cross/thin sections and unique techniques for atom probe tomography
(APT) to complement synchrotron x-ray scattering and support
scanning/transmission EM (S/TEM) sampling across multiple disciplines. It will
enable automated TEM section preparation, greatly increasing work efficiency and
productivity. The PFIB-SEM will enable hitherto challenging experiments in a
wide range of initiatives and impact a broad category of materials
characterization. Local and regional needs in key and fast emerging technical
areas will benefit from these capabilities. Of special note is the cryo-
compatibility for soft-hard (hybrid) materials and structures for bio,
agriculture, food and related hybrid systems. The broader impact of the PFIB
project will address “NSF Big Ideas”; including quantum information systems,
rules of life, and contribute to local education, outreach and regional
workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.