* 2320780
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Chemical and Biological Structure Determination
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yftah Tal-Gan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 404,406.00

This award is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The University of Nevada, Reno is
purchasing a single crystal diffractometer equipped with copper and molybdenum
sources to support the research of Professor Ana de Bettencourt-Dias with
colleagues Yftah Tal-Gan and Christopher Jeffrey. This instrument facilitates
research in luminescent materials and f element chemistry, bacterial
communication and quorum sensing, chemical ecology, and natural products
chemistry. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The features of
this instrument enhance the research efforts of faculty and students; it is also
successfully deployed as part of the teaching efforts of students at all levels
in many departments at the University of Nevada, Reno and in teaching and
outreach in the Northern Nevada region. Most notably, students from area high
schools learn about the technique, and the history of its development, and have
access to determine the structure of simple compounds isolated as part of their
science curriculum.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
research enabled by the acquisition of this instrument spans a wide range of
areas in chemistry, biochemistry, biology and materials science, namely,
luminescent materials, f element chemistry, bacterial communication and quorum
sensing, chemical ecology, organometallic chemistry and catalysis, medicinal
chemistry, molecular materials for electronics applications, polyaromatic
hydrocarbons, sensors, theranostics, f element separation, metallacycles,
biological activity of polyacetylenes, biopolymers, plant cell wall biology and
muscle proteins. The availability of the instrument with dual copper and
molybdenum sources allows the research groups to gain insights from the
structural characterization of small molecules, macromolecules and metalorganic
frameworks, and the determination of absolute structure of light-atom molecules.
These further our knowledge in the areas mentioned above, and the structural
information collected cannot be accessed by any other technique. The research of
a total of 16 investigators and their research groups spanning 5 institutions,
which include 2 NSF CAREER recipients, 4 junior, 5 female and 4 Hispanic
investigators, is impacted by the availability of the instrument. Students from
varied socio-economic backgrounds have access to a technique that is not usually
part of the undergraduate curriculum, which provides them with an important
marketable skill. In addition, a collaboration with a local school provides high
school seniors with a more in-depth understanding of the importance of
structural characterization in the sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.