* 2320366
* Equipment: MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Supporting Interdisciplinary Microbiological Research and Education at Eastern Kentucky University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rishi Drolia, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 381,870.00

An award is made to Eastern Kentucky University to do hands-on educational
outreach and research training in areas including, but not limited to,
microbiology, ecology, and environmental biology. With this award of an
automated mass spectrometry microbial identification system with MALDI-TOF
technology, the research projects and state-of-the-art instrumentation will
inspire undergraduate, masters-level, and high school students to participate in
a variety of projects allowing these students to see and believe in themselves
as STEM researchers. Beyond strengthening the research infrastructure at Eastern
Kentucky University and within the immediate Appalachian region, the project
will increase the diversity of the STEM workforce by providing high-impact
research and outreach opportunities to many underrepresented populations in STEM
who attend Eastern Kentucky University and university programs. Project
participants will include many low-income and first-generation students, as well
as future teachers, who represent a significant proportion of the student body
and their collective participation will raise the scientific literacy in
Kentucky.

The project will accelerate research at Eastern Kentucky University regarding
microorganisms, and will lead to more research opportunities, discoveries, and
interdisciplinary collaborations. Due to the simplicity of obtaining results
from environments of societal and regional interest, the project will enable the
rapid identification of microorganisms, including drug-resistant microorganisms,
in understudied environments. The research will inform the broader scientific
community in understanding how ecosystems neutralize, maintain, or enhance
antimicrobial resistance in organisms and genes. Ultimately, the research will
inform efforts aiming to understand how non-clinical environments, like streams,
lakes, forests, wetlands, and livestock areas contribute to antimicrobial
resistance in specific microorganisms and microbial communities. Findings could
inform watershed management practices aimed at improving human, plant, and
ecosystem health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.