* 2320971
* Roles of meiotic-stage non-coding RNAs in maize anther development
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Blake Meyers, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

Pollen production and regulation of plant fertility are essential to
agriculture. Hybrid corn and other grains have significantly boosted world food
production. This project will investigate the functions of RNAs that support
pollen development in anthers (the organs that make pollen in flowering plants).
The project will utilize plant genomics and developmental biology to determine
the biological roles of small RNAs and the proteins that utilize them for anther
functions. These RNAs are required for robust male fertility: in the absence of
the small RNAs, at normal temperatures, development fails, yielding male
sterility. Fertility can be rescued under lower temperatures, linking
environmental conditions to the role of these small RNAs. The project focuses on
maize because it is an optimal system for the proposed experiments; plus, male
fertility is key to the production of hybrid corn seed. Outcomes of this project
could include improved control of male fertility in grass crops. Broader impacts
of the project include training of students in plant and RNA biology.

The project will focus specifically on the class of 24-nt phased, secondary
siRNAs, known as “24-nt phasiRNAs” that are highly enriched in meiotic-stage
anthers. The project will characterize phenotypes and molecular genetic analysis
of loss-of-function knock-outs including the Dicer-like5 (Dcl5) gene, for which
the preliminary data demonstrate male sterility. The questions to be addressed
by this project include which basic Helix-Loop-Helix transcription factors
function to activate transcription of the 24-nt phasiRNAs? How does the core
biogenesis protein DCL5 function, and what is the exact nature of the phenotype
of sterility in its absence? Are there genetic modifiers of the dcl5 conditional
phenotype in other backgrounds of maize? What are the key catalytic Argonaute
proteins that load the 24-nt phasiRNAs for their function? And what are the
target RNAs with which the phasiRNA-loaded Argonaute proteins interact?

This award was co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.