* 2320480
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of a Zeiss 560 VP FE-SEM for chemical and surface characterization and training.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Monica Alfaro, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 988,884.00

Nanoscale variations in surface topography are hypothesized to disturb how
bacterial agents become attached, proliferate, and subsequently form biofilms,
particularly when those features are smaller than the microorganism itself. This
instrument will lead to new insights into how changes in nanoscale topographies
(i.e., shape, elevation, pitch, width, length, and density) can regulate or
inhibit bacterial attachment and colonization of a surface. Information provided
by this instrument could, for example, provide new insights on how ocean
acidification reduces the ability of various marine organisms to build shells
and exoskeletons. The successful use of this instrument has the potential to
lead to the development of nanomaterials with controlled properties for
biomedical, electronics, aerospace, and environmental remediation applications.
University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez (UPR-M) is the major engineering and
applied sciences research center of the island with an academic population of
over 12,000 students, 95% of them from underrepresented groups in STEM and over
51% females engaged in applied STEM programs. This instrument will thus
substantially augment and enhance research and experiential training with a
cutting-edge tool for the characterization of nanomaterials, polymers, and
biological specimens for these students. Research conducted using this
instrument will support undergraduate, graduate, and professional education and
training in biology, chemistry, environmental sciences, and engineering. The use
of the instrument will support the research training of over 100 undergraduate
and more than 60 graduate students per year along with collaborations with four
other universities and research and development facilities within 100 miles
around the island.

The system to be acquired is a high-resolution field emission scanning electron
microscope (FE-SEM), with secondary electron (SE), Energy Dispersive X-Ray
(EDS), and variable pressure (VP) capabilities, specifically a Zeiss 560 VP FE-
SEM. The instrument will be used to assess the fundamental surface parameters
such as morphology, density, and spatial distribution exerted on the sorption
and effective binding of nanomaterials and bacterial agents with interest in
developing scalable and transferable nanostructures that can either inhibit
chemical agents and pathogen proliferation or systematically regulate bacterial
binding and adhesion. The instrument will be used to evaluate the effect of the
use of composite materials as matrix-reinforcements in biopolymers for biocidal
applications and electronic applications. In addition, the instrument will also
serve to study the morphological features and exoskeleton changes of deep-water
crustaceans from the Caribbean basin as a function of sub-micron plastic
pollution and global changes. The successful implementation of this instrument
will enable the team to elucidate surface and structural parameters that can
regulate structural integrity, bacterial binding, biosensing, and chemical
remediation. Due to its diverse range of analytical capabilities this instrument
has the potential to be used in a variety of interdisciplinary applications and
to provide interdisciplinary training and research opportunities to a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of Chemistry,
Materials Science and Engineering, Biology, Biotechnology, and Marine Sciences.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Implementation (MRI)
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.