* 2320707
* CAS-Climate: Conference: 2023 Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage GRC and GRS: Transformative Science for the New Carbon Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Greeshma Gadikota, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 40,025.00

The 2023 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar in Carbon Capture, Utilization,
and Storage (GRC- CCUS) will provide a platform to discuss transformative
scientific advances for the new emerging carbon economy. The conference will
provide an integrated and inclusive platform where early career researchers,
established scientists and engineers, and academics come together to discuss
natural and engineered carbon management solutions that will deliver meaningful
societal and ecological impacts. The conference is designed to help educate the
pipeline of emerging talent on carbon management solutions. In this context, the
associated Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage Gordon Research Seminar (GRS)
will provide a forum for mentoring and training the next generation workforce to
advance sustainability solutions to capture, convert, store, and remove CO2
emissions from flue gas emissions, air, and ocean. The conference compelling
program includes speakers and discussion leaders from diverse backgrounds with
expertise ranging from fundamental chemical interactions to policy.

The 2023 GRC-CCUS and GRS will serve as forums to discuss transformative
scientific and technologies advances for scalable realization of carbon
management solutions. These events will address opportunities and challenges at
the forefront of advancing natural and engineered carbon management solutions
while considering the emergence of low cost, renewable energy resources, and the
need to address environmental justice considerations. The conference and seminar
will provide insights into approaches to unlock value in negative emissions
technologies, deliver additionally co-benefits, and ensure permanence in
storage, all while learning from technologies that are being deployed. The
conference and seminar will foster international collaborations to train the
next generation of researchers on advancing transformative carbon management
solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.