* 2320510
* MRI Track 1: Acquisition of an Aerosol Chemical Speciation System to Elucidate Sources, Formation Processes, and Environmental Impacts at ASU's AppalAIR Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Swarthout, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 531,902.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Project (MRI) supports the development of an
aerosol chemical speciation system (ACSS) to be located at the Appalachian
Atmospheric Interdisciplinary Research (AppalAIR) facility at Appalachian State
University in Boone North Carolina. The research to be conducted at this
facility is based on the collection of detailed aerosol chemical composition
measurements that will be used to examine the spatiotemporal heterogeneity in
the relationships among the concentration and sources of aerosols and their
interactions with clouds, solar radiation, and meteorology in the Southern
Appalachian Mountain region of the southeastern US. This data is important for
better understanding regional changes in air quality and climate.

The requested ACSS will be an identical system to those that are part of the
Science and Chemistry mEasurement NeTwork (ASCENT), recently funded by the NSF
Mid-Scale Infrastructure Program. The AppalAIR site also is home to NOAA FAN,
NASA AERONET, and NASA MPLNET aerosol network sites. Data from this site will
provide long-term measurements of sub-2.5 micron (PM2.5) aerosol refractory and
non-refractory chemical composition to complement ongoing measurements of gas
phase aerosol precursors and aerosol detailed optical and microphysical
properties. Projects that use will data from the ACSS include those that aim to
improve the understanding of atmospheric aerosol water uptake and the role of
hygroscopic aerosols as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). This data is critical
for modeling aerosol-cloud interactions and aerosol direct radiative forcing.

Appalachian State University is a predominantly undergraduate institution in the
rural southern Appalachian Mountain region. The ACSS-enabled projects mentioned
above will provide in-depth, hands-on research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students that will give them an advantage when
entering the job market or seeking advanced degrees. This project is jointly
funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry Program and Division of Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences that support projects that increase research capabilities,
capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety of institution types, as outlined
in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.