* 2320054
* MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer to Quantify Trace Metal Ions Enabling New Research and Research Training at Barnard College
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rebecca Donegan, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 237,984.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Drs. Austin, Brenner, Donegan,
Mailloux, and Vizcarra at Barnard College will acquire an inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS). ICP-MS enables the measurement of very low
levels of metals in many different sample types, including: biological
molecules, tissues, solid materials (after appropriate treatment), and water
samples. This instrument will allow researchers at Barnard and other
institutions in the region to pursue important areas of research in the fields
of Chemistry, Biology, and Environmental Science, including: groundwater and
soil contamination; nutrient sources that fuel persistent, difficult-to-treat
bacterial infections; and the global cycling of carbon. The acquisition of an
ICP-MS at Barnard College will support students in a range of research and
research training programs, including programs targeting at diversifying the
scientific and engineering workforce.

The acquisition of an ICP-MS will enable a number of different research groups
to answer vexing questions about the role of metal ions in complex systems. The
instrument will enable the determination of the cellular processes involved in
heme uptake in non-tuberculosis mycobacterium. It will also facilitate
identification of the active site of the non heme diiron enzyme alkane
monooxygenase (AlkB). Questions about the coupling between the metabolism of
anaerobic bacteria and arsenic solubilization will be addressed by using the
ICP-MS to measure arsenic levels in water samples from mesocosm experiments. The
capacity of oysters living in close proximity to an EPA-designated Superfund
site to record lead contamination by analysis of their shells will be
investigated using the instrument. The instrument will also contribute to on-
going work to test the hypothesis that arsenic levels in rice grains are
controlled, to a large extent, by zinc levels in soils, with high arsenic levels
correlated with zinc-depleted soils. The ability of the instrument to detect
trace levels of large number of metals will be used in several catalytic
projects where the reaction medium will be examined to determine if metal ions
are leaching from catalyst surfaces during chemical reactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.