* 2320222
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Maskless Photolithography Instrument for Undergraduate Research and Teaching at High Point University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Briana Fiser, High Point University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2026
* USD 148,945.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is for the acquisition of a
maskless photolithography tool for use by faculty and undergraduate researchers
in the Departments of Chemistry, Physics and Engineering at High Point
University (HPU) (NC) in collaboration with faculty and undergraduate
researchers from the Department of Chemistry at the University of Richmond (VA),
Department of Physics at James Madison University (VA) and the Department of
Biology at the University of Virginia along with other regional undergraduate
institutional partners. The ability to rapidly prototype structures and devices
with dimensions smaller than a cell is a key enabling capability for a variety
of technologies, and the training of undergraduate chemistry, physics and
engineering students will help expand the pipeline of future nanotechnologists.
Microlithography is a critical processing step in the production of integrated
circuits and devices, and developing a trained workforce in nanofabrication is
vital to the economic and national security interests of the United States.
Finally, structures created using this tool will be used in conjunction with the
imaging laboratory at HPU for scientific outreach to local schools and museums
in the Piedmont Triad region of North Carolina to spark an interest in the next
generation of learners in the micro and nanoscopic world. This instrument will
be used to train undergraduate students how to rapidly prototype micro- and
nanostructures used in chemical sensing, optics, neuroscience studies, surface
engineering and biomedical devices.

This Major Research Instrumentation award is for the acquisition of a direct-
write maskless photolithography tool for use by faculty and undergraduate
researchers at High Point University in collaboration with faculty and
undergraduate researchers at James Madison University and the and the University
of Virginia. This lithography tool will enable the rapid prototyping of
microstructures down to 0.6 µm in support of the researchers on the project team
and will be made available to other investigators at regional primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) through the Primarily Undergraduate
Nanomaterials Cooperative (PUNC) as a resource to help further develop their
microfabrication research and educational projects. This project will directly
enable the rapid prototyping of microstructures in research projects ranging
from polymer materials science to neuroscience. Specifically, these projects
include the rapid prototyping of silicone-based microstructures for microfluidic
applications and biofilm prevention, microcontact printing (µ-CP) of surfaces
for grafting-from conductive polymer synthesis, microfabrication of silicon-
based photodetectors, design and prototyping of nanoparticle-enhanced chemical
sensing platforms, and rapid prototyping of microfluidic structures for
neuroscience studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.