* 2320410
* MRI: Track 1: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography-High Resolution Mass Spectrometry System for Multidisciplinary Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julia Oxford, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 710,000.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Boise State University is acquiring
a high-resolution accurate-mass ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography - mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) system. The new LC-MS system will vastly improve research
infrastructure at Boise State University to support investigators finding
solutions to their research questions and increase their productivity. This
system will also provide training to graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students in modern mass spectrometry techniques as future scientists. The new
mass spectrometry system will benefit a broad scientific research community and
have a significant impact on the research infrastructure and local economy in
the State of Idaho. It will foster collaborative investigations with 12 other
colleges, universities and research foundations in the State of Idaho, as well
as with local industrial partners.

The acquisition of the high-resolution LC-MS system will enable new capabilities
in proteomics and metabolomics research at Boise State University in model and
non-model organisms, discovery of novel proteins and metabolites from non-model
plants, microbes, and animals, and monitor biomarkers of stress in cells,
organisms, habitats, and social-ecological systems. The high-resolution,
accurate-mass data will be used to address challenges for the comprehensive
characterization of complex proteomes and metabolomes for a large number of
current and future research projects at Boise State University. These research
projects include integrating genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics to predict
plant tolerance in wild vertebrate herbivores, investigating impact of smoke on
potato growth, storage and profitability, lipidomic and proteomic profiling of
autophagosome membrane, understanding the role of MTA/SAH nucleosidase
deficiency in bacteria and protozoan parasites, elucidating function of tyrosine
sulfation in extracellular fibrillogenesis, and carbon capture from hot springs
capnophiles microbial mats. Graduate students in Biology, Chemistry,
Biomolecular Sciences, Ecology, Evolution & Behavioral Biology, and Material
Science will benefit from the research enabled by the acquisition of the high-
resolution LC-MS.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.