* 2320100
* Water in garnet as a record of fluid flow during metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sarah Penniston-Dorland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 387,136.00

Water is an essential ingredient for life, but its presence in the deep Earth
also has significant impacts. Water in the Earth affects how rocks deform and
melt and it plays a role in phenomena critical to society including earthquakes,
volcanoes, and the concentration of metals of economic value. Metamorphic rocks
that form 10s of km deep in the Earth provide a snapshot of these processes, and
study of these rocks and the minerals in them provides a better understanding of
how water affects these important phenomena. The mineral garnet is commonly
found in metamorphic rocks, and it grows over a period of time in concentric
growth zones. These growth zones are like tree rings, recording information
about the history experienced by the mineral rather than just a final snapshot
in time. Measurements of water contents in different zones of a garnet can act
as a recorder of the release and flow of water deep in the crust. This work will
use measurements of the water content of garnets from five different field
localities to look for evidence for how many flow events occurred during garnet
growth and how long they may have lasted. The results of this work will allow
for connections to be made between the flow of water recorded in the rocks with
processes generating seismicity and concentrating metals of economic value. The
proposed work will also include a component of outreach to the local community
showing the importance of water in the Earth during Maryland Day, when the
University of Maryland opens its doors to the general public.

This proposal seeks to use in situ measurements of H2O in garnet in conjunction
with other tracers of fluid flow (O isotopes, Li isotopes, trace element
concentrations in garnet) to investigate processes of fluid release and fluid
flow events during the growth of garnet and to constrain the cyclicity and
duration of individual fluid flow events. This project will investigate garnets
from five different localities, each of which has documented evidence for either
fluid release or fluid flow events. Studies of metamorphic rocks from a variety
of geologic settings show a range of durations of fluid flow events, some of
which are quite rapid, on the scale of weeks to hundreds of years. These
estimates are based on bulk-rock measurements of isotopic and petrologic
tracers, and therefore represent a time-integrated measurement. Many features in
metamorphic rocks suggest that fluid flow is cyclic and may revisit pathways, in
which case the estimated durations may overrepresent the duration of fluid flow
and underestimate the number of fluid flow events. The proposed work addresses
fundamental questions about fluid release and fluid flow during metamorphism.
The applicability of using H in garnet as a tracer of fluid flow and fluid
release events will be fully explored by coupling measurements of H in garnet
with other tracers of fluid flow. The proposed work will constrain the nature,
cyclicity, and duration of fluid transport, aiding in the understanding of fluid
flow processes in metamorphic settings. Understanding the cyclicity and
timescales of fluid flow is important for a variety of reasons – fluids
transport heat and mass, drive metamorphic reactions, impact rheology, and
contribute to seismicity. This work will also provide a better understanding of
the behavior and incorporation of H in garnet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.