* 2320953
* Collaborative Research: SCIPE: Interdisciplinary Research Support Community for Artificial Intelligence and Data Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Jane Combs, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,076,472.00

Research in every field of Science and Engineering can be accelerated by
leveraging modern advancements in Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
(ML). Unfortunately, there is a lack of experts to help researchers understand
and integrate the latest ML capabilities into their work. This proposed project
aims to address this critical need for experts by creating and sustaining a
cohort of cyberinfrastructure (CI) professionals (CIP) to empower researchers to
effectively leverage ML techniques. By embedding the recruited personnel into
large research projects while providing tailored mentoring and training
programs, the project aims to enhance interdisciplinary collaboration and foster
innovation. This initiative aligns with the national interest of promoting the
progress of science and advancing the fields of CI and ML. The project's
intellectual merit lies in its comprehensive approach to developing long-term
career development paths for interdisciplinary CI professionals. Through
personalized training, mentoring, and hands-on experience in large research
projects, the cohort of Interdisciplinary Research Machine Learning Engineers
and Interdisciplinary Research Machine Learning Facilitators will gain the
necessary skills to excel in their roles. By creating a mechanism to charge new
grants for employing these professionals, the project anticipates growth beyond
the initial four positions, expanding the cohort's capacity to support diverse
research domains. The project emphasizes the production of impactful research,
technical papers, tutorials, and training materials, contributing to the broader
ML and CI communities. Furthermore, by engaging with non R1
colleges/universities, R2 and minority-serving institutions, and two-year
colleges, the project aims to foster diversity and inclusivity in the CIP
workforce, ensuring that all institutions can benefit from AI capabilities and
CI support. The training materials developed will be openly available to support
interdisciplinary research across various domains and promote the use of CI
resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.