* 2320520
* MRI: Track 1 Development of a Combined Optical and Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy System
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ashok Ajoy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 870,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation, and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI)
programs. The University of California at Berkeley is developing an instrument
which incorporates nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) and an optical fluorescence spectrometer to support the research
of Professor Ashok Ajoy along with colleague Jeffery Reimer. This instrument
facilitates research in the areas of materials science, quantum information
science, energy storage, and catalysis. This development project enables the
simultaneous manipulation of electronic and nuclear spins of proteins,
materials, and molecular systems employing the ability to rapidly transport the
sample from low to high or high to low magnetic fields at cryogenic
temperatures. By combining the three spectroscopic techniques, the instrument
enables users to perform cutting-edge dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP)
techniques which significantly improve the sensitivity of magnetic resonance
experiments for the thorough characterization of the properties of molecular
systems. Students and trainees from the undergraduate to postdoctoral level are
involved in the development and testing of the instrument. The completed
instrument benefits a wide array of research groups and undergraduate students,
including those from diverse backgrounds and from a predominately undergraduate
institution in the Bay Area, San Jose State University. Multiple investigators
from additional universities and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory also
benefit from this resource.

This award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
instrument enables the development of an optical dynamic nuclear polarization
(DNP) NMR system to study metal-organic frameworks. The instrumentation is also
used to probe electrons optically and via spin resonance to uncover the role of
interactions with their nuclear environment and thereby enable the study of
molecular systems for applications in quantum information science. Additionally,
the instrument enables the investigation of the chemical surface structure of
bulk and nanoscale materials for enhanced quantum sensors and the development of
a sub-micron scale NMR in-situ chemical probe within microdroplets using nuclear
spin in nanodiamonds as quantum sensors. The instrument also allows the unique
ability to simultaneously probe EPR active systems and perform in-situ DNP
measurements of light-harvesting complexes within photosystems. Furthermore, by
using the three modalities, this instrument aids in understanding the interplay
between the electron g-factor and the resulting optically pumped NMR spectra in
bulk or heterostructured semiconductors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.