* 2320185
* Cell Derived Extracellular Matrix BIofiber Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jamie Hestekin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2026
* USD 427,760.00

Non-technical Abstract: Fibers are a highly versatile geometry that can be
fabricated into a range of implant geometries (meshes, tubes, ropes) using
manufacturing methods developed and routinely used by the textile industry.
Unfortunately, synthetic fibers are recognized by the human body as a foreign
material which makes them challenging to use as medical implants. As an
alternative to synthetic fibers, the overall research goal of this project is to
develop a fiber built using the molecules, like collagen, that are secreted by
living cells. These all-natural biofibers would avoid the foreign material
response directed by the body against synthetic polymeric materials, but could
still be used with currently available textile fabrication techniques in order
to make various medical products. More broadly, the proposed research could help
establish a supply of materials that would help alleviate the shortage of
donated human tissues and address the complications associated with medical
implants that use synthetic fibers. To create these biofibers, the investigators
will develop innovative methods to farm the molecules that are secreted by
populations of cells during growth in the lab. Specifically, the investigators
will create a toolbox of cell derived biofibers using key human cells and then
explore methods to fabricate these human cell derived biofibers into beneficial
medical implants. To enhance the broader impact of this study the research will
be complemented by educational projects at the undergraduate and K-12 academic
levels. Highlights include the creation of a rural biomedical engineering middle
school summer program, the integration of fiber projects into the university
courses, and the involvement of undergraduate students through participation in
existing University programs.

Technical Abstract: The investigators will develop biomaterial fibers that are
built from the extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules secreted by cells. To do so
the team will explore methods to farm the ECM that is secreted by populations of
cells during growth in culture. While methods to collect isolated molecules from
cells have existed for some time, the wholesale collection of cell secreted ECM
proteins to create bulk biomaterials is unique. The overall goal is to fabricate
woven biomedical implants using ECM as an alternative to synthetic polymer
fibers. To collect the ECM that cells secrete, the investigators will utilize a
solvent degradable hollow fiber membrane (HFM). When cells are seeded into the
HFM and grown in culture they secrete a multitude of ECM molecules that
accumulate within the lumen. The innovative step is that the HFM can be
thoroughly dissolved using a water miscible solvent, stripping away the
synthetic component, and leaving behind the accumulated ECM fiber. The result is
a biofiber formed entirely from the ECM secreted by cells. The proposed research
program will investigate the synthesis of next generation human ECM biofibers
using clinically relevant cell types (cardiac, muscle, vascular); optimize
synthesis methods and model the influence of pro-collagen synthesis schemes on
ECM biofiber properties and identify combinations that optimize yield and
mechanics; genetically engineer producer cells with specialized ECM production
capabilities and examine the properties of ECM biofibers synthesized using them;
characterize the in-vivo host response to implanted ECM biofibers, with
particular attention given to inflammation and fibrotic tissue formation; and
lastly create scaled-up biofiber manufacturing schemes and utilize textile
production schemes to create woven biofiber constructs. To enhance the broader
impact of this study the research will be complemented by integrated educational
projects at the undergraduate and K-12 academic levels, both within the
University of Arkansas and as educational outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.