* 2320030
* MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a TriBeam Microscope for a 3D Materials Education and Science Hub (3DMESH)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tresa Pollock, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,938,193.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
new type of microscope, the TriBeam, that generates high resolution 3D
information on a broad range of materials. This includes polymers, composites,
ceramics, metals, semiconductors, electrochemical and biomaterials. Such 3D data
underpins the ability to design and predict the behavior of a broad array of
engineering and biological systems, but often requires many months to years to
acquire. This instrument dramatically speeds up the process, generating critical
information in days to weeks. The TriBeam data will be deployed to design new
materials for battery electrodes, additive manufacturing, wear-resistant
coatings, and high power semiconductor devices. Additionally, it will enable new
insights on structure and function of heart tissue and advanced materials in
extreme space and nuclear environments. The instrument will also provide
critical 3D data for training of machine learning algorithms and open new
frontiers for the quantification of material structure and properties. To
broaden the instrumentâ€™s impact, a Hub, 3DMESH, will be formed to provide
TriBeam training and increase community access to 3D datasets and analysis
protocols. This will benefit the broader engineering community as these new
instruments become more widely available.

The instrument is designated as TriBeam because it hosts electron, focused ion
and femtosecond laser beams in one chamber. The femtosecond laser allows for
extremely rapid (of the order of seconds) in-situ serial sectioning of
millimeter squared-scale surfaces with sub-micron slice thickness, with further
cleanup of the surface by the ion beam for some materials. The electron beam and
other in-situ detectors enable acquisition of chemical, structural and
crystallographic information from each slice. This information is subsequently
processed to create 3D multimodal datasets, with all of the materials
information merged. These rich modalities result in many gigabytes of data per
slice, and many terabytes of data per dataset - requiring simultaneous
development of methods for data management, analysis, and sharing. Large volumes
at sub-micron resolution are critical for understanding the mechanisms that
govern mechanical, electronic, and magnetic properties in a wide range of
materials, since they are often governed by the presence of microstructural
features or layered structures at the 1-100 micrometer scale. Examples include
additively manufactured metallic structures with 100 micrometer-scale melt
pools; melt tracks, transistors and diodes in electronic and light emitting
device structures and soft; and biological materials that possess complex
structure at the microscale, cellular and tissue levels.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.