* 2320039
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an AFM-Raman Confocal Microscope to Enhance Materials Research and Training at the University of Puerto Rico - Humacao
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rolando Oyola-Martinez, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,878.00

Non-Technical Description: The University of Puerto Rico - Humacao (UPRH) is
enhancing its research, education, and training capabilities with the addition
of an atomic force - Raman confocal microscopy (AFM-Raman) instrument.
Researchers from UPRH and other institutions in Puerto Rico are using the
instrument to advance knowledge in areas at the interface of biology, chemistry,
physics, and materials sciences. The research conducted by the group benefits
society by developing new materials and devices for health, environmental,
energy, and electronics applications. In addition, hundreds of minority
undergraduates and high-school students benefit from learning and applying new
analytical techniques for their research projects and from the integration of
laboratory experiences into science curricula. The outreach program is also
enriched by exposing students and teachers to new analytical and imaging
techniques. As a result, more minority students are motivated and better trained
to pursue advanced degrees and more competitive sciences careers. Finally, the
AFM-Raman instrument benefits the larger Puerto Rican research community using
UPRH's shared research facilities and promotes the development of new
collaborations.

Technical Description: AFM-Raman is an integrated solution for simultaneous AFM
and confocal Raman, fluorescence, scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM),
and tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) measurements. The science enabled by
this instrument provides relevant societal benefits by contributing to
fundamental and applied research in the following projects as examples: (1)
study the development of liquid marbles for colorimetric assays with the goal of
minimizing pipetting steps, (2) understand the physics and growth dynamics of
silver nanoparticles for the development of ultra-sensitive, highly-selective,
and low-cost surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) sensors, (3) understand
the effect of cellulose functionalization with pillar[n]arenes on trapping and
detecting heavy metals and/or organic molecules in water, (4) develop new
gallium-derived nanomaterials for drug delivery, sensors, and applications in
medicine, (5) develop new sensors and passive electronics using conductive
polymers nanofibers blends, (6) understand structure/property relation of
carbon-based nanomaterials to develop self-standing and flexible composites with
tunable properties for new strain, photo-sensing, and wearable electronics
applications, (7) understand the effect of doping agents on the crystal
structure of the electrocatalyst zinc oxide use in the oxygen reduction reaction
in a fuel cell.

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.