* 2320462
* Equipment: MRI: Track II Development of an Optical Spectrometer for Multimodal Linearly Polarized, Circularly Polarized, and Integrating-Sphere-Assisted Spectroscopic Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Shengli Zou, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,415,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research. Mississippi State University along with the
University of Central Florida are developing an optical spectrometer for
multimodal linearly polarized, circularly polarized, and integrating-sphere-
assisted spectroscopic measurements. The instrument will support the research of
Professor Dongmao Zhang and colleagues Shengli Zou (University of Central
Florida), Colleen Scott, Qilin Dai (Jackson State University), and Sidney
Creutz. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, chemical
engineering, materials science, and physics. In general, UV-vis, fluorescence,
scattering, and circular dichroism are widely used optical spectroscopic
techniques by researchers in academia and industry as well as in scientific
education. The new instrument introduces several innovative circularly polarized
spectroscopic methods that are not currently possible with any commercial or
published tools. The instrument also significantly enhances the capabilities of
linearly polarized and integrating-sphere-assisted spectroscopic techniques. The
instrument has a modular design that allows for agile controls of a number of
parameters and enables the implementation of numerous additional spectroscopic
modalities using the same spectrometer. This instrument's development involves a
collaboration with Sciencetech Inc, a Canadian company recognized for their
proficiency in creating engineering solutions for optical instrumentation. This
instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students
at all levels in several departments at the Mississippi State University and the
University of Central Florida. Mississippi State University boasts a diverse
student population, with 23% from underrepresented groups, primarily Black or
African American. Through the research activities enabled by this instrument,
numerous undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdocs, and senior
researchers across the nation, will receive interdisciplinary training.

This award is aimed at supporting research and education at all levels.
Instrument being developed is an optical spectrometer for multimodal linearly
polarized, circularly polarized, and integrating-sphere-assisted spectroscopic
measurements. The instrument addresses shortcomings of existing linearly
polarized and integrating-sphere-assisted approaches. It offers several
innovative circularly polarized spectroscopic capabilities. These measurement
capabilities will 1) advance our fundamental understanding of photon/matter
interactions, 2) lead to new strategies for noninvasive characterization of
materials properties, including morphological, conformational, electronic,
compositional, and optical properties. The combined capabilities of the new
instrument for linearly polarized, integrating-sphere-assisted, and circularly
polarized spectroscopic measurements will revolutionize chiral materials
research. The information derived from these measurements will help researchers
quantitatively understand the interactions between chiral absorption, chiral
scattering, and chiral emission in materials. The developed tool will enable
chemists, biologists, and materials scientists to achieve a more comprehensive
understanding of the relationship between structure and properties of the
materials they study, as it enhances their capability for non-invasive materials
characterization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.