* 2320196
* Equipment: MRI Track-I: Acquisition of CyBR: Cyber Infrastructure for Big Data Research Critical for Alaska
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Jessica Glass, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 910,418.00

This project funds the procurement of modern Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)
based compute nodes and sufficient high-performance storage at University of
Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) that will support a new range of data and compute-
intensive applications to allow new science and engineering discoveries. This
system, a Cyberinfrastructure for Big data Research (CyBR), will enable
artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, image analysis,
statistical modeling, and large-scale simulations at UAF. The instrument will be
a catalyst for increasing high priority, data-driven research in multiple
science and engineering disciplines critical to Alaska, its climate and its
natural resources. These include Alaska’s distinctive flora and fauna and its
sociocultural and economic mobility. At least 20 different research projects
will benefit from the instrumentation. Research areas include Arctic marine
biology and implications for Indigenous communities, Alaska coastal modeling,
boreal wildfire management, Alaska earthquake detection, Alaska mining safety,
wildlife and ecology, Arctic Ocean modeling and space science. NSF Alaska EPSCoR
recognizes many of these as high-priority research areas. Other research areas
include, glaciology, volcanology, water treatment, critical mineral extraction
and discovery of low carbon construction material in Alaska. All of these will
potentially support new funding opportunities. This project will also create
training opportunities for first-generation college students, female students,
and those from marginalized communities, including Alaska Native communities.
CyBR will aid in diversifying the data analysis and computationally intensive
workforce, which is invaluable not only in Alaska but also in the nation where
data analysis jobs are expanding at an unprecedented rate.

The Cyberinfrastructure for Big data Research high-performance computing
instrument will consist of 10 compute nodes, each with AMD CPUs, NVIDIA GPUs, at
least 256GB RAM, and NVMe SSDs. This hardware will be accompanied by a large
Lustre storage array to accommodate big data and an HDR Infiniband switch for
high-speed, low-latency data transfer between nodes and the storage so that
computational performance is not bottlenecked by network bandwidth. The research
team will collaborate with the UAF Geophysical Institute’s Research Computing
Systems group to purchase, install and maintain the instrument. It will be
located in the Butrovich Data Center, where it will be connected to UAF’s
existing Chinook HPC cluster. Integrating the new CyBR instrument with the
existing HPC cluster will reduce the time to make this new instrument available
to researchers, reduce the infrastructure needed to operate it and reduce the
management overhead to maintain it.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the
Information Technology Research (ITR) program, and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (OAC).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.