* 2320936
* Excited State Specific Correlation Methods in Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Neuscamman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 530,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Eric Neuscamman of the University of California at
Berkeley is developing new tools for the computer simulation of light-driven
chemistry. Whether studying DNA damage from sunlight or industrial processes
that mimic photosynthesis, understanding the mechanisms by which light drives
chemical change is made difficult by the tiny scales and fast pace at which the
action occurs. Modern experimental techniques can offer glimpses of what is
going on, but often leave key questions unanswered, such as the full series of
shapes a molecule transforms itself through after absorbing energy from
sunlight. The Neuscamman group will develop and deploy a new generation of
computer models that faithfully simulate these processes in high priority areas
of chemistry where current methods are limited. In particular, light-driven
processes that move electrons from one side of a molecule to the other or that
move multiple electrons at once cannot be simulated accurately by current tools
except in the smallest molecules, whereas key applications of these processes
occur in technological and biological settings involving hundreds of atoms. By
bridging this gap, the Neuscamman group aims to deepen our understanding of
light-driven chemistry and the crucial technologies that rely on it. In tandem
with this research, the Neuscamman group will expand its outreach work to middle
school students, teaching the underlying principles of mathematical optimization
methods that support scientific priorities from chemistry to machine learning.
This game-based outreach will also plant seeds around concepts like slope and
curvature so that students are already familiar with exciting and lucrative
real-world uses for calculus when they eventually find themselves in a calculus
classroom. By engaging undergraduate students as instructors in this outreach,
the activity will both broaden middle school student horizons and reinforce
understanding for the active undergraduate co-worker participants.

Understanding the energies of transitions in which molecules absorb light is
central to chemistry. While decades of theoretical work have been dedicated to
predicting the transition energies of electronic (e.g. HOMO→LUMO) excitations in
particular, some categories of electronic excitation are still poorly served by
available theoretical methods. Two examples of these are charge transfer states,
which are central to biological and artificial light harvesting as well as many
enzymatic reaction mechanisms, and double excitations, which are common in the
extended π-conjugation networks of pigments and chromophores as well as in many
transition metal complexes. The Neuscamman group will build on recent
breakthroughs in the mean-field treatment of electronically excited states to
construct what is anticipated to be a highly accurate, and affordable suite of
coupled cluster and related methods for modeling electronically excited states
in large molecules and molecular assemblies. These methods have the potential to
significantly improve the state-of-the art in modeling both charge transfer and
doubly excited states with potential broad long term scientific impacts for
chemistry, biology, materials and systems chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.