* 2320979
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Inclusive Cyberinfrastructure and Machine Learning Training to Advance Water Science Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* David Boyer, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2026
* USD 367,590.00

Advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) that emphasizes machine learning modeling,
data analytics, cloud computing, and open and reproducible software practices is
rapidly transforming water science. However, the water science user community
and the current undergraduate and graduate curricula have not kept pace with
this transformation. To address this gap, this project will train CI users and
CI contributors through a recurring, two-week-long, immersive hackathon during a
three-year project. By effectively integrating CI tools with analytics, machine
learning, and cloud computing this project will create new, open-source CI
modules and curriculum that can serve as templates to increase the adoption of
advanced CI computational and data-driven models by a broad range of water
science disciplines. Furthermore, this project will promote open, interoperable,
reproducible, and accessible CI tools, allowing the scientific community to
quickly integrate new findings and develop robust workflows. Faculty and
scientists with complementary expertise in water science, engineering, computer
science, and education will develop new CI training materials that are
applicable to various water science disciplines. This project further aims to
extend the data access and collaboration capabilities of the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) by
promoting and distributing the curriculum to the consortiumâ€™s 130-plus member
universities. The cyber-training activities will increase water science research
activities by (i) promoting holistic and open-source CI and analytics
approaches, and (ii) empowering the next generation of researchers to overcome
major bottlenecks in CI applications for water science. This project will
increase diversity in water science, create state-of-the-art educational tools
and curricula, and empower researchers and students to move from CI technology
consumption to CI technology creation. It will use multiple diversity programs
to recruit and broaden the participation of CI users and CI contributors from
underrepresented groups across a broad range of types of educational
institutions (HBCUs, PUIs, HSIs, R2s, and R1s).

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.