* 2320762
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an X-ray Diffraction Instrument for Research and Education in Southeast Wisconsin
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Adam Fiedler, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,188.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Marquette University is acquiring a
diffractometer with an advanced detector and X-ray optics to support the
research of Professors Fiedler, Gardinier, and Reiter. In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The instrument will be utilized in multiple
research areas, including inorganic chemistry, magnetic materials, catalysis,
biochemistry, and pharmaceutical studies. Training opportunities in
crystallographic analysis will be provided to undergraduate and graduate
students in the Chemistry and Biological Sciences Departments of Marquette
University, as well as nearby colleges and universities. In addition, this
instrumentation will benefit chemical industry in Southeast Wisconsin, as these
companies often require X-ray diffractometers to understand the structures of
complex molecules and materials.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on provide molecular structures to advance
knowledge of coordination chemistry, magnetic materials, and transition-metal
catalysis. The instrumentation will also enable studies of biomolecules,
including enzymes and RNA/protein adducts. The X-ray diffractometer will be
utilized by researchers at Marquette University, nearby colleges and
universities, and companies in the region to obtain structural insights into
drug targets, natural products, protein crystals, transition-metal complexes,
and materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.