* 2320059
* Integrated Experimental and Theoretical Endeavor for Fundamental Understanding of Processes in Methane Dehydroaromatization
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Sheima Khatib, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2023
* USD 312,044.00

The West Texas Permian Basin holds trillions of cubic feet of natural gas
resources predominantly comprised of methane, which constitutes an economic
opportunity in the billions of dollars to upgrade this low-carbon fossil fuel to
higher-value fuels and chemicals. The project advances catalytic processing
technology that upgrades methane to higher-value chemicals in small plants
located at or near the production wells, thus avoiding flaring or costly gas
pipeline transport. The catalysts currently employed in this process do not
fulfill the activity and stability requirements necessary to make the process
economically viable. The study integrates experimental and theoretical methods
to better understand the factors limiting current catalyst performance, and uses
that knowledge to guide the design of improved catalysts and processing schemes.
The project also promotes training of graduate and undergraduate students in
technologies related to efficient, cost-effective, and low environmental impact
utilization of hydrocarbon resources, while promoting outreach to predominantly
minority schools to attract K-12 students to STEM fields.

This project targets methane dehydroaromatization (MDA) which constitutes a path
for the direct conversion of methane to benzene and hydrogen. Specifically, the
project focuses on ZSM-5-supported molybdenum (Mo) catalysts. Previous work by
the investigators has revealed that the specific processes by which a
ZSM-5-supported Mo oxide precursor is activated to form Mo carbide species
strongly affects the catalytic behavior. Thus, Mo-C-support interactions play a
pivotal role in achieving the stable formation of aromatics. To further
investigate those interactions, model catalysts, with active metals existing
only on either the outer surface or within the zeolite channels, will be
prepared and evaluated by a suite of experimental and computational tools. The
structure, location, and evolution of the Mo species will be monitored by in
situ and operando experiments using advanced characterization techniques,
including X-ray absorption and high-resolution powder diffraction. The
experimental data will be combined with density functional theory calculations
to advance knowledge with respect to the structure-activity relationship of the
catalysts and the reaction pathways involved in the complete MDA catalytic cycle
(activation, reaction, deactivation, regeneration). The combination of kinetic
tests, in situ structural characterization, and theoretical calculations will
result in the determination of the reaction and deactivation pathways of MDA and
will provide the basis for the rational design of catalysts. Beyond the research
efforts, the investigators will develop a novel virtual reality (VR) technology
module that will allow K-12 students to immerse themselves into a catalyst
structure and allow them to directly interact with dynamic 3-D images of the
molecules involved in a catalytic process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.