* 2320088
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Electricity Access and Sustainable Business Model Educators Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Pritpal Singh, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 86,592.00

This project will convene approximately 50 educators, practitioners,
governmental and non-governmental organizations, and other stakeholders in the
domains of electricity access and associated sustainable business model
development for a two-day workshop. The workshop builds on the success and
interest from the Energy Access Educators Workshop sponsored by the National
Science Foundation in 2022. Electricity access is concerned with providing
electricity to the over 700 million people presently without it. Although most
of the people that struggle with electricity access are found in Sub-Saharan
Africa and South Asia, within the United States tens of thousands of homes do
not have electricity. Crucial to any scalable technological solution to
providing electricity access is an attendant sustainable business model that
considers how the costs of producing electricity are recovered, and ways to
productively utilize the electricity for maximum economic impact. These topics
are scarcely found in engineering curricula in the United States. However,
students may greatly benefit from engaging with these topics. Students are more
likely to show interest in and persist in engineering if they are exposed to the
application of engineering in ways that improve the lives and livelihoods of
people in marginalized, under-resourced, or at-risk communities. Unfortunately,
at present, the number of faculty active in both electricity access and
sustainable business models is relatively small, and there is no venue,
professional association or infrastructure dedicated to serving these educators.
As a result, the quality and quantity of education in these topics suffers, and
community building, academic exchange, and opportunities for collaboration among
the faculty is stifled.

The workshop will be held in October 2023 at Villanova University, immediately
preceding the IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference. The workshop
agenda includes targeted discussion, panel, and networking sessions. Ample time
will be given for open-ended discussion. During workshop sessions, participants
will share best practices, lessons learned, and innovative ideas for curricular,
co-curricular, and extra-curricular activities related to technical and business
aspects of electricity access. Interactive sessions will explore topics such as
identifying educational materials, gaining support from university
administration, effectively engaging with cross-disciplinary collaboration,
establishing local partnerships, and acquiring funding. There will be selected
keynote presentations from experienced practitioners and educators. Each day of
the workshop will conclude with a de-brief session that summarizes the dayâ€™s
discussion points. Pre- and post-workshop surveys will be given to create a
preliminary snapshot of the state of electricity access education, shape the
workshop agenda, and assess the success of the workshop in meeting its aims. The
key findings of the workshop will be synthesized and disseminated through
publications and presentations. The workshop will lead to the development of a
roadmap of future activities and infrastructure, such as additional workshops,
email lists, sharing of course materials and resources, and collaborative
pedagogical or applied research with the goal of creating a community of
interest for long term collaboration. Attendees will also brainstorm ways to
perpetuate this workshop in future years through alternative funding models. The
workshop participants will be recruited from a variety of higher education
institutions, with particular emphasis on Primarily Undergraduate Institutions,
Tribal Colleges and Universities, and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.