* 2320846
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a high-performance computer cluster for computational biology
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Tyler Luchko, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 730,520.00

This MRI award will enable the acquisition of a high-performance computer
cluster for computational biology at California State University, Northridge
(CSUN). The award will support the development and growth of research in
computational biology, biochemistry, and biophysics at CSUN by enabling the
analysis of larger datasets and more complex simulations than previously
possible. The goal of this research is to advance our understanding of a diverse
range of topics, including heart disease, immune system function, computational
drug-design, medical implants, membrane protein structure and function, and the
role of microbes in global warming. Students at CSUN, over 50% of whom are from
traditionally underserved groups, will be trained through dedicated workshops,
hands-on experience in research, a new research-based course in computational
biology, and the integration of the cluster into existing courses. Additionally,
the PIs and senior personnel will work with local high school teachers in
computational/data science, who will, in turn, train local high school students.

The cluster, with a balance of high memory graphics processing units (GPUs) and
central processing units (CPUs), large-memory, and storage, will allow currently
inaccessible problems in life sciences to be addressed and support current as
well as new research directions in computational biology. The flexible design of
the cluster will allow the PIs and senior personnel to apply the wide range of
methods and approaches used in computational biology to characterize the
thermodynamics and structural dynamics of G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR)
signaling, create new approaches to predict ligand and ion binding to proteins
and RNA, develop a multi-scale framework to link protein mutations to cardiac
arrhythmias, create detailed models of how T-cell receptor diversity affects
immune system, design and test treatments to prevent fibrous tissue growth
around medical implants, and use DNA and RNA sequence data to determine how
microbial communities in thawing permafrost contribute to climate change.
Collectively, these projects will further knowledge in applied and foundational
biotechnology and provide new software tools for the scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.