* 2320009
* MRI: Track 3: Acquisition of a Helium Recovery System to Reduce the Consumption of Helium of Montana State University's NMR Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Valerie Copie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 271,925.00

An award is made to Montana State University (MSU) to acquire a helium recovery
system to reduce the consumption of liquid helium used in MSU’s NMR Core
Facility. The system will lower the facility’s operational costs and carbon
footprint, making the NMR Core’s activities more sustainable and environmentally
friendly. Liquid helium is required for the operation the state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers, and the helium recovery system is an essential enhancement to
research infrastructure that supports researchers carrying out frontier research
and educational activities. The NMR Core is critical to MSU’s land grant
mission, which promotes research, teaching, and outreach throughout the state of
Montana. The helium recovery system will enhance MSU’s contributions to high
quality graduate and undergraduate student education and will expand the Core’s
ability to promote hands-on training of students through workshops, teaching of
courses, and tours and demonstrations promoting scientific education.

NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules, to identify unknown substances, and to characterize the
arrangements of atoms within molecules. The helium recovery system will benefit
the research of numerous scientists, staff, students, and outside (academic and
non-academic) users of MSU’s NMR Core Facility. The NMR Core serves as a
resource for chemists, engineers, biochemists, and other scientists at MSU, the
University of Montana, and Tribal Colleges, throughout Montana and the upper
northwest region of the United States. In addition to its critical role for
early career faculty, the NMR Core provides essential support for established
researchers including biochemists, organic chemists, medicinal chemists,
bioinorganic chemists, and other campus-wide faculty engaged in metabolomics,
biofuels, animals and livestock, and biofilm research, which will all benefit
from installation of a helium recovery system in MSU’s NMR Core Facility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.