* 2320098
* NSF MRI Track 2: Acquisition of an Electron Beam Lithography and Imaging System for Research, Education, and Training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tara Drake, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,944,433.00

This MRI proposal seeks acquisition of an electron-beam lithography (EBL) system
to support education and research at the University of New Mexico (UNM) and
surrounding regions. UNM is a Carnegie R1, Minority-Serving Institution with a
student body that is approximately 50% Hispanic and 12% American Indian, and
this proposal leverages this unique environment to train students from
historically underrepresented backgrounds in EBL and its applications. The EBL
system will be installed at the Center for High Technology Materials (CHTM), a
center with a 40-year record of leadership in photonics and semiconductor
research that serves a broad range of internal and external researchers.

Intellectual Merit: Nanofabricated devices are at the heart of numerous fields
of science and engineering, ranging from photonics to biochemistry and quantum
technologies. EBL is the workhorse tool in nanofabrication, and regular access
to high-quality EBL is a requirement for many nanoscience research projects. At
UNM, over fifteen PIs in multiple disciplines (e.g., Electrical, Mechanical,
Chemical Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry) use EBL. In quantum technology,
UNM researchers use EBL-defined devices to build a fundamental understanding of
the potential, scalability, and limits of quantum devices. In nanophotonics, EBL
enables UNM research in areas from molecular chemistry to solar cell
engineering. In nanomechanics, UNM researchers use EBL in developing new
imaging, sensing, and lithography techniques.

Broader Impacts: The EBL system will be used to provide training to graduate
students in EBL-enabled research. EBL is also being integrated into UNM
undergraduate nanophotonics and nano-electronics courses. The EBL system
provides students with advanced technical workforce training for academia,
national labs, and the semiconductor, photonics, and quantum technology
industries. Additionally, the co-PIs host the QU-REACH program, a summer
research experience in Quantum Technology for New Mexico undergraduates, with a
diverse student intake. Integrating EBL into this effort will enhance the
participants' recruitment prospects and training experience. CHTM also hosts
year-long service learning experiences and summer workshops for high school
students and teachers, mostly from economically disadvantaged schools in
Albuquerque. These students and teachers will participate in EBL-enabled
research and observe the tool in action.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.