* 2320090
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-flight Mass Spectrometer for Analysis of Macromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Genevieve Sauve, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 310,000.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program. Professor Geneviève Sauvé from Case
Western Reserve University, on behalf of 15 investigators from 8 departments
across the university, is acquiring a matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF MS). This
instrument will enable a wide range of innovative and transformative research
activities that depend upon a soft ionization mass spectroscopic technique with
a large mass range, including analysis of fragile macromolecules, complex
biomaterials and synthetic polymers. This instrument will strengthen the
research infrastructure at the university and surrounding areas. It will improve
recruitment and retention of the best students and faculty members. The
instrument broadens participation by enabling new projects for a diverse student
population, including economically disadvantaged high-school students from the
Cleveland area. It will also advance education and training of diverse students
at all levels and postdoctoral fellows.

This award empowers innovative and transformative research activities across a
wide variety of disciplines impacting fundamental STEM areas ranging from
materials-energy research to the study of problems at the chemical biology
interface. The detailed characterization of macromolecules provided by the new
instrument are difficult to achieve by other techniques or equipment available
to CWRU scholars. The instrument will lead to the development of new knowledge
in areas including: pi-conjugated materials, nonlinear optical materials,
fluorescent polymer brushes, graphynes, bioinspired nanomaterials, imaging and
contrasting agents, functionalized gas-core nanoparticles, biomolecules with
targeted surface-adhesive properties, tissue engineered products, DNA
nanostructures, regulation of cellular processes, understanding chemical damage
of RNA/DNA by sensitizers, and elucidating molecular mechanisms of the estrogen
receptor alpha protein. This knowledge will enable and accelerate research that
will benefit society, with practical applications including: printed
optoelectronic devices such as photovoltaics and light emitting diodes,
artificial blood surrogates to address shortages for blood transfusion, ways to
protect RNA/DNA from photodamage, stable DNA nanostructures with programmable
therapeutic properties, new brush copolymers to revolutionize cataract surgery,
novel molecules that will revolutionize detection and treatment of cancer,
enhanced MRI contrast agents, and improved engineered cartilage quality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.