* 2320116
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a High-Performance X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yujie Sun, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 841,753.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Cincinnati is
acquiring an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with a multitechnique-ready
XPS surface analysis platform to support the research of Professors Yujie Sun,
Anastasios Angelopoulos, Ryan J. White, Jingjie Wu, and Sarah J. Watzman. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, materials science,
impacting studies of sustainable energy and catalysis, sensing and sensor
development, and nanomaterials. The instrument serves users from the Departments
of Chemistry, Chemical & Environmental Engineering, Mechanical & Materials
Engineering, and Electrical Engineering at the University of Cincinnati and
surrounding region. XPS spectra are produced by irradiating a sample with X-rays
that have sufficient energy to eject electrons. Next, the kinetic energy of the
electrons is measured and subsequently related to their binding energy. These
data can be related to the chemical elements in the sample and effects from
their bonding environment. This instrument enhances teaching as well as research
and research training of undergraduate and graduate students. The instrument
provides more equitable access to an XPS instrument in the Greater Cincinnati
area and surrounding region.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on the following three areas: (1)
Sustainable energy and catalysis. The objective of this focal area is to develop
materials and catalysts for sustainable and renewable energy capture, storage,
and utilization; (2) Sensing and sensor development. The objective of this focal
area is to understand the sensor interface at both the materials and chemical
level to develop sensors with unprecedented sensitivity and specificity for
sensing and imaging applications; and (3) New nanomaterials. The objective of
this focal area is to develop novel nano and inorganic materials to transform
the fields of sensing and energy. The specific aims of each of the research
activities will provide fundamental insights for the development of new
strategies for energy materials, catalysis, sensor surfaces and chemistries,
corrosion and surface protection, and new nano and inorganic materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.