* 2320943
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Fostering Computational Excellence (FOCEX): Addressing the Disconnect between Advanced CyberInfrastructure and Educational Preparedness
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Assad Oberai, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop training materials in the form of workshops and
teaching kits for students and researchers in science, technology, mathematics,
and engineering (STEM) to aid in translating computational research into modern
high-end computing platforms. This project addresses the longstanding challenges
researchers encounter when working with computing and data-intensive
applications that rely on new computing accelerator hardware deployed in modern
high-performance computing clusters. The training will focus on computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) applications, i.e., predicting the flow around objects like
an aircraft. Additionally, the training material will share many common elements
with other disciplines and will be easily applicable to other fields besides
CFD. The workshop will present general concepts and exemplary code and
demonstrate its functionality in a real-world application. An archival and
dissemination plan is included in the project, and advertising to a broad
audience will be pursued.

This project will train a cohort of researchers and students to tackle
challenging problems in fluid mechanics by employing state-of-the-art numerical
techniques and efficiently utilizing modern heterogeneous computing
architectures in advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI). This project has two major
components; direct training and teaching facilitation. Direct training will be
piloted as a 4-week-long summer school designed program for graduate and
undergraduate students with a foundational understanding of CFD and programming.
During this program, the participants will gain hands-on intensive training in
research CFD pipelines, which include understanding numerical techniques,
knowledge of the heterogeneous computing architectures available in advanced CI,
and the programming skills needed to effectively utilize them, as well as
machine learning and optimization. The training modules will be developed to
prepare teaching kits to be distributed to instructors throughout the NSF ACCESS
program. The aim is to facilitate the integration of these subjects in different
coursework across the nation. The direct training pilot is expected to host
students directly while teaching facilitation has the potential to scale up and
benefit many more students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.