* 2320815
* CAREER: Understanding the Exceptional Near-Field Auditory System of the Aye-Aye, One of the Most Unusual Primates in the World
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ehsan Dehghan-Niri, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2026
* USD 550,752.00

Over the past 50 million years, the near-field auditory system of aye-ayes, one
of the most unique and endangered primates in the world, has evolved to perform
an exceptional foraging behavior called tap-scanning. As the aye-aye moves along
the surface of a tree, it taps the wood with its unusual middle finger while
keeping its nose near the tree’s surface and its large ears bent forward to
detect deep cavities in tree bark that contains the worms they eat. This
behavior is very similar to what is done in nondestructive evaluation (NDE), a
process where an active acoustic wave is generated and the response from a
material (e.g., echo) is used to characterize material properties as well as to
detect and evaluate defects (e.g., cavities). The aye-aye’s tap-scanning
behavior is unique, making it particularly valuable for creating new NDE
technologies. The main goal of Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
research is to understand the exceptional near-field acoustic-based sensing and
detection capabilities of aye-ayes, inspiring the creation of new NDE methods.
This grant will help support research that will provide a foundation for
developing bio-inspired NDE methods, both promoting science and ensuring the
safety of our nation’s aging infrastructures. Reliable NDE methods are needed to
inspect aging structures, such as bridges, pipelines, power plants, and
aircrafts, as well as provide quality control assessments for complex
manufactured components. Therefore, this research will benefit both the U.S.
economy and promoting the safety of U.S. society by circumventing catastrophic
failures of critical aging infrastructures.

The principal hypothesis of this research is that the exceptional near-field
auditory system of aye-ayes has resulted from two marvelous adaptations: (i)
shape and morphology of the aye-aye’s pinnae, ear canals, and head have adapted
to enhance the noise reduction and reception of sound reflected from tapping and
increase the near-field acoustic beam resolution and (ii) morphological features
of the aye-aye’s middle finger have adapted to provide unique acoustic cues
during tap-scanning. To test these hypotheses, the research team will perform
bio-mimetic and numerical studies. First, a robotic platform will be used to
mimic the aye-aye’s middle finger during tap-scanning. The effects of the pinna,
head, and ear canal in enhancing the aye-aye’s acoustic near-field sensing will
be evaluated experimentally. Second, finite element models will be used to
numerically analyze the acoustic field of the aye-aye’s auditory system.
Finally, a bio-inspired tap-scanner will be designed and manufactured to be used
to inspect composite materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.