* 2320478
* MRI RI-Track 2:  Development of the Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array (EOVSA)-15--Major Upgrade of a Community Facility for Solar and Space Weather Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gelu Nita, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,879,490.00

The Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array (EOVSA), currently consisting of thirteen
2.1-m antennas operating in the 1-18 GHz frequency range, is the world’s premier
solar-dedicated radio array equipped for broadband microwave imaging
spectroscopy. The EOVSA, operated by the New Jersey Institute of Technology, has
been supported as a community facility under the Geospace Facilities program of
the NSF Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences (AGS) since 2021. The
science addressed by EOVSA covers nearly every aspect of solar phenomena,
including nonthermal emission and particle acceleration from solar flares,
thermal emission from solar active regions, solar eruptive events, and several
aspects of space weather research. This project is a major upgrade of the
existing capabilities of EOVSA. The research results and data products produced
by this major upgrade will measurably improve basic knowledge of solar activity
and provide improved space weather data products of broad societal impact. The
improvements in the image quality will make the data more accessible to general
users and the public. Research with this university-based instrument is well-
integrated into education and training, where students and early-career
researchers have major involvement in instrument construction and operation,
data analysis, theory development, and modeling.

The primary goal of EOVSA is basic research and discovery, to increase our
knowledge and understanding of this wide range of solar phenomena through rapid,
continuous multi-frequency imaging of the full Sun at >400 frequencies from 1–18
GHz with a rapid time cadence of 1 s. In addition to this fundamental research,
the instrument produces a variety of daily data products of operational
interest, such as F10.7 images, radio burst images, spectra, and light curves,
for applied research in monitoring and forecasting space weather events. This
MRI will upgrade EOVSA’s capabilities by: (1) Improving its polarization
measurement capabilities by transforming EOVSA into a uniform array and
equipping each antenna with next-generation wide-band feed horns, to enable the
entirely new capability of broadband imaging spectropolarimetry. (2) Improving
its broadband imaging performance by adding two new antennas to the array. This
addition, which is fully compatible with the existing correlator infrastructure,
will greatly enhance the image quality, and hence spectral precision at all
frequencies. The polarization of the observed radio emission provides crucial
diagnostics for the direction of the solar coronal magnetic field. The new
polarization capabilities will enable many possible applications including a)
opening up a new window for measuring the direction of the rapidly evolving
magnetic field in solar flares, and b) placing much tighter constraints on the
coronal magnetic field strength and topology in solar active regions where major
flares and eruptions frequently occur. The 35% increase in u-v coverage from the
upgrade leads to a much cleaner point spread function, resulting in images and
spatially resolved spectra with vastly improved fidelity for quantitative
analysis. Lastly, the upgraded array will correct a limitation of the current
array to achieve a 25% increase in sky coverage with full capacity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.