* 2320841
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscope for Research and Education at San Jose State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Abraham Wolcott, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

Non-Technical Description: The acquisition of a tip-enhanced Raman spectroscope
at San Jose State University (SJSU) can significantly improve our understanding
of nanometer-scale materials and foster hands-on learning experiences for
undergraduate and master's student researchers. The team at SJSU utilizes this
optical instrument to tackle scientific challenges on materials science, with
the materials for potential applications in transportation, energy storage,
electronics, and health science. In addition, the instrument facilitates
collaboration with external users in the area, including California State
University - East Bay and the University of California - Merced. The acquisition
also aims to advance high-quality public education for students, including those
in underrepresented groups, thereby cultivating a highly trained and diverse
science and engineering workforce in the United States.

Technical Description: The acquired tip-enhanced Raman spectroscope integrates
scanning probe microscopy and Raman spectroscopy, enabling scientists to
determine molecular fingerprints and topography of nanomaterials down to 10
nanometer spatial resolution, which is a resolution level that could not be
achieved using traditional optical measurement techniques. This combined
analysis technique is also less invasive than some of the other techniques based
on electron beams or X-rays, minimizing the sample damage and misinterpretation
of the chemical and physical properties of nanomaterials. The researchers at
SJSU apply this analysis technique to study quantum dot composites,
biomaterials-driven interphase in batteries, quantum coherence properties in
nanodiamonds, the effects of strain manipulation on transition metal
dichalcogenide heterostructures, and the effects of surface dipole moments on
nitrogen-vacancy centers for quantum sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.