* 2320320
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Highly efficient magnetoelectric nano-antenna arrays with wide operational bandwidth
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shad Roundy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2026
* USD 385,000.00

This research is a four-way collaboration between the University of Utah, Utah
State, Tyndall Institute in the Republic of Ireland and Queens University of
Belfast in Northern Ireland of UK to develop a new generation of non-traditional
magneto-elastic antennas across multiple size scales, from nm and um to mm and
cms. The size and efficiency of traditional communications antennas are
intimately tied to the electromagnetic wavelength. This fact limits their
performance across a wide spectrum of frequencies. To address this issue, this
project will develop the core technologies for a new type of antenna, called a
magnetoelectric (ME) antenna, that can dramatically reduce the required antenna
size for a given frequency. As part of this project, the team of researchers
will develop and characterize ME antennas operating at low frequencies (tens of
kilohertz), and high frequencies (up to gigahertz). The antennas developed in
this project could impact wireless communications across many applications and
industries. At low frequency, the antennas can enable effective communications
through complex environments due to the lower path loss at low frequency. These
include underground, under-ice, and perhaps underwater communications. A
compelling application at higher frequencies is the use of wireless implantable
devices for monitoring, sensing, and control of targeted drug release in humans.
This application is greatly hampered by the strict limitations on the physical
size of implanted devices. The smaller, more efficient, antennas developed as
part of this project can be an enabling factor for wireless implants which could
impact the lives of a large proportion of humanity. At even higher frequencies,
such as those used for 5G and 6G communication, this technology can enable
smaller and more efficient 5G and 6G communications devices. PI proposes to
train undergraduate and graduate students on magnetoelectric (ME) antennas
fabricated at the nano-, micro-, and meso- size scales in three countries. In
addition, outreach efforts include familiarizing high school students
specifically for Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander populations in the
technology area.

In this project, the team of researchers seeks to enable smaller communications
devices through the exploration of magnetoelectric (ME) antennas fabricated at
the nano-, micro-, and meso- size scales. ME antennas are made from multi-
material structures consisting of magnetostrictive materials coupled with
piezoelectric materials. In receiver mode, the structures acoustically vibrate
in response to incoming electromagnetic waves producing a voltage through the
action of the piezoelectric material. In transmitter mode, the piezoelectric
material is excited electrically, producing acoustic waves which create a
radiating electromagnetic wave through the action of the magnetostrictive
material. In either case, the size-frequency relationship is dictated by the
acoustic wavelength which is orders smaller than the electromagnetic wavelength
for a given frequency. This fact enables antennas that are an order of magnitude
smaller than traditional electromagnetic antennas. This project will advance the
state of knowledge for ME structure design and performance specifically, and
wireless communications generally. The project will explore novel low frequency
antenna design and structures implemented at the meso-scale (i.e., millimeter-
centimeter scale) and characterize their use for communication in lossy
environments, specifically underground. Micro- and nano-scale ME antennas will
be explored for higher frequency communications. This will entail the
development of novel fabrication processes needed for non-standard, nano-
patterned piezoelectric ceramics and magnetostrictive metal-ceramic
heterostructures. In both cases, low frequency and high frequency, novel
nonlinear mechanical structures will be incorporated to increase antenna
bandwidth without loss of performance. Finally, this project will explore the
modulation of spin waves while producing tripartite phonon-magnon-photon
coupling in different magnonic nano-patterned magnetoelectric antenna
architectures which represents a fundamentally new ME coupling mechanism used
for communications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.