* 2320839
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of a Campus-wide Helium Liquefication Plant for the University of Colorado Boulder
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 545,484.00

Liquid helium is critical for a great many of the research needs at the
University of Colorado Boulder, particularly with the extensive recent and
coming growth in the areas of quantum sciences and engineering. The Physics
Department has operated a helium liquefier for almost two decades, while also
providing liquid to other users across campus. Unfortunately, the present
liquefier is of a style and age that is extremely complicated to run and
maintain and it is no longer supported by the manufacturer. The present project
includes replacing the existing liquefier with a much more modern and simple
system, that due to its design will have much higher reliability. The
infrastructure for supporting such a facility is already in-place and will be
reutilized. Other infrastructure across our campus is also in-place, as the
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) facilities in both Chemistry and the
Biofrontiers Institute, which operate 7 distinct superconducting-magnet NMR
instruments, have helium capture and compression facilities, but will have no
way to reliquefy the helium. A similar capture and compression facility will be
installed in Engineering as part of this project, enabling it to serve all
present liquid helium needs in the campus - including 40 different research
groups representing 8 Departments, 3 Colleges, and 5 Research institutes. The
impact on the teaching program will also be strong – the superconducting-magnet
NMR systems are directly utilized in 5 distinct undergraduate courses with an
enrollment of ~ 1300 students/year.

Liquid helium is critical for a great many of the research needs at the
University of Colorado Boulder, particularly with the extensive recent and
coming growth in the areas of quantum sciences and engineering. The Physics
Department has operated a helium liquefier for almost two decades, while also
providing liquid to other users across campus. Unfortunately, the present
liquefier is of a style and age that is extremely complicated to run and
maintain and it is no longer supported by the manufacturer. The present proposal
includes replacing the existing liquefier with a much more modern and simple
system based upon pulse-tube technology, that due to its design will have much
higher reliability. The infrastructure for supporting such a facility, including
piping and gas monitoring from across the Physics/JILA complex is already in-
place and will be reutilized. Other infrastructure across the campus is also in-
place, as the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) facilities in both Chemistry and
the Biofrontiers Institute, which operate 7 distinct superconducting-magnet NMR
instruments, have helium capture and compression facilities, but will have no
way to reliquefy the helium. A similar capture and compression facility will be
installed in Engineering as part of this project, enabling it to serve all
present liquid helium needs in the campus. Many of the experimental systems
can’t be replaced by “dry” or recirculating helium systems, due for example to
the need for ultra-low vibrations. In addition to the work on quantum systems in
Physics, JILA, and Engineering, the NMR systems serve 40 different research
groups representing 8 Departments, 3 Colleges, and 5 Research institutes. The
impact on teaching program will also be strong – the superconducting-magnet NMR
systems are directly utilized in 5 distinct undergraduate courses with an
enrollment of ~ 1300 students/year.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.