* 2320626
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Development of CODAS: A System for Concurrent and Multi-Technique Observations of Time-Sensitive Stellar Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jean Perkins, Monterey Institute For Research in Astronomy
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2027
* USD 720,850.00

In recent decades, astronomers have discovered that the Universe is more
dynamic, on all time scales, than previously believed. Astronomical research
that depends on observations made with multiple instruments at the same time is
challenging to organize and achieve. The Concurrent Observing and Data
Acquisition System (CODAS) offers a multi-mode, observing tool that can address
the need for simultaneous data. This project will integrate current and new
hardware into a single, cohesive instrument that can explore many areas of time-
sensitive astrophysics. The CODAS array of instruments is sensitive over a broad
range of wavelengths, from the ultraviolet to the infrared. Users will be able
to quickly select the optimal instrument configuration for their observations.
Students from nearby Hispanic Serving Institutions will be recruited and
prioritized within their annual internship program.

CODAS utilizes the capacity of the pointing platform to carry the co-aligned
36-inch and 14-inch telescopes and the Guidance-Acquisition Package (GAP), which
quickly redirects light to one of multiple instrument access ports on the
36-inch. This project will design, engineer, and document the hardware and
software necessary to support concurrent data acquisition (simultaneous 36-inch
and 14-inch observations) and contiguous data acquisition (different instrument
ports on the 36-inch GAP). It will develop the user software interface required
for astronomers to efficiently observe with CODAS. The available observing modes
include standard filter photometry with CCD and CMOS detectors, long-slit and
echelle spectrographs, and high-precision polarimeters, including a high-
efficiency imaging polarimeter. Most instruments are designed to be sensitive
from the atmospheric cutoff in the near-ultraviolet (300nm) to the near-IR
(1000nm), and to take advantage of the typical sub-arcsecond seeing at the
observatory. Additional near-IR detectors extend this range to 2.5 microns for
the imaging and spectroscopic modes. This work adds a crucial ability to respond
to time domain-critical transient events with multiple instruments. This project
will provide training for high school and early college-level interns in the
areas of instrument design, engineering and fabrication, and software
development. This award addresses/advances the goals of the Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.