* 2320976
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Particulates in canopy flowpaths: A missing mass flux at the macrosystem scale?
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Alexandra Ponette, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2027
* USD 651,159.00

Forests cover one-third of the land on Earth. For rainfall to pass through the
forest canopy, it must drain along two “hydrologic highways”: throughfall (water
that drips through gaps and from leaves or bark); and stemflow (water that runs
down stems). As throughfall and stemflow drain, they wash particles from leaves
and bark. Although tiny, particles washed from the canopy by these hydrologic
highways can constitute a significant chemical input to the soil, and represent
a wide range of materials, from nutrients to pollutants. Despite this, no large-
scale effort has sought to measure, scale, and predict the amount and quality of
particles descending down these hydrologic highways. These particles are
generally “missing” from current ecological theory of how forests cycle
elements. This study seeks to fill this gap by monitoring storm conditions,
throughfall, stemflow, and the particles in these hydrologic highways across
sites representing major forest types in North America. Results will link
throughfall and stemflow to common models used to inform freshwater and forest
management. Outcomes will inform outreach efforts, including science comics and
illustration exhibits, open-access articles written for (and reviewed by)
primary and secondary school children with Frontiers for Young Minds, and
YouTube videos with MinuteEarth, a channel with an international viewership of
millions. The project will also provide research experiences to members of
underrepresented groups to broaden participation in science.

For 40% of the North American continent and one-third of global land surface,
rainfall must pass through forests to reach the soil surface. This rainfall is
partitioned by the forest canopy into two net rainfall fluxes: a drip flux
called throughfall (TF), and a flow of water down stems, called stemflow (SF).
How much rain travels along these hydrologic highways can alter water supply by
20-50%, and what they carry from the canopy can supply >100 kg per hectare of
various materials to the soil surface each year. These canopy ecohydrological
processes are on the front line of climate and land use change, being that the
forest-rainfall interactions that initiate terrestrial hydrological pathways and
supply nutrients/pollutants to the surface are the first ecosystem elements
impacted by hydrologic intensification. Ignoring these fluxes, and their
particulate traffic, introduces error in water and nutrient flux models at the
first point where terrestrial biogeochemistry and hydrological cycles entwine,
and which may cascade those errors through downgradient processes. This project
aims to extend current macrosystem biological understanding to include
throughfall and stemflow particulate concentrations, fluxes and composition,
specifically addressing 3 major objectives: (1) estimate the net rainfall
(TF+SF) water and particulate mass flux across forest types; (2) characterize
the particulate composition (C:N:P, including C components like total C, organic
C, black C, and microplastic C) of TF and SF; and (3) identify major drivers of
macrosystem variability in net rainfall particulate flux and composition. Field
monitoring of the above variables across 11 sites of the National Ecological
Observatory Network representing the major US forest domains allows links to be
tested between existing functional characteristics and the practical integration
of throughfall and stemflow dynamics into continental-to-global scale
biogeophysical models. The project will also support research training of a
postdoctoral researcher, masters and doctoral students, and a technician.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.