* 2320966
* CAREER: ERASE-PFAS: Mechanistic Investigation of Thermal Decomposition of Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substances in the Soil Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Feng Xiao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 238,932.00

The contamination of soil and water by per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) is a national concern. Certain PFAS chemicals have been detected in the
blood of more than 95% of the US population. Soil largely contributes to the
quality of groundwater and crops, which are potential human exposure pathways
for these chemicals. The challenge of dealing with PFAS contamination results
from their chemical structure that leads to strong resistance to biological
degradation in the environment. However, thermal processes such as forest fires
are known to induce physical and chemical changes of PFAS chemicals in soil. The
goal of this CAREER project is to understand the stability and decomposition of
PFAS chemicals in soil during thermal treatment. A deeper understanding of these
processes is necessary for the development of thermal technologies to clean up
soils contaminated by PFAS for the protection of human and ecological health.
Successful completion of this research will enable scientists to accurately
predict decomposition products of PFAS in various thermal processes. Additional
benefits to society result from the training of engineering undergraduates and
enhanced learning through participation in hands-on experiments in soil
chemistry and physics. Further benefits will accrue from the dissemination of
results to the public, remediation professionals, and other stakeholders through
outreach, conference presentations, and journal publications. This project is
jointly funded by the CBET Environmental Engineering program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The goal of this CAREER project is to elucidate transformation mechanisms of
PFAS in soil during thermal treatment. PFAS reaction pathways at elevated
temperatures will be identified through stepwise experiments assessing the
thermal treatment of various PFAS classes under different gas phases in various
soils and reference soil components. Results will be used to determine the
combined effects of soil properties, PFAS molecular structure, and ambient
atmosphere on degradation pathways; information critical to assessing thermal
treatment as a potential remediation method for PFAS-contaminated soils. A novel
aspect of this research arises from the use of an innovative identification
approach based on continuously interleaving scans at low and high collision
energies of time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Successful completion of this
research will yield critical insight into the thermal stability of various
classes of PFAS, enhanced understanding of the fate of PFAS in the soil
environment during forest fires, and elucidation of mechanisms of thermal
decomposition of PFAS. This knowledge is potentially transformative because the
high thermal stability of PFAS is an implicit assumption in current
environmental fate and transport models. The educational objectives of this
project are focused on advancing STEM understanding through the involvement of
undergraduate students in well-designed projects. Students will apply knowledge
learned in class to address interesting and relevant real-world problems. The
diversity of the Nation’s STEM workforce will be broadened through the
participation of underrepresented groups in the research. This project is
jointly funded by Environmental Engineering program of CBET and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.