* 2320218
* MRI: Track 3 Acquisition of Helium Recovery Equipment to Establish a Sustainable NMR Facility at the University of Toledo
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yong-Wah Kim, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 322,980.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs in response to the solicitation
of proposals that promote the recovery, recycle, and/or reuse of helium
initiated by the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022. The University of Toledo is
acquiring a helium recovery system to capture and reliquefy helium from four NMR
spectrometers which support the research of Professor Yong-Wah Kim along with
colleague Jon Kirchhoff. This equipment supports research in the areas of
synthetic chemistry, polymer chemistry, catalysis, and drug discovery. In
general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. Using the intrinsic magnetic properties of atomic nuclei, it is used
to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The
superconducting magnets of these instruments rely on regular deliveries of
liquid helium to maintain their operation. However, the instability in the
helium supply due to global and national challenges jeopardizes research
programs relying on NMR spectroscopy. A helium recovery system collects the
helium boiloff from the superconducting magnets of NMR spectrometers and then
reliquefies the helium for reuse. This equipment supports the educational,
research, and teaching efforts at all levels in multiple departments as well as
academic and industrial researchers throughout northwest Ohio.

This award is aimed at supporting research and education at all levels.
Specifically, this helium recovery system collects the helium boiloff for
reliquefication and reuse from the superconducting magnets which sustains the
operation of the institutionâ€™s four NMR spectrometers. The NMR instrumentation
supported by this equipment enables numerous research projects including the
rational design of transition metal catalysis for C-H activation and
functionalization and the development of recyclable bio-based co-polyesters for
packaging. The equipment sustains instrumentation which involves harnessing
nitrogen-centered and transition metal complexes for the synthesis of nitrogen-
containing heterocycles and the development of organometallic catalysts for
green chemistry. Other research projects benefitting from this award include the
study of nitric oxide release from neuroprotective nitric oxide mimetics and the
development of inorganic and organometallic catalysts and reagents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.