* 2320450
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a TEM for Multi-disciplinary Research and Education at University of Texas Rio Grande Valley-A Hispanic Serving Institution.
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nirakar Sahoo, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 439,413.00

An award is made to the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) to acquire
a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM; Hitachi HT7800 120 kV), which will
significantly boost the research and teaching activities spanning several
disciplines, such as biology, earth, environmental, marine sciences, chemistry,
physics, mechanical engineering, health and biomedical sciences, immunology and
microbiology. As one of the largest minority-serving institutions in the USA,
UTRGV is dedicated to the academic growth of over 30,000 students, more than 90%
of whom are Hispanic. The acquisition of this state-of-the-art microscope will
increase several societal benefits, including enhancing research capabilities,
improving educational quality, and expanding participation by underrepresented
groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.
UTRGV's strategic position along the US-Mexico border in the heart of deep south
Texas makes it a key environmental and public health research center. The
acquisition of the TEM, a first for the region, shows UTRGVâ€™s dedication to
continue leading in scientific exploration and innovation. In addition, the
microscope will become an integral part of various courses and programs,
exposing more students to this cutting-edge technology and sparking their
interest in STEM professions.

The instrument will enable high-resolution imaging and analysis of various
biological, chemical, and physical samples, providing critical data for
investigators and students working on projects such as studying plant responses
to insects, zebrafish neuron reactions to environmental chemicals, and
theranostic nanoparticles for magnetic hyperthermia cancer treatment. The
instrument will also examine the morphology of nanofibers for applications in
energy, optoelectronics, water treatment, healthcare, food packaging, and
biomedical sectors, as well as the ultrastructure of bordered pits in plant
tissues to understand plant drought resistance. Its user-friendly features, such
as the integrated high-resolution camera and patented non-toxic sample
preparation technologies, make it a valuable tool for education and hands-on
training. The acquisition of the microscope will expand research and teaching
efforts at UTRGV, providing undergraduate and graduate students with practical
experience and exposure to real-world applications. This exposure should improve
their employability and competitiveness for advanced degree programs. Moreover,
the microscope will foster collaboration across various departments and schools,
thus strengthening the mission of UTRGV to become an R1 institution. Overall,
this acquisition will solidify UTRGV's reputation as a leading institution for
STEM research and education, particularly benefiting underrepresented minority
students, ultimately helping the Rio Grande Valley and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.