* 2320031
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Instrument for Materials Research in Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Escarra, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 966,750.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) enables researchers to study the
chemistry of material surfaces, which plays a pivotal role in how materials
perform in technologies being developed to address people’s needs for clean
water, renewable energy, and waste reduction. Specifically, researchers at
Tulane University and in the greater New Orleans area use surface-sensitive
techniques like XPS to study materials used for water purification, solar energy
conversion, batteries for energy storage, and plastics recycling. This major
research instrumentation project, jointly funded by Division of Materials
Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
funds the acquisition of a new XPS instrument and brings to this region modern
capabilities needed to train the next generation of materials scientists and
engineers and to encourage greater industry-university collaboration.
Modernizing the equipment available to students facilitates a holistic
educational experience by enabling them to operate the instrument, acquire data,
and perform their own analyses, something not possible with outdated equipment.
Additionally, this project supports broadening participation in science and
engineering through multiple programs co-sponsored between Tulane University and
Xavier University of Louisiana, a member of the historically black colleges and
universities in the United States. These well-established programs guarantee
participation of at least two (typically more) Xavier University students every
year in research projects that utilize the XPS. More broadly, investment in
research equipment through this program is critical for building (not simply
maintaining) research capacity and for attracting (and retaining) scientific
talent in regions like the greater New Orleans area.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface-sensitive technique used to
characterize composition and chemistry (e.g., oxidation state of elements) of
material surfaces. Because surface chemistry plays a pivotal role in material
behavior and performance, particularly for nanomaterials and surface-active
materials, access to state-of-the-art XPS capabilities is essential to this type
of research. This grant supports the acquisition of an XPS instrument to be
housed in the Coordinated Instrumentation Facility (CIF) at Tulane University in
New Orleans, Louisiana. Equipment in the Tulane CIF serves the needs of greater
New Orleans area businesses and four major universities: Tulane University
(private, research-intensive); the University of New Orleans (public, research-
intensive); Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA) (private, HBCU, undergraduate-
focused); and Dillard University (private, HBCU, undergraduate-focused). The
acquisition of a new XPS instrument brings to this region modern capabilities
needed to train the next generation of materials scientists and engineers and to
encourage greater industry-university collaboration. Additionally, the new
instrument is equipped with the following additional features: imaging, variable
angle measurements, depth profiling, in-situ heating/cooling, and electrical
contacts for in-situ sample biasing or current flow through the sample. These
features support ongoing research of material interfaces important in both
traditional and emerging areas, including polymer engineering, solar energy
conversion, catalysis, nanotechnology, electrochemical energy storage, and
optoelectronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.