* 2320454
* Identifying the Foundational Concepts and Skills of Materials Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Nicole James, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 340,808.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying the concepts and
skills necessary for materials chemistry research. Solutions to the Nation’s
most challenging problems require materials designed with the right chemical
properties. For example, addressing energy needs requires higher-efficiency
solar panels; decreasing the prevalence of microplastics requires robust plastic
alternatives. Consequently, materials chemistry is a rapidly growing field of
research and area of the national workforce. However, materials chemistry is not
commonly represented in the undergraduate chemistry curriculum, and it is not
clear which concepts and skills are essential for a holistic preparation in
materials chemistry. With support from the NSF EDU Core Research: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, this Individual
Investigator Development-track (IID) project seeks to advance understanding of
what concepts and skills are used in materials chemistry research through a
national survey of post-doctoral researchers. This understanding will enable
education researchers to study student learning in crucial content areas, and
will aid educators in providing opportunities for students to develop materials
chemistry competencies. Concurrently, this project will build the quantitative
skills of an early-career education researcher in survey design and statistical
analysis. In this way, this project enables the enhancement of the national STEM
workforce in areas relevant to major national and global challenges.

This study uses an integrated conceptual framework to operationalize skills and
concepts. This framework informs the collection of exploratory interviews with
postdoctoral scholars who conduct materials chemistry research. An inductive
analysis of these interviews will yield insights that will inform the
development of a quantitative survey. In alignment with the Standards for
Educational and Psychological Testing, evidence based on test content, response
process, and internal structure will be used to ensure validity of the data
produced by the survey, and its interpretation. The survey will be administered
nationally to postdoctoral scholars in materials chemistry. Responses will be
analyzed using cluster analysis and social network analysis. These findings will
be used to develop a map identifying the materials chemistry skills and concepts
in use, their relative frequency of use, and the relationships between them.
Project outcomes will center the skill and concept map. Project findings and
outcomes will be shared through presentations and open-access research
publications. For this individual investigator development project, the
principal investigator (PI) will develop relevant quantitative skills through
coursework and collaboration from a project mentor and advisory board. This
project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research in the
core areas of STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.