* 2320703
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Laser Ablation System for ICP-MS to Expand a Broad Range of Analytical Activities and Research Training in the Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Holli Frey, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 265,000.00

This MRI award funds a laser ablation (LA) system to couple with an existing
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS). The LA-ICP-MS allows
elemental analysis of very small areas (micron scale) of solid geological or
biological samples. The LA will enable the research programs of Union faculty
and students, as well as those of researchers from outside institutions. The
acquisition of the LA will greatly expand our ability to address both basic and
applied questions in paleoclimatology, paleoenvironments, and high-temperature
geochemistry (including volcanology and geochronology), and their connection to
related geological, geochemical, atmospheric, hydrologic, and ecological
systems. The LA will allow for both rapid throughput and high spatial resolution
that is required by the proposed research activities. This instrumentation will
allow the lab to expand its capabilities in geochemistry, and is critical to
advancing the research needs of several Geosciences faculty and their students.
The LA will advance research on developing multiproxy paleoclimate,
palaeoceanographic, and paleoenvironmental records, specifically to: a) utilize
stalagmites to develop climate records in temperate and tropical regions; b)
investigate historical pollution events using stalagmites and bivalve shells;
and c) develop and investigate elemental proxies in biological carbonates
including bivalve shells and corals. The LA system will also advance high-
temperature geochemical research, with projects on magma mixing, volatile
content of magmas prior to eruption, and thermometry in volcanic rocks and
deeply eroded mountain belts. The LA will be used in undergraduate independent
research, the lab components of undergraduate courses, and will advance the
research of two female pre-tenure faculty at nearby institutions as well as
foster new collaborations at other institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.