* 2320830
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 "Acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer for teaching, research and collaboration"
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Luis Raul Castaneda Perea, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 355,913.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, jointly funded by the Division
of Materials Research, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) supports the acquisition of a new single crystal X-ray
diffractometer at New Mexico Highlands University (NMHU). The new capability
enables the characterization of the molecular and crystal 3-dimensional
structure of synthesized and natural crystalline solids. Materials research
activities, involving undergraduate and graduate students, use the instrument in
the discovery of these newly synthesized compounds, materials and minerals. The
mixing of students from different disciplines (e.g., chemistry, geology) into
the scope of laboratory research and training brings a fresh perspective to
fully realize the cross-disciplinary nature of scientific inquiry. The new
instrument helps to provide training in the form of crystallography workshops,
mineralogy and materials seminars, and other courses in a friendly environment
at a minority serving institution that allows students to find pathways in their
career at academia, national laboratories, and industry.

The single crystal X-ray diffractometer is equipped with the latest technology
on area detectors and on micro focus X-ray sources. The identification by X-ray
diffraction methods of the molecular structures and 3-dimensional configurations
are the first steps in the design of the new cutting-edge materials. The
instrument facilitates inter-disciplinary and inter-university research such as
(i) oxide inclusions in silicate minerals, light emitting diodes, and
pharmaceuticals at NMHU (ii) semiconductors and solar cells in collaboration
with the University of Colorado Boulder, and (iv) metal organic frameworks
inclusions and magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents in collaboration with
the NSF BioPACIFIC MIP. These research activities expose students to technical
and essential skills such as data processing, critical thinking, and
interdisciplinary competency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.