* 2320073
* Collaborative Research: Ab Initio Engineering of Doped-Covalent-Bond Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexey Kolmogorov, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2026
* USD 252,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational research aimed at designing superconducting
materials with advanced modeling methods. Superconductors display a unique
property of conducting electrical current without any resistance when cooled
below a certain critical temperature. Discovery of new materials synthesizable
with ambient-pressure techniques and superconducting at high temperatures can
impact a wealth of emerging technologies in the areas of energy storage and
distribution, medicine, electronics, and transportation.

The project will involve a systematic screening of a vast compositional and
structural space. The chemical set will include light-weight elements that can
form strongly bonded layered frameworks and different metals that can make the
covalent frameworks stable and superconducting. In order to study and tune the
key properties of candidate materials, the team will add new capabilities to
software packages developed in the PIs’ groups. The new features will enable
investigation of large-scale phenomena using artificial intelligence approaches
and evaluation of the complex materials’ superconducting properties with
cutting-edge electronic structure methods.

The educational activities will focus on training graduate and undergraduate
students in computational materials science and high-performance computing. The
team will also participate in outreach activities for K-12 students to help
attract a new generation of scientists from underrepresented groups into the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics disciplines. All new
computational features will be made freely available to reach a wider community
of physicists, chemists, and materials scientists.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports a collaborative project on the prediction of high-
temperature superconductors that can be synthesized at ambient pressure. The
team’s exploratory work has identified layered metal borocarbides as a promising
materials class to host new synthesizable compounds with targeted electronic and
vibrational properties. In contrast to searches for ground state crystal
structures that can be performed with a variety of existing algorithms,
identification of temperature- and composition-dependent synthesis routes
yielding metastable materials is a far more difficult task. The team will employ
a combination of ab initio methods and machine learning interatomic potentials
to explore complex kinetics-protected pathways that may lead to the desired
metastable configurations. The large size and possible disorder of the resulting
structures will make the accurate description of their superconducting
properties a considerable challenge. The PIs will introduce new descriptors of
the electron-phonon coupling and new capabilities within the anisotropic Migdal-
Eliashberg framework to enable a high-throughput evaluation of the candidate
materials’ superconducting critical temperatures.

The new features in the PIs’ electronic structure software packages (MAISE and
EPW) will be disseminated under the open-source GNU General Public License via
well-established platforms and presented at workshops to ensure that the
scientific community will benefit from these developments in a timely fashion.
The PIs will also train (under)graduate students in computational materials
physics and high-performance computing as well as introduce K-12 students to
present-day materials research through interactive demonstrations organized with
the help of the Physics Outreach Program at Binghamton University. Aimed at
fostering the young generation’s interest in STEM disciplines, these efforts
will contribute to the development of a skilled workforce for advancing
cyberinfrastructure and computational materials research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.