* 2320630
* MRI: Track I: Development of UltraFast High Granularity Modules for Timing Layers for the LHCb Upgrade 2 and Future Collider Calorimeter Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Matthew Rudolph, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,218,284.00

This project is focused on developing modules that provide precise timing and
space information for the construction of a high-granularity timing-layer to be
integrated into the LHCb Upgrade II calorimeter at the CERN laboratory in
Switzerland and future high-luminosity colliders. The development of this
instrument will be an essential element of an ambitious physics program rich in
discovery potential that will advance our understanding of elementary particles
and their interactions. High spatial resolution combined with a precise time
stamp has broad applications to future colliders and industrial instruments, for
example medical devices. The group will develop full-size modules comprising a
sensor and its processing electronics, integrated into an optimized package with
electrical and mechanical properties suitable for scalability into large planes.
Its components comprise novel ultrafast sensors with fine space segmentation and
complex electronics that combine sophisticated signal manipulation and data
processing. This R&D project is synergistic with the semiconductor industry in
the United States and the many efforts of applying artificial intelligence
techniques to advanced technology.

The goal of the effort is to integrate this detector in the LHCb Upgrade II at
the CERN LHC collider following the high-luminosity upgrade (HL-LHC). The HL-LHC
era offers the possibility of unprecedented reach in many landmark measurements.
The high luminosity, combined with increased efficiency for photons, pions,
electrons, and positrons, will be a formidable combination that, thanks to the
flexible software trigger, will allow the group to optimize the data taking to
specific interesting decays. In addition, this instrument is aligned with basic
research needs in calorimetry for future collider applications. It can also be
adapted to construct hadron identification devices for future e+e- colliders.
The stringent specifications involve sensor and microelectronics features that
are at the edge of current technologies. Challenging requirements on the speed
and radiation resistance on the sensors, speed and low noise performance of the
analog processing, complexity of the digital section, and encompassing
algorithms possibly optimized with machine-learning techniques have far-reaching
implications for advancement in microelectronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.