* 2320265
* Equipment: MRI: Track #1 Acquisition of Photonic Wirebonding Tool for Quantum and Nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 999,420.00

Photons, particles of light, can travel across long distances with very high
efficiency, especially when propagating in very low loss fiber-optical cables.
Therefore, photons are used as information carriers of choice for optical
communication technology that forms the backbone of the internet. Integrated
photonic chips - integrated photonics for short - consisting of many micron-
scale optical devices, have emerged as an essential technology required to
encode information in a photon’s color, polarization, shape, and position.
Beyond optical communications, integrated photonics has enabled a wide range of
applications with significant societal impact, including environmental
monitoring, bio-medical imaging, machine vision, and high-performance computing.
These applications crucially rely on the ability to efficiently interface
“micro-world” of integrated photonic chips with “macro-world” of optical fibers.
In the laboratory setting, this is achieved using bulky, expensive, and high-
precision positioners, which renders the system challenging to use in real-world
applications. Photonic wire bonding (PWB), the process of permanently attaching
an optical fiber to a photonic chip, is ideally suited to overcome this
limitation and improve the performance and usability of the integrated
photonics. Furthermore, it can also make these systems accessible to many under-
resourced communities (e.g. small colleges, high schools) who may not have
access to state of the art laboratory equipment. This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award is supporting the acquisition of a PWB system by
Vanguard Automation. The tool will be placed in a shared clean room facility -
Center for Nanoscale Systems at Harvard, member of NNCI network - where it will
be available to many academic and industrial users. Therefore, the tool will
enable many scientific breakthroughs, stimulate technological advancements and
entrepreneurship, and help train a diverse and photonic-savvy workforce.

Modern chip-scale photonic systems consist of many optical devices, including
waveguides, resonators, modulators, switches, lasers and detectors, realized in
a variety of photonic materials and has enabled applications ranging from
optical communications and computation on one end, to sensing and precision
measurement on the other. The outstanding challenge for integrated photonics is
that of efficiently getting light on- and off-chip. Due to the large optical
mode mismatch between sub-micron scale on-chip optical waveguides and
commercially available optical fibers, featuring optical mode diameters
exceeding ten microns, much of the light is lost when light passes from the
waveguide to the fiber. This is particularly true for applications that require
low temperature operation (e.g. inside cryostat or dilution refrigerator),
operation in fluids (e.g. in sensors), scalability (e.g. 10s or 100s devices to
be connected at the same time), or robustness to vibrations. Recently, photonic
wire bonding, an optical equivalent to electrical wire bonding ubiquitous in
electrical circuits, has emerged as a promising technique to create efficient
and permanent connections between photonic devices on different platforms, or
with fibers or lasers. In this approach, 3-D polymer waveguides are fabricated
in situ to bridge the gap between photonic circuits located on different chips,
or between the chip and fiber or laser. This technique not only enables
scalable, highly efficient, and low loss interface between optical chips and
optical fibers, but also allows for the realization of compact hybrid devices
that combine different materials. The PWB tool will facilitate successful
completion of a large number of ongoing research programs focused on development
of new types of chip-scale lasers (including pulsed ones), frequency combs and
single-photon sources, for example, and their application in microwave
photonics, optical communication and computing, precision measurements of time
and distance, environmental monitoring, quantum communication and computation.
The tool will also enable new opportunities by the ability to perform long term,
stable measurements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.