* 2320384
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of NMR Instrument for Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Edward Fenlon, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,720.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Franklin and Marshall
College is acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
equipped with a broadband probe to support the research of Professor Edward
Fenlon along with colleagues Sarah Tasker, and Davide Lionetti. This instrument
facilitates research in the areas of physical organic chemistry, structural
biology, and materials science. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. Using the intrinsic magnetic properties of atomic nuclei, it is used
to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument
enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students, including
undergraduates from underrepresented groups, at all levels in the Chemistry
Department as well as provides accessibility for use at a nearby community
college, Harrisburg Area Community College.

The award of the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in areas such as synthetic and mechanistic
organic, biophysics, and biochemistry. Specifically, the instrument enables
research focusing on the development of new radicals for dynamic nuclear
polarization measurements and studying vibrational coupling to measure
internuclear distances in DNA, RNA, and proteins. Other investigations include
developing the reactivity of s-aryl thioformate reagents and the synthesis and
biological evaluation of antibacterial natural products and their derivatives.
Additional research projects to be enabled by the 400 MHz NMR spectrometer
include facilitating multielectron reactivity with bidentate ligands, enabling
cooperative reactivity in multimetallic complexes, and tailoring nanoparticles
via post-synthetic transformations. In response to global helium supply
challenges, the acquisition of this instrument includes a superconducting magnet
with a low loss cryostat reducing the institutionâ€™s consumption of helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.