* 2320951
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Promoting AI Readiness for Machine-Assisted Secure Data Analysis (PAIR4MASDA)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Alvis Fong, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2027
* USD 499,876.00

Democratization of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, such as large
language models and chatbots, has accelerated the need for an AI ready
workforce. To meet this challenge, the project aims to instill AI readiness in a
broad spectrum of users and researchers of advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI), so
they can productively and harmoniously use AI for secure big data analysis. The
project directly involves eighteen science and engineering faculty members, ten
industry experts, and over a thousand students across partner universities and
colleges, including several minority serving institutions. By promoting AI
readiness across diverse populations with accessible and relatable learning
materials and holistic professional development, the project aims to level the
playing field for those who feel left behind via bottom-up empowerment.
Collective impact guides the team's concerted effort to broaden participation
from underrepresented groups such as women, minorities, and veterans. All
training materials have reproducibility built in by design to facilitate
adoption by a broad range of learners, including those not currently attending
college or otherwise having limited access to computational or traditional
educational resources.

Advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) enabled artificial intelligence (AI) with big
data analysis is an important enabler for science and engineering (S&E)
research. However, as recent mishaps involving chatbots show, AI can produce
convincing but incorrect or even harmful results. AI cannot yet be trusted with
full autonomy, especially in mission critical applications. There is an emphasis
on machine assisted secure data analysis, with human in the loop to enhance
safety, security, and reliability. Responding to repeated calls for a multi-
faceted approach to AI training, the project studies AI readiness along three
dimensions: technical, psychological, and behavioral. Expectation confirmation
theory is extended with decision quality and coupled with pervasive technology
strategies. This development both advances knowledge and provides a theoretical
basis for precise and measurable outcomes. A comprehensive suite of experiential
learning modules forms the core of a set of customizable training materials.
Critical knowledge and skills are distilled into bitesize units known as
flexible micro modules (FMMs) to rapidly upskill learners, who in turn create
their own personalized toolkits. An additional layer is built on top to give
learners multimodal immersive experiences using extended reality (XR)
technologies. These immersive experiences help learners better comprehend
difficult concepts and internalize complex sequences of tasks.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Division of Graduate Education (DGE) within the NSF Directorate
for STEM Education (EDU) and Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) division
within the Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.