* 2320769
* Cyber Training: Pilot -- Breaking the Compute Barrier, Upskilling Agri-Food Researchers to Utilize HPC Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Alison Joglekar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,974.00

There is a dearth of scientists with expertise in the agri-food and environment
domains that have compute-to-scale capabilities enabled by High Performance
Computing (HPC) environments. Low adoption of HPC capabilities among agri-food
researchers can be largely attributed to the real (or perceived) complexity of
using HPC. Moreover, traditional training courses rooted in the CSE sciences
often lack the contextualized problem focus and hands-on access to tailor-made
learning data and problem sets that are familiar to and thus useful for
upskilling this particular sector of the workforce. This project proposes to
develop and deploy a multi-module learning curriculum tailored to CI-
applications in the agri-food sciences that is provided as a synchronous,
virtual offering with substantial hands-on application-based learning
opportunities. The challenges that the proposed work will be made generalizable,
such that other left-behind communities seeking to capitalize on core advances
in data science and HPC can leverage the approaches and infrastructure developed
under this proposal. The proposed multi-module course is focused on building the
foundational, data-driven skills necessary to create a sustainable community of
skilled CI Users through tailored, discipline-appropriate course materials
targeted at bridging the gap between domain specific science and computer
science for agri-food scientists.

This proposal aims to develop and deploy a multi-module learning curriculum
tailored to Cyberinfrastructure (CI)-applications, notably High-Performance
Computing (HPC), in the agri-food sciences that is provided as a synchronous,
virtual offering with substantial hands-on application-based learning
opportunities. The 30-person course will be delivered via a containerized
learning environment to ensure all learners have ready access to an identical
set of tools. The first three course modules provide the basic building blocks
for HPC-based analytics, followed by a series of hands-on application modules
that enable agri-food researchers with the levels of competency needed to
facilitate HPC analyses of critical agri-food problems. The course will be
accessible to academic (undergraduate, graduate, and faculty/staff) audiences
around the US and abroad (especially targeting underrepresented populations of
students), as well as individuals working in US government agencies and agri-
business firms. To enable both academic and non-academic accessibility, this
pilot project will host the CI-focused agri-food analytics curriculum on
Microsoft Azure cloud computing infrastructure, but the course will introduce
learners to the portfolio of available private, academic, and cloud-based HPC
resources. The project team will work with internal and external agri-food
networks and leverage the capabilities of the ACCESS Knowledge Base Ask.CI
and/or Community Affinity Groups. The team will engage in a series of external
and internal content and delivery audits throughout the grant period to ensure
the identification of optimal HPC learning pathways for agri-food researchers.
After delivering alpha-, beta- and full-course instances of their HPC for Agri-
Food Researchers course, the course will continue to be offered 2-3 times
annually through their GEMS Learning portfolio beyond the life of the grant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.