* 2320972
* Collaborative Research: Implementation: Medium: Secure, Resilient Cyber-Physical Energy System Workforce Pathways via Data-Centric, Hardware-in-the-Loop Training
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* James VanZwieten, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2027
* USD 480,000.00

This project will establish a CyberTraining hub of cyber physical energy systems
in Southern Florida, a region that suffers from numerous coastal processes
impacting critical infrastructures and therefore would greatly benefit from
resilience and security research and education. This project aims to provide
students and researchers with mentored, hands-on training. The faculty team has
expertise across power engineering, communication networks, data science, and
cyber/hardware security to build a novel model for energy cyberinfrastructure
resilience education. The curriculum and instructional materials to be developed
will bring advanced skills from multiple areas, under the umbrella of cyber-
physical energy systems. Participants will develop and refine multi-disciplinary
skillsets needed for the data-centric energy industry, using the unique,
remotely connected smart grid cyberinfrastructure. Participants will extend
their academic research portfolios, strengthening their career competitiveness
as future cyberinfrastructure professionals and users. Two-week workshops will
immerse undergraduate/graduate students and researchers in a unique training
opportunity through laboratory demonstrations and mini workshops. Semester-long
projects will provide research-intensive training and further strengthen the
participants' real-world problem-solving capabilities.

The project will tackle three technical challenges with significant intellectual
merit: (1) Curating comprehensive, heterogeneous benign and malicious cyber-
physical data from a remotely-connected cyberinfrastructure platform to strongly
enable hands-on training and research. Hardware-in-the-loop power testbed
connected with a virtual network laboratory will be used to characterize system
dynamics, where state-of-the-art hardware and software modules will enable
humans, machines, and grids to cooperate in a near-to-real learning environment;
(2) Developing user-friendly cybersecurity modules in a virtual lab to simulate
threats from cyberspace, enabling self-paced training. Participants will create
attack scenarios in the cyber domain, where the attacking process and
consequence are visualized in the physical system. Data analysis techniques
based on machine learning (ML)/artificial intelligence (AI) will be developed as
a set of cyber defense mechanisms; (3) Designing, delivering, and integrating
cross-disciplinary curricula, composed of undergraduate and graduate course
modules and a certificate program. The project further offers unique training
opportunities with relevant private and public sector partners through capstone
projects and internships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.