* 2320937
* CIF: Small: Impact of radiation trapping on sensing and communication systems in the THz, infrared, and optical regime - foundations, challenges, and opportunities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,997.00

When electromagnetic radiation is sent through a gas, specific frequencies can
be absorbed, and then re-emitted. The re-emitted radiation can be re-absorbed
somewhere else in the gas, re-emitted there, and so on. This absorption/re-
emission is known as “radiation trapping”. Because each absorption/re-emission
induces a delay and can change the direction as well as induce a slight
frequency change, radiation trapping changes the fundamental characteristics of
the radiation – in other words, the radiation arriving at a detector has
characteristics that are different from that of the radiation that was
originally incident on the gas. As mentioned above, radiation trapping happens
mainly at specific (very high) frequencies. As modern wireless systems are
moving to higher and higher frequencies, there are thus more situations where
radiation trapping is important. Wireless systems in those frequency ranges
might be used for communication, sensing, or both. In any of these cases, it is
important to analyze the impact of radiation trapping – either to simply assess
its impact, to find ways to mitigate its detrimental effects, or to actively
exploit it. This project pursues an in-depth investigation of both the
fundamentals of radiation trapping and its effects on next-generation wireless
communications and sensing. The results of these investigations will form a
foundation for future wireless system design in these ultra-high-frequency
regions, and will be broadly disseminated. Furthermore, significant outreach
activities, aimed at broadening the participation in this research area, are
planned. The radiation trapping process has important consequences for the
properties of the resonance radiation emerging from the gas. Firstly, the line
shape is distorted: since photons at the center frequency of the absorption line
“see” a high absorption coefficient, the probability of reaching the detector is
low, while photons in the “wings” of the line shape can escape more easily.
Secondly, the emerging radiation suffers from both delay dispersion, frequency
dispersion (the re-emitted frequencies are shifted from the absorbed
frequencies), and spatial dispersion (photons can be re-emitted in any
direction, though there can be a nontrivial relationship between directional
dispersion and frequency dispersion). The project will start by investigating
the interaction of resonance radiation with molecular transition and the
interaction between Orbital Angular Momenta (OAM) radiation with atoms and
molecules. Solution methods for the fundamental equation of radiation trapping,
the Holstein equation, will be investigated for conditions that are practically
relevant for transmission in (Earth) atmosphere. The project then will
investigate how trapping can impact sensing systems. Finally, the implications
for communications systems, including multi-carrier and single-carrier systems,
will be investigated. The project takes an interdisciplinary approach, combining
insights from atomic/molecular physics, chemical physics, communication theory,
wireless system design, and experimental design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.