* 2320292
* Equipment: MRI: Track 2 Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Boosting Artificial Intelligence Enabled Science, Engineering, and Education in South Carolina
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sophya Garashchuk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Andresen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project aims to establish a new High-
Performance Computing (HPC) instrument with balanced Central Processing Unit
(CPU) and Graphics Processing Units (GPU) nodes at the University of South
Carolina (USC). This facility will significantly improve the existing HPC
resources at USC, which will boost research in diverse fields such as materials
science, physics, chemistry, engineering, computer science, bioinformatics,
health science and humanities, all enhanced by the HPC, big data and artificial
intelligence (AI) tools. Moreover, this instrument will enable access to HPC
resources and AI training for students and faculty at over 10 undergraduate
institutions in South Carolina (SC), including historically black and minority-
serving colleges, creating opportunities for cutting-edge HPC/AI-for-Science
research for underrepresented groups in STEM.

This project will advance fundamental science, engineering, health sciences and
humanities, through collaboration among many partnering institutions across the
USC system and SC state, and contribute to national research priorities in
energy, climate and national security. The new HPC facility will enable
researchers to perform large-scale simulated data acquisition for AI model
training. The new instrument will be employed for state-of-the-art analytics, AI
algorithms and data visualization. Research efforts centered on ab initio
quantum physics and chemistry, molecular dynamics, computational ﬂuid dynamics,
multi-universe stochastic models and data-intensive deep learning and graph
convolutional neural networks, will advance our knowledge of cyber-physical
systems and materials. This knowledge will contribute to the development of
innovative applications such as generative design of materials, effective
intervention and prevention mechanisms for complex diseases.

This project will greatly broaden access to the HPC-AI computing facility in SC
and will provide holistic AI and HPC training through technical workshops,
undergraduate research scholarships and AI-for-Science projects and high-school
summer camps. This instrument will also enhance and promote interdisciplinary
collaborations among regional consortium researchers, including scientists and
students at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) serving historically
underrepresented groups, leading to an organic growth of the research community
in SC. Over 3,000 people including 315 faculty, 2,550 graduate and undergraduate
students, 90 high school students and 30 departments across USC and 10 PUIs will
immediately benefit from this HPC equipment.

The project website for public access will be http://ai4science.sc.edu. It will
serve as the depository for all research products generated throughout the
project, such as data, codes, results, emulators and simulators. The project
website will be maintained for at least 5 additional years beyond the project
period.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.