* 2320311
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a System for Integrated Confocal Microscopy and Mechanical Interrogation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ernst-Ludwig Florin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,386,969.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of
three commercially-available instruments that will be combined to create a new
instrument. The three instruments to be acquired are a confocal microscope, an
atomic force microscope (AFM), and a laser cutter. The confocal microscope will
be able to do fast, high-resolution optical imaging of living cells and tissues
as well as soft gels and other soft materials. The AFM will be able to apply
well-controlled forces at well-defined locations on these samples, to measure
their mechanical properties. Additionally, the AFM can also be used to do
higher-resolution imaging of sample surfaces than the confocal light microscope.
The laser cutter will be used to cut biological tissues or fiber networks while
they are under tension, so that the amount of tension in the structure can be
measured by measuring the recoil following the cut. Working together, the
combination of these instruments will allow determination of the mechanical
properties that develop in biological cells and tissues and how biological cells
and tissues respond to a range of mechanical inputs from their environments.
Although it is well-known that the interplay between biology and mechanics is
important in a wide range of essential biological processes, specific tools for
probing the different types of interplay have been limited. Therefore, the
acquisition of this instrument will substantially advance basic scientific
understanding of biological systems and of non-biological systems that resemble
biological systems in composition, structure, and/or function. Acquisition of
this instrument will also advance the engineering of materials that interface
with biological systems to tune biological response in the desired way. This
will benefit society through advances in multiple areas of biomedicine. The
instrument will offer new training and research opportunities to scientists and
engineers at all stages of their education and career. Specific efforts will be
focused on benefiting early-career researchers and those who are members of
under-represented groups.

A high-resolution, high-speed confocal microscope, an AFM designed for work with
“wet” biological and soft-matter samples, and a laser cutter will be combined to
create one instrument, termed the “mechanoscope.” This instrument will be used
to investigate mechanobiology, including the fiber networks that characterize
the cellular cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix, single-cell eukaryotic
and prokaryotic mechanobiology (with a particular emphasis on signaling and
differentiation), and tissue- and organism-level mechanobiology (with a
particular emphasis on connective tissue and morphogenesis). This instrument
will also be used to investigate interactions at the biotic-abiotic interface,
focusing on photo-responsive dynamic hydrogels. Further, the instrument will be
used in the development of new soft materials, including active soft gels,
peptide fibrils, and stimuli-responsive soft materials that incorporate
genetically engineered bacteria as a functional component for tuning gel
properties. Confocal microscopy will be used for imaging and
Forster/fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) measurements. AFM will be
used for controlled force application and for measurement of Young’s moduli and
storage and loss moduli. The laser cutter will be used for ablation of fiber
networks, cellular cytoskeletons, and tissues, and as a photo-stimulus for
crosslinking dynamic hydrogels.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology Program (BMMB) in the division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.