* 2320284
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Multifunctional Thermal Analysis Instrument for Interdisciplinary Research and Research Training in Advanced Nanomaterial Development
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Whitehead, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 224,834.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Union College is acquiring a
thermogravimetric analyzer integrated with a Fourier Transform infrared
spectrometer and a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (TGA/FTIR/GC/MS) system
to support the research of Ellen Robertson, Ann Anderson, Mary Carroll, Yijing
Stehle, and Christopher Whitehead and other colleagues at the institution. In
general, a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) is a scientific instrument that aids
the characterization of the structural, mechanical, chemical, and physical
properties of materials as a function of temperature. However, having only
information about the material weight loss as a function of temperature is not
sufficient for answering the specific research questions associated with each
material. Instead, a thorough characterization of the chemical species that are
released during material heating is often desired. A TGA/FTIR/GC/MS system
allows for the unambiguous identification of material thermal degradation
products through the assignment of both vibrational modes (Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectroscopy – FTIR) and molecular weight analysis (Mass Spectroscopy –
MS). The instrument impacts many areas, such as chemistry, mechanical
engineering, materials science, and nanotechnology. Furthermore, the new
instrumen provides research and educational opportunities for a diverse group of
at least 50 undergraduate students annually, both inside and outside of the
classroom.

The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. Research
enabled by the instrument is focused on characterizing the structural,
mechanical, chemical, and physical properties of diverse classes of modern
nanomaterials, including plasmonic nanomaterials for detecting pollutants,
semiconducting quantum dots for heavy metal sensing, metal oxide nanocrystals
and aerogels for catalysis, and functionalized graphene oxide membranes for
water filtration and purification. The instrument allows for the unambiguous
identification of nanomaterial thermal degradation products through the
assignment of both vibrational modes and molecular weight signatures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.