* 2320239
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a SEC/FFF-MALS-DLS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Hage, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 478,072.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. The University of Nebraska –
Lincoln is acquiring an instrumental platform that combines the chemical
separation methods of size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and field-flow
fractionation (FFF) with the detection methods of multi-angle light scattering
and dynamic light scattering (MALS-DLS) to support the research of Professor
David S. Hage, Chin Li (Barry) Cheung, Edward Harris, Wei Niu, and Angela K.
Pannier. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry,
biochemistry, chemical and biomolecular engineering, and biological systems
engineering at this institution. SEC separates molecules as a function of size
based on their elution from a packed column. FFF is a versatile separation
technique that can be applied to macromolecules and nanoparticles. MALS-DLS are
subsequently used, in-line, to measure time-dependent fluctuations in scattered
light, which is related to molecular diffusion coefficients and their size
distributions. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching
efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides
accessibility for use at nearby institutions. The instrument is leveraged in
research training opportunities that impacts many areas spanning from
nanomaterials and polymers to biomedical research and environmental studies.
Students, local industry and others gain hands-on experience with the instrument
through its integration in various program.

The award of the SEC/FFF-MALS-DLS is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as chemistry, polymer science,
biochemistry, chemical and biomolecular engineering, and biological systems
engineering. Research focuses on environmental and chemical research aimed at
examining the activity of pharmaceuticals in water and their binding with
dissolved organic matter, as well as the characterization of new methods for the
degradation of nanoplastics and microplastics in water. The instrument is also
used to isolate size-specific forms of the complex carbohydrate hyaluronan for
examining their biological activities, to characterize and separate recombinant
proteins and their domains for enzyme engineering, and to isolate and
characterize synthetic nanoparticles and biological vesicles for use in
biomedical research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.