* 2320379
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a Real-Time Hybrid Simulation Testing System for Cyber-Physical Research and Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jeffery Volz, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2026
* USD 589,262.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art structural testing instrument. The instrument will enable
cyber-physical “hybrid” tests. These tests coordinate the response of a cyber
numerical model and a physical experimental test specimen in real time. In doing
so, the instrument better replicates realistic loading conditions. These loading
conditions include, for example, the impacts of natural hazards on the nation’s
critical infrastructure. The cyber-physical tests conducted with the instrument
will help to better understand the performance of innovative infrastructure
materials and components. The structural materials and components validated
using the instrument will help to mitigate economic, property, and human losses
caused by natural hazards, improving the well-being of individuals in society.
The new instrument will transform the way the multidisciplinary MRI team
conducts research at the University of Oklahoma (OU), will foster technology
transfer with industry, and will promote the development of a globally
competitive science, technology, engineering, the arts, and mathematics (STEAM)
workforce. The instrument will also be a resource for researchers in the
surrounding region.

Addressing the demand for more resilient infrastructure requires an improved
basic understanding of the complex behavior and performance of building
materials and structural components subject to realistic loading produced by
natural hazards. Such loading conditions can be realized using real-time hybrid
simulation (RTHS) facilitated by the acquired instrument. Research enabled by
the instrument will (1) reveal the physics behind the complex, nonlinear
behavior of innovative structural components, (2) quantify their performance in
civil (e.g., buildings and bridges) and energy (e.g., solar and wind)
applications, (3) advance physics-based mathematical models of such components,
and (4) catalyze multidisciplinary and fundamental research involving additive
manufacturing, material science, and the arts. The fundamental understanding of
these structural materials and components will result in new technologies for
resilient infrastructure. Overall, the RTHS instrument will produce the complex
loading conditions needed to advance multidisciplinary research projects.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the Engineering for Civil Infrastructure Program (ECI) in the division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.