* 2320309
* MRI: Acquisition of an advanced X-ray detector for static and dynamic synchrotron X-ray scattering studies of materials at extreme conditions at the Advanced Photon Source
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,394,500.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will permit the purchase of an
advanced X-ray detector, EIGER2 S CdTe 9M at Sector 13 of the Advanced Photon
Source, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science user facility at Argonne
National Laboratory (Chicago, IL). This detector upgrade will help to overcome
the challenges in determining the structure and composition of materials in-situ
at extreme pressure-temperature conditions, which are currently limited when
trying to resolve many fundamental questions in Earth and planetary sciences.
New capabilities enabled by this upgrade will facilitate novel experiments which
will address key aspects of physical and chemical properties of Earth and
planetary materials such as minerals, melts, and iron alloys, thus greatly
advancing our understanding of planetary interior structure and dynamics.

The proposed acquisition will significantly enhance frontier high pressure
research being conducted at Sector 13. The quality of the synchrotron beam at
the upgraded APS-U will be greatly improved, with a more tightly focused,
brighter, and highly coherent beam. Acquisition of this new detector will take
full advantage of the upgrade and will provide a vast and critical improvement
in the quality of XRD. The hybrid-pixel EIGER2 CdTe detector from DECTRIS has
significant technical advantages versus the currently used PILATUS detector with
higher spatial resolution, larger dynamic range, and faster frame rates at high
energies. These technical improvements will provide new abilities to determine
XRD reflection shapes and positions much more precisely by spatially resolving
closely positioned reflections. The detector will allow definitive detection of
weak reflections in long acquisitions and discriminate them from much stronger
spurious reflections, thus enabling numerous previously unrealizable
applications. These improvements are most critical for single-crystal (SC) XRD
and full profile refinement of powder XRD, which can determine the structure and
composition of materials in situ at extreme P-T conditions. It is also critical
for extending the P-T range of high-quality and high-resolution XRD studies to
pressures approaching 1 TPa and temperatures approaching 10 kK, where samples
are exceptionally small. An upgraded XRD facility will enable new investigations
of equilibrium phase diagrams (including melting), phase transition kinetics and
dynamics, the structure and composition of low-Z materials, and the structure of
non-crystalline materials. New investigations will combine XRD measurements with
a variety of laser heating techniques, dynamic compression, and cryogenic
cooling of samples in the DAC. The proposed major technological improvements of
the laser heating system combined with XRD will allow new experimental campaigns
for addressing many fundamental questions through a much-improved capability to
interrogate the structure and physical properties of Earth and planetary
materials (e.g., minerals, melts, and iron alloys), greatly advancing our
understanding of planetary interior structure and dynamics. Existing data are
often contradictory (e.g., melting and thermal/ electrical transport properties)
or too poorly constrained to provide unique answers. This underscores the need
for comprehensive investigations of the properties of planetary material using
in situ measurements on mantle and core analogues in well controlled and
calibrated high P-T conditions, such as those made possible by the new detector
proposed here.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.