* 2320328
* Finite Temperature Simulation of Non-Markovian Quantum Dynamics in Condensed Phase using Quantum Computers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Fei Wang, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 255,788.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Fei Wang of George Mason University will work to
develop efficient quantum algorithms to perform condensed phase quantum dynamics
simulations on quantum computers. Many important physical and chemical processes
occur in the condensed phase, spanning chemical reactions in solutions, charge
transfer at semiconductor interfaces, and solar energy conversion in molecular
aggregates. The scientific investigation of these processes not only promotes
our fundamental understanding but also offers practical solutions to materials
design and environmental sustainability. As many of these processes involve
charge migration and excitation energy transfer, quantum dynamics involving many
degrees of freedom is essential for their description. However, such simulations
are resource intensive on classical computers. On the other hand, quantum
computers are naturally suited for quantum simulations. With algorithm
development, Dr. Wang is aiming to show quantum speedup for quantum dynamics
simulations in condensed phases, and demonstrate practical applications of
quantum computing in the area of quantum simulation. Graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers involved in this project will receive rigorous training
in quantum information science and master state-of-the-art quantum simulation
tools. Through internship programs offered to undergraduate and high school
students, the PI will support underrepresented and economically disadvantaged
groups. These efforts will not only encourage broad participation in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics), but also help to educate a
future quantum workforce for careers in academia and industry.

The focus of this work will be to develop efficient quantum algorithms for
finite-temperature non-Markovian time evolution, which offers a general
framework for condensed phase quantum dynamics. New advances in this project
will cover unitary operator construction, efficient quantum circuit compilation,
model and real system simulations, and performance comparison between different
types of quantum devices. Three mathematical methods will be explored (unitary
dilation, singular value decomposition, and linear combinations of unitary
operators) for non-unitary to unitary conversion, and their effectiveness will
be assessed based on complexity theory. Two general approaches will be
investigated for circuit compilation: one performs the exact mathematical
decomposition, and the other uses the variational quantum circuit method. The
optimal circuit structure will be identified based on gate counts and circuit
depth. The algorithm will be tested on spin-boson models as well as on realistic
systems, and the performance of trapped ions and superconducting devices will be
compared. The success of the algorithm will offer quantum speedup in simulations
of multi-state non-Markovian quantum dynamics at finite temperature. A user-
friendly and open-source platform will be put forward such that, with input
parameters, dynamical simulations on a quantum computer can be carried out and
the results analyzed. This work could potentially inspire future quantum
algorithm design for simulating the dynamics of open quantum systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.