* 2320120
* Effective Strategies to Recruit Underserved Students to Baccalaureate Engineering Success and Transition Programs (Recruit-BEST)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xinyu Zhang, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Baccalaureate Engineering student Success and Transition (BEST) programs are
holistic student success programs at four-year undergraduate universities that
provide evidence-based, well-structured activities to enhance engineering
students' academic and professional success in the college transition and to
increase their retention in the engineering major. These programs often struggle
to attract diverse students, including women, students from underrepresented
minority groups, first-generation students, low-income and rural students. This
project aims to examine this issue by finding the most effective methods for
reaching underserved students and recruiting them to BEST programs. The project
seeks to identify strategies that are successful, impactful, and sustainable.
This will strengthen BEST programs, allowing them to fulfill their goals and
expand further. The project will contribute to our national understanding of
efficient recruitment methods and effective communication channels.
Additionally, it will promote diversity in engineering education and the
workforce. By recruiting more engineering students from diverse backgrounds, we
can address the nation's need for a diverse engineering workforce, which is
critical for the advancement of society. By implementing strategic recruitment
efforts, we can uplift underserved students, their families, and their
communities, and these efforts have the potential to enhance the economic growth
of rural areas. The goal of this project is to build STEM education research
skills in the PI through a project that broadens participation in engineering in
the U.S. via assessing different strategies to recruit underserved students
(women, minorities, first-generation, low-income, and rural students) into BEST
programs at 4-year universities. The study is based on the Diffusion of
Innovations framework and will examine students’ awareness of BEST programs and
decision-making processes about whether or not to apply to these programs
through surveys and interviews. Responses will be analyzed to study the
effectiveness and alignment of different recruitment methods in use by BEST
programs from the perspectives of both program organizers and students. The
project is national in scope and aims to include 100 BEST programs across the
U.S. and more than 2000 students via surveys and interviews with program
leaders, and BEST program participants and prospective participants. Knowledge
generated on effective recruitment strategies from this project will contribute
to the literature base, broadening its impact and helping to tackle the
challenges of low enrollment of underserved students in BEST programs, while
supporting the creation and continuation of student success programs. This
project also trains new STEM education researchers (PI and supported students)
to enhance their capacity to conduct rigorous research in STEM education. The
project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators' capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.