* 2320258
* Equipment: MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a fluorescent confocal microscope at Truman State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stephanie Maiden, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 283,481.00

An award is made to Truman State University to acquire a fluorescent confocal
microscope to enable cutting-edge cell and developmental biology research.
Located in Kirksville, Missouri, Truman is a predominantly undergraduate
institution and the state’s only public liberal arts and sciences university.
Faculty use innovative teaching strategies and high-impact research experiences
to train students in the critical thinking and analytical skills they will need
to be successful in their careers and communities. Fluorescent confocal
microscopy is an essential tool in cell and developmental biology due to its
ability to quickly provide optical sections through thick, sometimes living,
specimens. The research and teaching using this instrument will train hundreds
of students in confocal microscopy, broadly reaching undergraduates majoring in
Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Health and Exercise
Science, and Nursing. Through existing programs at Truman, local K-12 educators
and students will also be given the opportunity to learn about and use
fluorescent confocal microscopy, increasing the awareness of this powerful
instrument. Additional users from a nearby institution will promote further
collaborations and contribute to Truman State University’s positive impact on
northeast Missouri and the liberal arts and sciences throughout the state. The
faculty members conducting this research use five different model organisms to
study fundamental cellular and molecular mechanisms governing animal
development, respiratory function, and plant:bacteria interactions.
Specifically, this project will determine the roles of two genes in the
developing embryos of a roundworm, aid in our understanding of the nerve
connections in fruit flies, allow a detailed analysis of how the brain controls
breathing in rats, determine how bacteria form beneficial relationships with a
clover-like plant, and how pesticides affect the growth of beneficial bacteria
on alfalfa roots. The highly detailed images obtained by the fluorescent
confocal microscope will enable further presentations and research articles by
students and faculty and advance scientific knowledge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.