* 2320553
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 3D Scanning Laser Vibrometer to Enhance Collaborative Research and Teaching
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Javad Baqersad, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 577,750.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
three-dimensional scanning laser Doppler vibrometer. A laser Doppler vibrometer
incorporates a technique that uses coherent light to measure the velocity of
vibrating objects. This instrument will allow high-fidelity measurements of
vibrations for high-temperature, lightweight, and rotating structures. This will
enable a breadth of research projects that have the potential to be
significantly impactful in the areas of providing sustainable energy sources,
using lightweight materials to develop fuel-efficient cars, and improving human
health. It will also enhance research in the areas of non-destructive
inspection, energy, lithium-ion battery monitoring, additive manufacturing, and
material science. The instrument will be integrated into the current Kettering
University curriculum and outreach programs, such as Academically Interested
Minds, that target underrepresented minority and low-income students to build
interest in science, technology, engineering, and math learning. The system will
be used as a shared research, training, teaching and outreach tool to support
interdisciplinary efforts at Kettering University as well as collaborators from
other regional universities at Michigan State University, Oakland University,
University of Michigan-Dearborn, University of Michigan-Flint, and Grand Valley
State University.

The three-dimensional scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (3D SLDV) will be used
for high-frequency and high-spatial-resolution applications. This capability
will be especially critical for research activities in the areas of (1)
biomedical engineering, research on acoustic pressure in ultrasound therapy, and
skin and soft tissue characterization, (2) structural health monitoring and
damage detection, (3) material modeling and microstructure optimization to
develop materials with improved vibration performance, (4) microstructural
characterization of acoustoplastically deformed structures, (5) uncertainty
characterization in additive manufacturing of metamaterials, (6) dynamic
analysis of tires and contact patch mechanics, and (7) monitoring of Lithium-Ion
batteries. Altogether, the 3D SLDV will provide researchers at Kettering
University and collaborators with a robust, non-contact, full-field measurement
system with a wide frequency range that can be readily used for in situ
measurements of complex structures.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.