* 2320130
* Equipment: MRI Track 1: Acquisition of Flow Cytometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Guy, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2026
* USD 208,678.00

An award is made to Northern Kentucky University, a primarily undergraduate
institution, for the acquisition of a Miltenyi Biotec MACSQuant VYB digital
benchtop flow cytometer for their Biology and Chemistry teaching laboratories,
faculty research capabilities, and undergraduate research training. Current
undergraduate students will have access to this innovative and sophisticated
technology to answer research questions in neuroscience, immunology,
microbiology, and biochemistry. This instrumentation will enhance outreach
programs with regional high school students by providing exposure to advanced
research equipment and methodology. The flow cytometer will generate detailed
biological data that students may use for training on data organization and
analysis.

The flow cytometer expands research opportunities for faculty studying
neuroscience, immunology, aquatic microbiology, and the mechanics of gene
expression. All research faculty at Northern Kentucky University work closely
with undergraduate students as research assistants in their laboratories and
undergraduate students receive hands-on experience with all instrumentation. The
instrumentation acquired through this award will allow faculty and students to
answer questions related to brain development, genome quantification in
eukaryotic algae, immune responses to novel vaccine vectors, and the molecular
machinery of protein translation. The flow cytometer allows students to access
and to analyze complex data sets that they will generate through experiential
learning. Data generated using this machine will be disseminated to the public
via presentations and peer-reviewed publications. The expansion of research
infrastructure at Northern Kentucky University is critical to the mission of a
student-centered education and graduates that contribute to the region in
meaningful ways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.