* 2320043
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Advance Research and Education at Multiple Undergraduate-Serving Institutions in Tacoma, Washington
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kelly Kim, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 394,988.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Puget Sound is
acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with
a broadband probe to support the research of Professor Eric Scharrer along with
colleagues Emily Tollefson, Oscar Sosa, Luc Boisvert, and that of Professor
Kelly Kim at the University of Washington - Tacoma (UWT). This NMR spectrometer
facilitates research in a variety of fields, such as materials science,
medicinal chemistry, catalysis, aquatic environmental science, and organic,
inorganic, and organometallic synthesis. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. In addition to enhancing the training of
undergraduate researchers working with these faculty members, the instrument is
used extensively as part of a wide range of teaching and laboratory courses in
both chemistry and biology at Puget Sound, UWT, and Tacoma Community College
(TCC). The instrument is also available to the greater Tacoma scientific
community.

The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels. Research enabled by the instrument is focused on the study,
preparation, and characterization of new liquid crystalline compounds and
organo- and metallo-gelators. It allows the study and structural
characterization of bismuth nanoparticles, and of medicinally and biologically
relevant compounds. It enables the study and development of new catalytic
systems for more sustainable synthesis and helps in understanding the sources
and fates of phosphonates in aquatic environments. In response to global helium
supply challenges, the acquisition of this instrument includes a superconducting
magnet with a low loss cryostat reducing the institutionâ€™s consumption of
helium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.