* 2320057
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of High-Resolution Multichannel Electrical Resistivity Imaging System for Sub-Soil Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Ram Ray, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2028
* USD 141,032.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
High-Resolution Multichannel Electrical Resistivity Imaging System for sub-soil
exploration and advanced soil characterization and parameterization in the field
of engineering, soil science, and agriculture. In the context of sizeable earth
infrastructures and agricultural lands, understanding large-scale sub-soil
characteristics is critical. This instrument will enable the quantitative
hydraulic and physical characterization of soil on a large-scale impacting
several engineering and scientific disciplines and providing a foundational
understanding of sub-soil behavior. It has the potential to bring advanced ideas
to next-generation engineering that will serve the national interest in
maintaining the resiliency of the nation’s infrastructures. It will also enable
advancements the field of agriculture and soil science, providing a means of
developing advanced techniques for greater agricultural yield. The educational
and training components of the project will facilitate hands-on experiments
using the instrument and enable the underrepresented student community to
explore STEM careers.

This acquisition of a High-Resolution Multichannel Electrical Resistivity
Imaging System will provide a comprehensive platform for in-situ quantification
of critical soil parameters. The instrument will be deployed in various earth
infrastructures and agricultural lands to measure soil moisture content, matric
suction, conductivity, soil water storage, and the salinity property of soil.
The instrument will also enable correlating significant soil parameters and
their variability with the geophysical property of soil (electrical resistivity)
under varying climates, as well as large-scale sub-soil mapping of critical soil
parameters. These measurements and correlations will validate the improved
performance, efficiency, and resiliency of infrastructures and agricultural
lands. The unique capabilities of the instrument will facilitate the achievement
of specific goals in the following areas: 1) large-scale sub-surface
investigation to evaluate the climatic change effect on earth infrastructure, 2)
characterization of unsaturated soil, 3) investigating soil moisture dynamics
and large-scale quality control of infrastructures, 4) rapid evaluation of soil
water storage capacity for landfill covers, 5) smart agricultural for crop
productivity, and 6) soil salinity appraisal in agricultural improvements.
Together, this instrument will facilitate multi-disciplinary research
collaborations across engineering, agriculture, and soil science.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.