* 2320751
* MRI: Track 1 Development of a Dual-Comb Fluorescence-Detected Photothermal Mid-Infrared (DC-FPTIR) Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Schmitt, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 737,423.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation, and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI)
programs. Purdue University is developing a novel fluorescence-detected
photothermal microscope using a dual-comb laser source to support the research
of Professor Garth Simpson along with colleagues Yoon Yeo, Lynn Tayler, Arezoo
Ardekani, and Paul Schmitt. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of
nanoparticle and advanced materials analysis, fundamental studies of biological
systems, and measurement of molecular composition in plants and animals. The
instrument enables high-resolution optical microscopy with contrast arising from
specific molecular bonds. In general, dual-comb spectroscopy uses high frequency
optical signals to produce radio-frequency beat patterns that can be detected by
high-speed digitization. These beat patterns modulate the local temperature and
the corresponding fluorescence intensity. Infrared spectroscopy is then
performed with a spatial resolution set by fluorescence microscopy and IR-
fluorescence colocalization dependent on the local thermal conductivity. In
addition to supporting fundamental science directly, this award targets the
enhancement of educational, research, and research training at all levels in
multiple departments. This developed instrument is also used to benefit
activities within the NSF-supported Center for Bioanalytic Metrology, an NSF
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, and major outreach and
educational activities of the newly established Young Institute for Advanced
Manufacturing of Pharmaceuticals.

This award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels.
Specifically, the development of this instrument offers the unique ability to
perform the spectroscopy characterization of therapeutic nanoparticle
transformations. The instrumentation enables chemical mapping within phase
separated domains affecting dissolution in therapeutic materials. By using the
dual-comb laser source, this instrument also aids in the structural elucidation
and compositional changes during virus maturation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.