* 2320053
* From lab to math classroom: Utilizing eye gaze and cognitive control tasks to examine the effects of perceptual cues and structure on mathematical performance
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Erin Ottmar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,997.00

Using perceptual cues in mathematical problem solving has been shown to improve
students' performance. Attention and executive function skills are two potential
mechanisms that explain how and for whom perceptual supports have the greatest
impact. However, measuring executive function, attention, and cognitive control
with students in educational settings is challenging. Using more scalable and
affordable web-based tools such as open-source executive function and eye gaze
measures provides a means to understand individual differences in cognitive
processing related to math. This project aims to build capacity and expertise in
the principal investigator's research on perceptual learning in mathematics by
examining how open source tools such as eye gaze/trackers and executive
function/cognitive control measures can be embedded into online technology
platforms to conduct ecologically valid classroom-based research.

To move research from the lab to classrooms with broader populations and to test
mechanisms, two studies will be conducted. The first study will establish the
usability and feasibility of using open-source eye tracking (Webgazer) and
executive function measures (ACE-X) online with college students. The second
study will test these relations in classroom contexts with middle school
students. By using translational research to investigate key potential
moderators and mediators, this work can contribute to research on how attention
and executive function impact student use of perceptual scaffolds during
mathematics problem solving. The outcomes of this project will also guide
methods to conduct translational research in education and may also inform the
future design of educational interventions or technology supports.

This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. This project is
also supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators'
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research in the core areas of
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.