* 2320899
* Laying the Scientific and Engineering Foundation for Sustainable Cultivated Meat Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 733,898.00

Cultivated meat could be a cornerstone of a sustainable food system. It involves
growing animal protein, fat, and connective tissue from animal cells. The goal
is to establish the scientific and engineering foundation for the cultivated
meat industry. There are critical bottlenecks and knowledge gaps that this
project will address. One is directing stem cells to reliably differentiate into
specific cell types (e.g., muscle, fat, cartilage). Another is developing a
growth medium for these cells that does not contain animal products. A third is
to develop material and processes to allow for the creation of a 3-dimensional
tissue scaffold for the cells to grow in. A final one is the development of a
technical and economic analysis of a representative cultured meat process. This
project will train graduate students, post-docs, and undergraduates. It will
also develop and deliver an annual extension/continuing education course on
cultivated meat science and technology.

In order to establish this scientific and engineering foundation, the project is
focused on four specific aims: 1) develop an efficient strategy for stem cell
amplification and differentiation to muscle and fat that maintains cell line
stability and supports scalability, 2) establish a process for growing and
differentiating cell lines in inexpensive, plant-based, serum-free medium up to
pilot scale, 3) create biomaterials and processes that allow creation of three-
dimensional tissue structure, and 4) complete a techno-economic analysis (TEA)
and life cycle analysis (LCA) for cultivated meat production. It is anticipated
that these advancements will contribute broadly to stem cell engineering for
regenerative medicine, biomaterials and tissue engineering for organ
replacement, large-scale mammalian cell culture for biotherapeutics production,
plant cell culture processes for food and biopharmaceutical production, and
techno-economic and life cycle analyses of fermentation-based bioprocesses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.