* 2320886
* Conference: Broadening Participation in an Astrosociology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Gerhard Sonnert, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,993.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by organizing a conference on
broadening participation in an astrosociology curriculum and by producing a
White Book of the findings, as part of the NSF IUSE: EDU Engaged Student
Learning Track, Level 1. At the dawn of a second Golden Age of space exploration
in which humanity is poised to interact with the cosmos in varied and novel ways
(e.g., Moon and Mars missions, space tourism, asteroid mining, satellites with
enhanced capabilities), space exploration is a fast-growing scientific,
technological, and economic sector in U.S. society, creating the need for a
rapidly expanding skilled and knowledgeable workforce of a variety of
backgrounds. The technical and astronomical challenges of these endeavors will
be daunting, but so will the host of social and moral issues raised by them.
Awareness of these issues is crucial for both future professionals in astronomy
and space exploration and the citizenry as a whole. On the one hand, young
people from diverse underserved backgrounds will benefit from developing a
critical understanding of space-related issues that might affect them and their
communities. On the other, the curriculum is intended to facilitate their entry
into this sector of the workforce, which could enable it to become more diverse
and inclusive. Moreover, the curriculum focuses on helping students of all
majors understand the complex interrelationship between society and astronomy
and space exploration, while honing their general skills in thinking rationally
through unusual scenarios. The benefits of this practice will extend beyond the
course and are intended to positively impact students’ lives. There is a dearth
of astronomy courses that systematically integrate the humanities and social
sciences, and this conference lays the groundwork for propagating such a
curriculum throughout higher education.

Recruited with the help of the Quality Education for Minorities Network,
participants in this online conference will be educational professionals from
all corners of the American higher education landscape. The conference will
cover three major topics: (1) an introduction to astrosociology and the
astrosociology curriculum; (2) how to infuse the curriculum with diversity,
equity, inclusion, and accessibility for diverse communities; and (3) the
support faculty would need or want to successfully adopt the curriculum. This
endeavor has the advantage of building on an existing unique course at Harvard
University, which has already demonstrated its feasibility. But to implement the
curriculum more widely across American institutions of higher education, a
necessary first step is to examine, through this conference, how the curriculum
may optimally function in a wide variety of institutional environments when
designed with diverse students’ experiences at the core, and how it might be
further revised to increase its relevance to multiple communities, especially
those traditionally underrepresented in science pursuits. In the long run, the
goal is a national scale-up of the curriculum in all different institutional
types of higher education. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.