* 2320491
* Collaborative Research: Cognitive Workload Classification in Dynamic Real-World Environments:  A MagnetoCardioGraphy Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jingzhen Yang, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2026
* USD 99,900.00

Cognitive workload refers to the level of mental effort put forth by an
individual in response to a cognitive task. Unfortunately, no technology
currently exists that can monitor an individual’s levels of cognitive workload
in real-world environments using a seamless, reliable, and low-cost approach. We
propose to fill this gap by using a novel magnetocardiography (MCG) system worn
upon the subject’s chest to allow the sensor to collect the magnetic fields that
are naturally emanated by the heart and associated with brain activity. This
science is anticipated to greatly accelerate progress in such diverse
disciplines as pediatric concussion recovery, pilot training, improved user-
machine interfaces, injury prevention in construction environments, increased
human performance in risky missions, and improved education outcomes. In
addition to advances in basic science, the proposed research is expected to be
of significant interest to students and the public. Through targeting
interdisciplinary education and diverse recruitment, we intend to expose new
audiences to STEM concepts via workshops and family-friendly outings.

The proposed MCG sensor is smartly integrated in a Cyber-Physical System (CPS)
with two inter-connected loops: (a) a human-in-the-loop that addresses changes
in the thresholds of different cognitive states as a function of time, and (b) a
non-human-in-the-loop that adapts the system’s algorithmic and hardware
components for high-accuracy classification of cognitive workload with minimum
resource usage. Our goals are to: (1) Build a knowledgebase concerning the
impact of hardware/algorithmic advances upon MCG sensor performance in real-
world settings. (2) Explore the classification of cognitive workload from MCG
data and close the loop with the wearer for dynamic calibrations that address
the time-varying thresholds of cognitive states. (3) Ensure operability in
dynamic real-world settings and close the loop between the cyber and physical
sides for minimal resource usage. (4) Validate the CPS within the framework of
measuring cognitive workload for children with concussion. Without loss of
generality, we select this population given the immense clinical potential: the
effects of cognitive activity on pediatric concussion recovery are currently
unknown, largely due to the difficulties in quantifying cognitive activity
workload.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.