* 2320586
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer to Expand and Secure Solution NMR Spectroscopy at UConn with Facility Helium Stewardship
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Peczuh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 798,945.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. University of
Connecticut is acquiring a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a broadband
three-channel probe to support the research of Professor Christian Brueckner and
colleague Mark Peczuh. In response to the solicitation for proposals to
contribute to the recovery, recycle, and/or reuse of helium initiated by the
CHIPS and Science Act of 2022, this award also includes a helium recovery
system. This award facilitates research in the areas of nanoscale materials
characterization, organic and inorganic chemistry, and biological sciences. In
general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. Using the intrinsic
magnetic properties of atomic nuclei, it is used to identify unknown substances,
to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study
the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid
state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who
are carrying out frontier research. The superconducting magnets of these
instruments rely on regular deliveries of liquid helium to maintain their
operation. However, the instability in the helium supply due to global and
national challenges jeopardizes research programs relying on NMR spectroscopy.
The helium recovery system collects the helium boiloff from the superconducting
magnets and then reliquefies the helium for reuse. This award targets the
enhancement of educational, research, and research training at all levels in
multiple departments including several early career faculty and undergraduate
and graduate students and in the surrounding community. This instrument is also
used to propel the NMR-themed outreach program for local high school teachers
and students.

This award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as chemistry, pharmacy, molecular and cellular biology,
and engineering. Specifically, the instrument enables research focusing on the
synthesis of small molecules exhibiting circularly polarized luminescence and
the computational and experimental design of associating bottle brush
mesostructures. Additional research projects to be enabled by the 400 MHz NMR
spectrometer include the design and synthesize of new functional biomaterials,
including modified natural polymers, such as Bombyx mori silk protein. Other
research activities include the synthesis and photochemical characterization of
azobenzene photoswitches; the systematic design, analysis and control of
manufacturable nano-machines; and the examination of surface ligands and surface
chemistry of metal nanoparticles. Other investigations include understanding how
various cellular signaling pathways contribute to tumor onset and progression,
and analyzing the design and synthesize of nucleic acid nanomaterials for a
variety of medical applications. In response to global helium supply challenges
the helium recovery system aids in helium conservation by recovering, recycling,
and reliquefying the helium boil-off from this instrument and the existing NMR
superconducting magnets at the institution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.