* 2321681
* PFI (MCA): Smart Monitoring and Fault Identification for Resilient and Reliable Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Taehyung Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation (Mid
Career Advancement) (PFI (MCA)) project is to provide a cost-effective and
intelligent solution to accurately detect and recover from engineering faults
and failures in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). It will fill a technology gap
in the UAV industry by developing modules for fault identification and failure
correction that will offer economic value for potential commercialization. The
next-generation UAVs will benefit from this work with intelligent fault
detection and correction techniques for electric propulsion systems. Such UAVs
will be able to successfully execute their missions even with faults. Without
proper fault identification and correction capabilities, a sudden drop in the
functions of battery, power components, and propulsion motor not only decreases
the systemâ€™s performance but also leads to critical system failure, which may
cause a crash. The project will substantially improve the reliability of UAVs
while minimizing additional hardware costs. The project concepts and
technologies will open new avenues for fault-resilient electric propulsion
system for UAVs and other electrified transportation systems.

The proposed project aims to investigate accurate fault detection methods and
collaborative fault mitigation techniques, which are typically not easy to
achieve for applications with highly dynamic loads and challenging operating
conditions. The outcomes of the proposed research will significantly advance
knowledge in the field of fault identification/compensation and provide a
foundation for next-generation fault-resilient and reliable UAVs, which can have
a significant societal impact with the potential for commercialization. The
research outcomes will enable more timely and wider usage of UAVs, especially in
response to natural disasters, pandemics, and war. The proposed project will
offer hands-on research experiences to students in multidisciplinary engineering
areas. The research activities will be integrated with education through the
incorporation of the project outcomes into engineering courses. The development
of an experimental platform and entrepreneurial team training will foster the
next generation of researchers, engineers, and entrepreneurs. The outcomes of
the project will be disseminated through journal publications, conference
presentations, and various outreach programs, focusing especially on
underprivileged student groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.