* 2321063
* Conference: Toward Explainable, Reliable, and Sustainable Machine Learning for Signal and Data Science
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,853.00

The fast-growing areas of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning
(ML), especially in the area of deep models, are bringing new ways and tools of
solving problems beyond the traditional paradigms. They offer new perspectives
and also prompt challenges and open questions in the areas of signal processing
and data science. This workshop aims at bringing together experts from academia,
industry, government agencies, and professional societies to discuss research
challenges, opportunities, and potential pathways forward and collaborative
efforts needed toward explainable, reliable, and sustainable machine learning
for signal and data science.

The workshop will be held in College Park, MD, on March 20-21, 2023, to foster
convergence research in AI/ML. The workshop will initiate a dialogue and foster
open and constructive exchanges of a group of leading experts with complementary
expertise and perspectives. It is envisioned that this two-day workshop will
feature keynote presentations, panel discussions, as well as break-out and
summary sessions; participants from a wide range of background will be engaged,
such as signal sensing and processing, data science, machine learning, computer
vision, speech and natural language, control theory and system, information
theory, and more. Discussions and collaborations facilitated by the workshop
will help shape the paradigm of research and graduate education in the new era
of AI, and pave a pathway forward to the research advancement and talent
training in machine learning that can benefit society in sound, reliable, and
sustainable ways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.