* 2321398
* MCA: Understanding cellulose synthase complex in planta using single molecule methods
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shi-You Ding, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 373,450.00

Cellulose is predominantly produced by plants as the main load-bearing component
of the plant cell wall to provide strength and play critical roles in plant cell
growth and development. As “the most abundant biopolymer on earth,” cellulose
also provides a great potential resource for biofuels and renewable biomaterials
towards a carbon-negative economy. Despite its importance, the detailed
molecular mechanism underlying cellulose biosynthesis in plants remains largely
elusive. This project addresses this knowledge gap by applying advanced
microscopic imaging methods to capture the dynamic activity of cellulose
synthase in living plants, achieved through a synergistic collaboration between
a plant biologist and an optical physicist. The research team will exploit and
develop new microscopy techniques to allow real-time visualization of cell wall
biosynthesis in growing plants, specifically the enzymes that are responsible
for cellulose synthesis at the subcellular and the molecular levels. The results
will provide new insights into cellulose biosynthesis and critical information
required for further rational design and production of bio-based materials. The
project also aims to foster collaboration and multidisciplinary team training of
young researchers and students in the current education and outreach programs at
Michigan State University and South Dakota School of Mines and Technology to
explore their interests in plant science and discover their passion in science
and engineering.

The biosynthesis of cellulose has been described as a spatially and temporally
controlled process carried out in the plasma membrane (PM) by a cellulose
synthase complex (CSC) containing multiple cellulose synthases (CESAs). In the
Arabidopsis genome, ten putative cesa genes are identified and biochemical and
genetic studies have revealed that at least three different CESA isoforms at a
1:1:1 ratio are required for cellulose synthesis in planta. However, the
architecture of CSC and its dynamic function in synthesizing cellulose has been
largely elusive. This project aims to exploit and develop microscopy approaches
to correlatively image the assembly and dynamics of CSCs in planta and cellulose
microfibril structure in situ. The putative CESA domains that may play critical
roles in CSC assembly and trafficking during cellulose biosynthesis have been
engineered to express fluorescence protein tags in corresponding cesa knockout
backgrounds for in planta imaging using super resolution microscopy.
Specifically, the lattice light-sheet (LLSM) and oblique selective plane
illumination microscopy systems with enhanced photon efficiency are used for
3D/4D single molecule tracking to improve localization accuracy and deep tissue
imaging, and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and time correlated
single photon counting methods are used to measure CESA-CESA interactions.
Furthermore, the 3D/4D trajectory data are analyzed to correlate with other
preliminary imaging results, such as ultrastructure of cellulose microfibrils
imaged by AFM and physicochemical properties of cell walls imaged by stimulated
Raman scattering microscopy. The findings from this project will allow us to
test our working hypotheses and formulate future research directions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.