* 2321203
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Structure, Dynamics, and Reaction Mechanism of Supported Single Atom for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jier Huang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 269,321.00

In this collaborative project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jier Huang of the
Department of Chemistry at Marquette University and Professor Jing Gu of the
Department of Chemistry at San Diego State University aim to construct and
investigate new generation single atom catalysts for visible light driven carbon
dioxide (CO2) reduction to form chemical fuels with high efficiency,
selectivity, and stability. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction by harnessing solar
energy represents one of the most attractive strategies that may simultaneously
address the global warming issue and fulfill the future energy demand. The
research is supplemented by diverse educational and outreach activities,
including encouraging graduate and undergraduate students, especially
underrepresented minority groups, into careers in STEM research, and providing
opportunities for students/teachers ranging from elementary to high schools to
advance their general understanding of catalysis and renewable energy
technologies.

Supported single atoms (SAs) have emerged as a novel class of catalysts,
offering new promise for light-driven CO2 reduction. The focus of prior research
is largely on documenting the efficiency, stability, and the selectivity of the
catalysts, not the fundamental mechanistic studies that underlines the
correlation of SA structure and their photocatalytic performance. To address
such gaps in knowledge, Professor Gu and Professor Huang target the following
objectives by leveraging their complementary expertise in materials design and
synthesis with time resolved spectroscopy: 1) systematically tuning the
geometric and electronic structures of supported SAs via altering the intrinsic
nature of SAs, the metal-support interaction, and the comparison with
nanoparticles with various sizes; 2) examining the charge separation and
structural dynamics, and resolving the intermediate structures at catalytic
active sites with high temporal and spatial resolution using time resolved
optical and X-ray absorption spectroscopy; and 3) evaluating the direct
correlation of the structures of the supported SA catalysts with their
photophysical properties and catalytic function to establish structure-property-
function relationships for CO2 reduction. Results obtained from these efforts
will be of significant value in developing more effective supported SAs for
photocatalytic CO2 reduction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.