* 2321908
* SBIR Phase I:  Enrichment of Cancer DNA for Improved Cancer Diagnostics from Blood
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Matthew Nelson, NEXGEN CANCER DETECTION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the diagnosis of residual cancer
cells, after treatment of cancer patients. The test will be conducted early and
accurately using a simple blood draw. Twenty percent of cancer patients will
experience cancer recurrence. Unfortunately, cancer recurrence is not diagnosed
until years after initial treatment when the cancer has often metastasized,
resulting in poor patient outcomes. As a result, 7% of cancer patients suffer
from debilitating fear of cancer recurrence. Early and accurate diagnosing of
residual cancer cells will improve the outcome for the 20% of cancer patients
who experience recurrence. Additionally, it will help the 7% of cancer patients
who suffer from debilitating fear of cancer recurrence. Overall, the costs of
treating cancer will be lowered by diagnosing cancer earlier. This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a highly
accurate diagnostic test for residual cancer from a blood draw. DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) from cancer cells circulates through the blood stream.
This cancer can be detected because of mutations in the DNA of cancer cells.
However, cancer DNA is rare compared to normal DNA, which makes diagnosing
cancer from a blood draw difficult. Proof-of-concept data has shown that
accuracy can be greatly improved through the enrichment of cancer DNA from a
sample. After the sample is collected, the DNA goes through rounds of
duplication, except a blocker is added to prevent normal DNA from duplicating.
Through this process the cancer DNA becomes a larger percentage of the overall
DNA in the sample and can be more accurately detected. This project will develop
a collection of tests for accurately diagnosing residual colorectal cancer. The
key tasks of this project are: 1) demonstrate the clinical robustness of the
optimized test method, 2) develop additional tests to cover most colorectal
cancers, and 3) demonstrate the sensitivity and specificity of the test methods.
This project will lead to earlier and more accurately diagnosed cancer
recurrence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.