* 2321163
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Selectivity by Catalyst Architecture Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yomaira Pagan-Torres, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 370,000.00

Significant progress has been made in recent years in chemically deconstructing
biomass to produce smaller molecules that can be used as building blocks for a
broad range of chemicals and fuels. Such a strategy is now being investigated
for the deconstruction of waste plastic polymers to provide building block
molecules either for re-synthesis of plastics or for synthesis of other
chemicals. In both cases, catalysis plays an important role in directing
chemical attack towards specific chemical bonds. The project continues catalysis
research by the investigators relevant to both biomass and waste plastic
deconstruction and re-synthesis toward a range of products. In particular, the
investigators will build on their experience in biomass catalysis to explore
fundamental aspects of waste plastics processing. The resulting understanding
will provide critical insights toward identification of cost-effective and
environmentally benign chemical pathways for processing of waste polymer plastic
feedstocks. Beyond the technical aspects, the project will embrace educational
and outreach activities at both institutions focused on underrepresented
minority students.

Designing catalysts that are selective for the activation of specific chemical
bonds in multifunctional organic molecules is a long-standing goal for the
sustainable and cost-effective production of chemicals and fuels to meet
societal demands with minimal environmental impact. Selective cleavage of
carbon-oxygen (C-O) bonds, especially, has become significantly important in
recent years due to its relevance in chemical processing of multifunctional
organic molecules from biomass and plastic polymers. Hydrogenolysis is an
approach widely implemented for the activation of C-X (X = C, H, O) bonds in
organic molecules, as aided by hydrogen. However, most hydrogenolysis catalysts
are challenged by the ability to selectively catalyze hydrogen-assisted C-O bond
cleavage over other C-X (X = C, H) bonds within multifunctional organic
molecules. The central objective of this project is to develop an understanding
of how tuning the overall architecture of heterogeneous catalysts can affect the
selective cleavage of C-O bonds in multifunctional organic molecules through
hydrogenolysis. The project will combine synthesis, microscopic/spectroscopic
characterization, and kinetic studies to gain fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms that govern hydrogenolysis of model organic substrate molecules on
dual-site catalysts. The research will lead to an understanding of the selective
cleavage of C-O bonds over dual-site catalysts, which will be critical in
identifying catalytic site and architecture requirements to enhance product
selectivity in multifunctional organic molecules. This understanding will
provide critical insights toward identification of cost-effective and
environmentally benign chemical pathways for processing both biomass and waste
polymer plastic feedstocks. The proposed research will have broader impacts
related to the advancement of catalytic science and engineering
training/education of underrepresented minorities. Outreach activities will
focus on providing mentorship, active learning, and research opportunities to
underrepresented minorities from the University of Puerto Rico â€“ Mayaguez and
the University of Michigan to foment pathways and engage students towards
pursuing graduate studies in science and engineering. As part of the outreach
activities an "Energy, Environment, and Engineering" day camp will be developed
to introduce middle- and high-school students, from the west coast area of
Puerto Rico and the Metro area of Detroit, to the importance of catalysis in
minimizing carbon emissions and promoting circularity in the manufacture of
fuels and chemicals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.