* 2321492
* Collaborative Research: CISE: Large: Cross-Layer Resilience to Silent Data Corruption
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Yanjing Li, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2028
* USD 148,462.00

Hyperscalers (i.e., large cloud service providers) are reporting frequent silent
data corruptions (or SDCs) within their datacenter infrastructures. SDCs are
software errors for which the only symptom is an incorrect result. Remarkably,
SDCs at-scale exhibit error occurrence rates on the order of one thousand faults
per one million devices. Meanwhile, hardware manufacturers strive to achieve one
hundred and close to zero defective parts per million for the commercial and
automotive domains, respectively. This discrepancy between manufacturers’ goals
and hyperscalers’ observations suggests that SDCs are a real threat to the
reliability of all modern computing systems, and by extension their security and
sustainability. This project explores whether it is possible to cooperatively
design testing, detection, and mitigation approaches for SDCs that minimize
performance impact on software applications, as well as additional carbon
footprint expenditures associated with manufacturing and running computing
systems. The project’s key novelties include: (1) leveraging reoccurring
computational primitives in software (e.g., matrix multiplication in popular
machine learning applications) and modern special-purpose hardware (e.g.,
Artificial Intelligence processors) to design domain-specific SDC solutions; (2)
exploiting the fact that SDC testing can be performed throughout a device’s
lifetime in the datacenter rather than for a few seconds to minutes — a strict
limitation on the manufacturing test floor; (3) considering sustainability and
carbon footprint as a core design metric. This project’s core impact will be a
critical improvement in reliability and security for the countless applications
to which we entrust computing systems today. A secondary core impact is an
improvement in the longevity of computing devices, which has significant
positive implications for sustainable computing. The research team will also
train students and work with industry partners. To address the SDC challenge,
the research team pursues four synergistic research thrusts that cut across
diverse domains: Silicon Devices, Computer Architecture, Software, and
Algorithms. Within each thrust, the team will study the SDC challenge through
the lenses of: Testing, Detection, Mitigation, and Security implications. Thrust
1 explores device-level testing through novel test pattern metrics and
continuous scan test deployment. Thrust 2 studies system-level testing
(improving error detection latency and test coverage and adapting tests to be
more representative of datacenter workloads), core-specific testing, defect
characterization, hardware support for testing and mitigation, and system
security implications. Thrust 3 investigates software detection and mitigation
through (partial) redundancy, appropriate scan and system-level test scheduling,
test-application fusion (where applications test themselves), and software
security hardening against defect-induced vulnerabilities. Thrust 4 pursues
algorithmic detection and mitigations with a particular emphasis on enabling
robust non-linear computation for important datacenter workloads, like neural
networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.