* 2321618
* Impact of Radical Polymer Architecture on Spin Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Bryan Boudouris, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2027
* USD 540,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

Advances in computing have revolutionized the way the world operates,
communicates, and does business; however, due to outstanding technological
breakthroughs and visionary implementation, the current microelectronics
paradigm is reaching its upper limit of computing performance. As such, new
operational paradigms, which will rely on the development of novel materials,
must be discovered, developed, and matured such that these critical technologies
continue to evolve. One promising thrust in pushing this idea towards reality is
that of spin-based quantum computing. In this context, spin refers to an
inherent property of electrons that is distinct from the inherent charge that is
often used to conduct electrons (i.e., an electric current), and it is a
property that can be manipulated such that there is transport of spin (i.e., a
spin current). This project, with support from the Polymers program in NSF’s
Division of Materials Research, develops new polymer materials that are
anticipated to have advanced spin transport properties. In addition to providing
systems with performance that is potentially better than the current state of
the art, using polymers as the spin-transport material opens the opportunity of
creating low-cost solutions to this technology opportunity. Therefore,
successful execution of the project could lead to next-generation quantum
computing materials that are readily integrated into device infrastructures.
Furthermore, the educational and outreach components of the project provide
unique experiences to a diverse group of scientists and engineers with an aim of
broadening participation in science and engineering. In addition to providing
summer research opportunities to high school students from economically-diverse
backgrounds and undergraduate students, graduate student researchers on this
project participate in a domestic trainee exchange program to advance their
technical skills. Additionally, a new massive open online course (MOOC) based on
the specific class of polymers utilized in this program is offered such that the
results are communicated to a broad audience in a rapid and digestible manner.
In these ways, the project pushes the bounds of fundamental science such that it
offers clear translation to new technologies and new educational programs that
advance national prosperity and national defense.

Technical Summary

The polymer science community has contributed to advancing organic electronic
materials for multiple end-use applications. As such, much effort has been
placed in elucidating the fundamental underpinnings associated with the
chemistry and physics of these macromolecules; however, the ability to apply
these same polymer science tools to manipulate spin transport in macromolecular
materials is not at the same level. Moreover, most of the work in the community
has focused on conjugated polymers given the history of the field and the good
deal of success these materials have had in advancing key device technologies.
On the other hand, radical polymers (i.e., nonconjugated macromolecules with
stable open-shell sites present at their pendant groups) are a new class of
spin-transporting organic materials and differ in two key ways relative to most
spin transport materials. First, the carbon-based nature of these polymer
conductors causes them to possess weak spin-orbit couplings, higher spin
relaxation times, and long spin diffusion lengths (i.e., > 50 nm) relative to
many of their inorganic counterparts, and these materials characteristics are
essential for enhanced spin transport. Additionally, radical polymers offer a
different spin transport environment compared to most of their conjugated
polymer counterparts. That is, the inherent nature of their stable open-shell
pendant sites ensures that spin transport occurs through a paramagnetic medium,
which could enhance the spin diffusion length. To these points, this project,
supported by the Polymers program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
establishes the underlying structure-property-performance relationships
associated with the macromolecular architecture, nanostructural environment,
magnetic environment, and spin transport properties of radical polymers.
Furthermore, this project advances the local American Chemical Society (ACS)
Project SEED Program, which provides summer research opportunities to high
school students from economically-disadvantaged backgrounds. Moreover, it
provides for a means by which to have a student exchange with a leading polymer
synthesis group in the United States such that cross-training of chemical
engineering graduate students occurs. Finally, the project includes the
development of a MOOC describing radical polymer fundamentals, because a course
like this does not exist currently. Therefore, the project has the potential to
make inroads in terms of fundamental scientific and broader impact while also
supporting educational and outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.