* 2321191
* An Explanatory Machine Learning Framework for Teacher Effectiveness in STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Benjamin Kelcey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2026
* USD 349,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing explanatory
machine learning methods for the study of teaching effectiveness in STEM
education. There is consistent evidence that teachers vary widely in their
effectiveness but conventional analytic methods have largely failed to explain
why and under what contexts teaching and teachers vary. Explanatory machine
learning methods hold significant potential in developing fundamental knowledge
and theories of equitable and effective STEM teaching because they can track
complex features, processes and patterns inherent in and implied by theories of
teaching in ways where conventional methods fall short. In this project, we
examine the extent to which we can leverage machine learning methods to identify
and explain profiles, pathways and practices (e.g., who teachers are, what
teachers know, what teachers believe, perceive and experience, what teachers do)
that produce student learning and how these profiles and practices vary across
STEM education contexts. The outcomes of this project have the potential to
accelerate research on the theory and practice of effective teaching, teacher
preparation, teacher development and student learning. This is a three-year
BCSER: Individual Investigator Development project in STEM Education Research
within Research on STEM Learning and Learning Environments.

The fields of STEM education and teacher development have made substantial
progress in developing sophisticated theories of teaching and learning and
instruments and measures that support and operationalize research on those
theories (e.g., teacher knowledge, culturally responsive teacher self-efficacy,
classroom observations). Recent literature has, however, noted that there is a
mismatch between the complexity found in our theories of effective teachers and
teaching and the prevailing methods we use to analyze those theories. For
example, theories suggest that teaching is a highly interactive, adaptive,
nonlinear and context-dependent practice; yet the field has almost exclusively
drawn on simple linear regression models that cannot readily detect and analyze
these complex patterns. There is a growing recognition of the need to craft,
develop and grow methodologies specific to the purposes of STEM teaching and
learning research. This project aims to fill this gap by developing and adapting
explanatory machine learning methods (e.g., neural networks) to analyze studies
of teaching effectiveness and examining the extent to which these methods can
predict, explain and contextualize effective teaching in ways that outperform
conventional methods. The results have the potential to broadly build capacity
and impact the field by identifying complex features and profiles of effective
teaching within and across contexts and developing scalable machine learning
methods that are broadly applicable to STEM education studies. This project is
supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation,
Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. This project is also
supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators'
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research in the core areas of
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.