* 2321745
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO Building synthetic regulatory units to understand the complexity of mammalian gene expression
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jef Boeke, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,220,400.00

The synthetic cells of the future will be produced for a multitude of end uses,
including agriculture, biotechnology and production of biomaterials. These
synthetic cells would perform best if researchers could turn specific genes on
and off at will, and precisely tune the level at which these genes are
expressed. Central to this goal is a deep understanding of how regulatory
elements in the DNA control the timing and level that genes are expressed. The
long-term goals of this project are to better define the functions of different
DNA regulatory elements, to determine how these elements work together to
control genes, and to use this knowledge to engineer mammalian cells that
precisely and controllably express a desired set of genes. This project will be
complemented by an innovative program, the yeast art program, that will be
developed as a major outreach tool to help the public better understand the
goals and potential of gene engineering.

Recent work has greatly increased our understanding of enhancers - one of three
fundamental genomic elements that orchestrate gene regulation. With promoters
and insulators, they form detectable and dynamic 3-D structures that drive
precise spatiotemporal programs of gene expression. The alpha-globin locus
offers a well-established and tractable model of a mammalian regulatory domain,
whereas other loci are not as easily defined and manipulated. Powered by recent
advances in de novo DNA design and synthesis approaches, together with the new
genomic engineering and analysis strategies, multiple versions of the entire
mouse alpha-globin regulatory domain have been generated and used to identify
novel genomic elements called ‘facilitators’. These enhancer-like elements have
no inherent activation potential but play crucial roles in modulating the
activity of canonical enhancers. Enlightened by this experience, this project
aims to address key questions in the gene expression field by initially creating
and analyzing 11 new hypothesis-driven mouse genetic models based on the natural
endogenous alpha-globin regulatory landscape. Further alleles will be designed
depending on the results obtained from these initial constructs. Understanding
the rules underlying the communication and relay of information between the main
classes of cis-regulatory elements will transform our understanding of the code
for life, with the ultimate goal of synthesizing minimal fully-functional
mammalian alleles and genomes.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council (BBSRC), where NSF funds the US investigator and BBSRC funds the
partners in the UK.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.