* 2321129
* Broadening the Use of Learning Analytics in STEM Education Research
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Elizabeth Cloude, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,918.00

Learning Analytics (LA) has emerged over the past 15 years as an
interdisciplinary practice that applies computational methods from data science
and artificial intelligence (AI) to better understand and improve student
learning. However, professional development and training opportunities --
particularly for scholars from underrepresented groups -- have not kept pace
with the growing demand for STEM education researchers prepared to use these
methods. To address this issue, the Institute on Broadening the Use of Learning
Analytics in STEM Education Research will provide participating scholars with
ongoing training and support in using cutting-edge techniques for their STEM
education research. The project team will also develop easy-to-use and adaptable
curriculum materials that participants can use to provide training for faculty
and students at their home institutions. All curriculum materials will be
published on a freely-available website so that education researchers and
practitioners everywhere can benefit, not just those directly involved in the
program.

The first year of the Institute will focus on creating a modular and adaptable
curriculum composed of 25-30 instructional modules that can be assembled into
learning opportunities ranging from short duration workshops or webinars to
multiple distinct semester-long courses. Years 2 and 3 will focus on training
two cohorts of STEM education researchers (50 participants in total) to learn
from, and teach with, curriculum materials developed during Year 1. Each cohort
will attend a 5-day, in-person summer training institute and participate in
online workshops during the academic year focused on self-selected methods and
topics (e.g., large language models, supervised machine learning, network
analysis) relevant to participants’ research interests. In addition, the project
team will provide participants with ongoing training and support to pilot
instructional materials with faculty or students at their home institutions
throughout the year.

This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. This project is
also supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators'
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research in the core areas of
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.