* 2321595
* Mercury's Nightside Magnetosphere Response to Southward IMF and ICMEs: MESSENGER Investigation and Comparisons With Earth’s Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* James Slavin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,821.00

The coupling between the solar wind and magnetosphere causes strong and distinct
magnetospheric and geomagnetic activities, known as space weather on Earth.
Mercury’s magnetosphere is structurally similar to Earth’s but differs in
several important ways. Mercury does not have an ionosphere, but only a tenuous
exosphere, and its magnetosphere faces stronger interplanetary magnetic fields
(IMF) and lower Alfvénic Mach numbers than Earth due to its proximity to the
Sun. These factors affect the coupling between the solar wind and the
magnetosphere and the closure of field-aligned currents at low altitudes.
However, few studies have explored the nature of the coupling at Mercury. This
proposal will conduct a comprehensive comparison of the solar wind-magnetosphere
coupling at Mercury and Earth. The results will be highly impactful and
contribute broadly to our understanding of solar wind-magnetosphere coupling
processes, especially the roles of the IMF and field-aligned current closure in
magnetospheric dynamics and space weather at these two terrestrial-style
magnetospheres. This project will support a Ph.D. student, an early career
scientist, a female scientist, and international collaborations between the US
and UK.

The proposed project aims to comprehensively investigate the magnetospheric
modes of Mercury’s magnetosphere and compare them with those observed in Earth’s
magnetosphere. Magnetospheric response modes of flux circulations, including
isolated substorms, steady magnetospheric convection, and sawtooth oscillations,
are fundamental coupling modes and important space weather phenomena during
solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. However, comprehensive investigations into
the properties and driver conditions of magnetospheric modes in Mercury’s
magnetosphere are lacking, as are comprehensive comparisons of the properties
and drivers of similar processes between the magnetospheres of Earth and
Mercury. We will analyze measurements from MESSENGER and compare them with the
current knowledge and modes of similar processes in Earth’s magnetosphere. The
specific science questions to be addressed include: i) investigating the
response of Mercury’s magnetosphere to the southward interplanetary magnetic
field (IMF) and interplanetary coronal mass ejections (ICMEs); ii) comparing
similar processes to those in Earth’s magnetosphere; and iii) determining what
can be learned from the comparison of similar processes between Earth and
Mercury.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.