* 2321053
* I-Corps:   Solid phase matrix for the formulation of pest control agrochemicals
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Charles Opperman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology for management of plant parasitic nematodes (PPN).
Using the proposed technology, nematicide may be applied at 1/100th or less its
current commercial rate and provide significant reduction in nematode
populations and a dramatic increase in crop yield. In addition, it may be
possible to deliver other crop production moieties in concert with nematicide,
including fertilizer, biologicals, insecticides or fungicides. PPN infection of
cash crops causes an excess of $125 billion in worldwide crop damage annually,
and PPNs are regarded as the most damaging biotic crop stressor where there is
no viable management option, straining global food security. PPN impact every
crop plant in every agricultural setting and industry including smallholder and
organic farming, forestry, field and truck crops, ornamentals, and turf. For
some crops, such as soybean, nematodes are recognized as the major pest. For
other crops, nematodes contribute significantly to a net reduction in yield.
Achieving safe and effective nematode control is a key part of the movement
toward environmentally sustainable agriculture.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a platform enabling a field
deployable paper-like seed treatment (nematicide-treated banana paper) to combat
plant parasitic nematodes (PPN). Reducing PPN infection of crops will increase
crop yield and quality and reduce soil populations of nematodes. The proposed
technology combines the ancient art of papermaking with expertise in nematology
and fibrous materials, enabling targeted delivery of beneficial small molecules
during crop establishment. Incorporation of active ingredients into a
lignocellulose matrix, such as banana paper, allows for effective distribution
of crop protection agents without interfering with farming practices. The shelf-
stable lightweight material may be applied at planting. The prototype under
development is an “active” paper sheet with perforated sections to simply wrap
and protect the seed (piece). The localization of the active ingredient, either
adsorbed directly or embedded in the paper, specifically targets PPN versus
beneficial organisms. Nematodes are primarily a seedling disease, so root
protection early is critical to the successful establishment of the crop. Early
season control translates into reduced post-harvest losses for root and tuber
crops as well. Results from multi-year on-farm trials indicate that the proposed
technology protects tuber crops from significant infections that lead to both
in-season and post-harvest losses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.