* 2321018
* Collaborative Research:CyberTraining:Implementation:Medium: Modern Course Exemplars infused with Parallel and Distributed Computing for the Introductory Computing Course Sequence
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Ramachandran Vaidyanathan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 63,557.00

Introductory computing courses in the U.S. are based on a conceptual model of
computation predating the distribution of computing across the Internet and
widespread use of parallel processing. Employer stakeholders reported that new
graduates are ill-prepared for working with modern systems so that it can take
up to two years of additional training before they become productive employees.
A key impediment to modernization that academic stakeholders identified was the
lack of example introductory course sequences to adopt. This project will begin
to remedy that situation by pioneering a new set of introductory computing
courses, built around a modern conceptual model of computation that includes
parallel and distributed processing, with rigorous evaluation of their
effectiveness and their adoptability across a diverse group of colleges and
universities. In addition, the project will better prepare and motivate the
future research workforce to leverage advanced cyberinfrastructure by
strengthening their foundational understanding of modern computing systems and
computational problem solving methods. Modern systems that are geared toward
supporting big data, artificial intelligence, large scale simulations, cloud
computing, etc., are the foundation of current research paradigms. The project
serves the national interest by training a well-prepared and diverse workforce
that is better able to compete globally, exploit, and meet the challenges
presented by all of these aspects of the pervasive, modern, cyber-technology
environment.

The immediate goal of this project is to overcome a key impediment that has
prevented educators from updating introductory computer science curricula to
address current systems: a lack of examples of modernized courses. Since
parallel and distributed computing is a core component of modern computing
infrastructure, the project will result in an overall modernization of the
future research workforce, and enable more effective use of advanced
cyberinfrastructure resources by a larger set of researchers than is now
possible. The project will design a modern first year introductory computer
science course sequence, based on a conceptual model that includes the
fundamental elements of parallel and distributed computation as found in current
systems. The sequence will be implemented at two colleges, using two different
programming languages, to demonstrate the generality of the model. The project
will develop a set of pre-treatment and post-treatment instruments, based on
education science, to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach. Evaluation
will first be done for unmodified courses, as an experimental control group.
Then the modified courses will be evaluated to gather data documenting the
outcome of the intervention. Six additional institutions, selected for diversity
(size, schedule, student population, connections to other institutions such as
community colleges, etc.), will be recruited to subsequently adopt and evaluate
the new course sequence, and thus discover enhancements that expand its
potential for widespread use, as well as providing evidence of effectiveness.
Instructors at the additional institutions will go through intensive summer
training workshops to learn how to use the evaluation instruments and how to
adopt the new course designs. In addition to public dissemination of the new
course sequences with their supporting materials through an active outreach
effort, including the NSF-sponsored ACCESS program, the project will result in
book chapters and publications describing the courses and the evaluation
results.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations within the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.