* 2321442
* MCA: Using Multiple Approaches for Understanding RNA Binding by Enzymes in Intermediary Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Constance Jeffery, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2026
* USD 414,164.00

All cells need methods to adjust their activities in a coordinated fashion to
respond to changes in their environment. In recent years, dozens of proteins
that have central roles in obtaining energy from food have, surprisingly, been
found to have direct interactions with specific RNA molecules that are key
players in turning up or down other cellular activities. A greater understanding
of how these proteins interact with and control RNA functions may lead to the
design and development of novel methods to regulate many kinds of cellular
activities, as well as commercial biotechnology applications. This Mid-Career
Advancement (MCA) project will enable the principal investigator to receive
hands-on training in determining the structures of protein/RNA complexes at a
national cryo-electron microscopy research facility. The PI will also work with
an expert collaborator to gain experience in using computational methods for
analysis and prediction of protein/RNA interactions. The project will generate
opportunities for undergraduate students to gain research experience and with it
the mentoring and training needed to prepare them for future careers in science.
Training of individuals with these skills is important to the high-tech
industries in the United States.

Dynamic interactions between RNA and RBPs play key roles in all aspects of post-
transcriptional gene regulation, including splicing, transport, translation, and
maintaining RNA stability or promoting RNA degradation. Combining catalytic and
RNA binding functions in one multifunctional protein can be a mechanism to
coordinate cellular activities, for example, by sensing the cell’s metabolic
state through availability of the enzyme’s ligands and responding by regulating
translation of specific transcripts. Conversely, RNA binding could regulate the
enzyme’s catalytic activity. Cryo-electron microscopy for determining the
structures of enzyme/RNA complexes will complement computational methods for
analysis and prediction of RNA binding sites on proteins. Structure-guided
mutagenesis will be used for validation of RNA/protein interaction sites.
Successful completion of the proposed project will add to the limited number of
structures of complexes containing RNA bound to noncanonical RNA binding
proteins and provide valuable information about the mechanisms of RNA binding.
The computer-based analysis will aid in understanding the nature of the
interacting surfaces and will provide a basis for identifying other
unconventional RNA binding proteins. This information can be applied in the
future to the design and development of novel proteins that regulate RNA
translation, stability, and lifetime and RNAs that regulate enzyme function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.