* 2321886
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Medical Equipment Utilization Tracking System for Improved Patient Safety and Hospital Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Ekundayo Shittu, OPAL HTM INC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project relates to the development of a novel system
capable of measuring medical equipment utilization with high accuracy and
scalability. This innovation will arm healthcare technology managers with the
insights needed to optimize inventory size and composition according to actual
patient needs, thereby saving hospitals an estimated $23.3 billion annually in
equipment-related costs, in addition to making possible usage-based predictive
maintenance that can effectively prevent dangerous equipment failures. Beyond
these core value propositions, comprehensive medical equipment utilization
insights may be leveraged to facilitate strategic resource management in public
health emergencies, increase energy efficiency of healthcare facilities, and
improve regulatory surveillance of emerging equipment safety issues. The results
of this project will form the basis for a hardware-enabled service and clear the
path towards development of deployable products, clinical pilots, and early
sales. Through commercialization under a sustainable business model, the
envisioned product will substantially increase the economic competitiveness of
US hospitals, which comprises one of the largest sectors of the American
economy. The project will also advance the health and welfare of the American
public through improved medical device safety and management.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will establish
technical and commercial feasibility for an innovative, asset-agnostic, medical
equipment utilization tracking system which will integrate state-of-the-art
techniques for non-intrusive load monitoring, deep learning, and edge computing
in order to overcome previously insurmountable asset monitoring challenges posed
by the heterogeneity and churn of hospital equipment inventories. Key technical
hurdles to be addressed relate to the capture and characterization of medical
equipment electrical load data, real-time translation of this data into accurate
usage statistics suitable for hospital decision-making, and distributed
implementation of this process through non-invasive sensor modules that are
broadly compatible with sundry medical equipment. The proposed research will
overcome these hurdles through (i) systematic collection and analysis of power
consumption data from a representative group of medical equipment under various
operational states, (ii) formulation, training, and validation of adaptive
artificial neural networks that predict usage from power data, (iii)
construction of a proof-of-concept intelligent sensor module, and (iv) system
performance testing in a simulated clinical environment. Through completion of
these objectives, this project will advance knowledge in the fields of hospital
asset management and industrial Internet-of-Things.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.