* 2321403
* PFI (MCA):  Smart Stethoscope for Point-of-Care Diagnosis of Valvular Heart Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,898.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Mid Career Advancement (PFI-MCA) project is the development of a smart
stethoscope which would enable the early detection of valvular heart diseases at
the physician’s office. Valvular heart diseases affect 2.5% of the US population
and incur an annual healthcare cost of $42.47 billion. The smart stethoscope
proposed in this research allows for timely interventions to prevent disease
progression and diminish severe outcomes. At the same time, it eliminates
unnecessary echocardiography procedures, which are costly and time-consuming. As
such, considerable time and resources can be saved for patients, physicians, and
the nation’s healthcare system. This project will training future leaders in
technology translation and broadening the participation of females and under-
represented minorities in STEM education. The proposed work will have a wide
range of activities, from educational programs for high school teachers and
students to engaging undergraduate students in research and translational
programs. The project has a range of partners and collaborators from academia,
industry, and medicine, with the goal of forming a spirit of technology
translation and innovation at Stevens Institute of Technology.

The proposed project is focused on the development of a smart stethoscope for
the early detection of valvular heart diseases at the point of care. Regular
stethoscopes rely on the human auditory system to detect malicious murmurs
associated with valvular abnormalities. Suspect cases are then referred for an
echocardiography exam, which is time-consuming and costly. The auditory system
is subjective and prone to error, resulting in a large number of undetected
cases. The proposed system provides significant improvements in both the
sensitivity and specificity of detection. As such, on the one hand, it reduces
the number of missed cases, allowing for earlier interventions to save patients’
lives and healthcare costs. On the other hand, it eliminates unnecessary
echocardiography procedures, hence saving time and money for both cardiologists
and patients. The project will employ novel hardware development and bio-signal
acquisition techniques along with advanced signal processing methods and
classification algorithms to implement a system which would significantly
enhance the accuracy and robustness of patient monitoring and disease detection.
The three-level fusion approach employed in this work, which integrates
vibrational, acoustic, and biopotential activities of the heart could also
significantly improve the accuracy and robustness of all hemodynamic monitoring
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.