* 2321032
* Collaborative Research: Modern Meta-Analysis Research Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ryan Williams, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 359,824.00

Improving the education of America’s youth in the disciplines of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is a well-documented, widely
endorsed federal policy priority. Several public and private initiatives have
emerged to address this economic reality, including developing more rigorous
standards, curricula, and assessments for prekindergarten through grade 12
education in science and mathematics. Addressing this problem requires a multi-
pronged approach. The first part of this approach is to examine the extensive
number of STEM education interventions that have been developed and evaluated in
recent decades. It is important to understand which interventions work, for
whom, and under what conditions. Modern meta-analytic methods can examine
intervention impacts on learning outcomes and explore how intervention effects
vary across studies. This project seeks to deliver a 9-month-long training
Institute, with online preworkshop activities, 5 days of an in-person, intensive
workshop, and multiple postworkshop opportunities as participants develop a STEM
education research meta-analysis project. Through this schedule of activities,
the project aims to improve the methodological skill sets of STEM education
researchers for conducting modern meta-analyses, resulting in a richer
understanding of how STEM education interventions affect learning outcomes.

This project will enable participants to conduct meta-analyses that explore
which STEM interventions work, for whom, and under what conditions through
methods to explore effect size heterogeneity. The Institute will support
participants to develop meta-analysis research questions aimed at heterogeneity,
to expand their skills for using modern meta-analytic software applications
including MetaReviewer and R, to conduct meta-analytic analyses that explore and
interpret heterogeneity in effect sizes using meta-regression models, and to
interpret and communicate the results of a meta-analysis appropriately. Pre-
Institute workshop activities will familiarize participants with the steps of a
systematic review and the use of R for statistical analysis. The five-day in-
person workshop will focus on how to conduct the preliminary stages of a
systematic review and meta-analysis, drawing on the experiences of the
instructor team in conducting large-scale reviews. The workshop schedule will
also devote significant time to teaching the use of R programs to conduct meta-
analysis and meta-regression, with methods to explore effect heterogeneity
across studies. The Institute aims to provide participants with the knowledge
and skills necessary to lead and conduct basic meta-analyses and to critically
evaluate published meta-analyses in the context of STEM education research. The
project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.