* 2321565
* Equipment: CC Campus Compute: Expansion of GPU Compute Capacity for NC State University HPC to  Support Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Marc Hoit, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 467,607.00

This project expands advanced computing capacity at North Carolina State
University (NC State). The resources enable larger models, faster simulations,
larger datasets for more accurate Artificial Intelligence models, and faster
processing of genome assemblies. The resource is deployed into a supportive
environment - the High Performance Computing (HPC) facility - which provides
outreach, training, documentation, tutorials, support, and tools for access,
visualization, job execution, and an onboarding process for beginning users.

The project installs six Lenovo SR670 nodes with the latest NVIDA Hopper
architecture (with 12x H100 and 12x L40 NVIDIA GPUs) so that teaching, classroom
use, and research (including research from the science drivers) can expand,
relieving the compute congestion on the current GPU cards. More than twelve
science applications will be supported on the system. Applications include ab-
initio methods such as Density Functional Theory and Molecular Dynamics, neural
network training, cryo-EM, genome assembly, and fluid simulation. More than 200
projects are supported by the HPC facility. Access to this system will be
provided for all students, including undergraduates. Educational impacts include
access to the system for teaching, classroom use, and research capability for
HPC users. A significant portion of the resource will be made available to Open
Science Grid, providing increased computing capacity for scientific users
nationwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.