* 2321093
* Conference: I.H.E.S. Workshop: Homogeneous Dynamics and Geometry in Higher-Rank Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Richard Canary, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 11/30/2023
* USD 40,000.00

Funding for this award will support US participants at a workshop on
``Homogeneous Dynamics and Geometry in Higher-Rank Lie Group'' to be held June
19--23, 2023, at Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques in Bures-sur-Yvette,
France. The aim of the workshop is to bring together two intellectual
communities that have recently made significant advances in the study of
discrete subgroups of higher rank semi-simple Lie groups: the homogeneous
dynamics community and the higher rank Teichmuller theory community. The event
is timely, since techniques from homogenous dynamics are becoming increasingly
prominent in the study of discrete subgroups of Lie groups in both fields. Each
morning there will be two mini-course lectures, intended to introduce
researchers to techniques from both fields, while the afternoon will be devoted
to research lectures. Bringing together these two groups will lead to further
interactions and will accelerate development in these exciting areas. The
organizers are committed to funding a diverse group of mathematicians.

Homogeneous dynamics deals with flows on the quotients of Lie groups by discrete
subgroups. There is a well-developed, now classical, study of orbit closures,
measure classifications, counting and equidistribution results in homogeneous
spaces of semisimple Lie groups of finite volume, i.e. when the discrete
subgroup is a lattice. These ideas have had many applications in seemingly
unrelated areas, for example, the solutions of the Oppenheim and Littlewood
conjectures in number theory, and more recently in Teichmuller dynamics. In the
last decade, there has been significant progress in extending this theory to
study discrete subgroups of rank one Lie groups which are not lattices. The
fundamental tool in this work is the theory of Patterson-Sullivan measures
associated to actions of discrete subgroups on the geometric boundaries of
hyperbolic spaces. The time is ripe for the pursuit of generalizations of these
works to higher rank homogeneous spaces of infinite co-volume. This theory has
already seen exciting preliminary development in the context of Anosov
representations. Further details about the workshop, including a full list of
speakers, are available at the conference website:
https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/event/8759/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.