* 2321013
* Collaborative Research: Micro- and Macroscopic Eukaryotic Life and its Preservation within the Mesoproterozoic Lower Belt Supergroup
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sarah Slotznick, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 269,822.00

Collaborative Research: Micro- and Macroscopic Eukaryotic Life and its
Preservation within the Mesoproterozoic Lower Belt Supergroup

The origin of eukaryotes (the domain of life that includes nearly all
macroscopic organisms, animals, and plants) remains one of the most challenging
and data-limited problems in all of evolution. Understanding the modern
biosphere relies upon answering fundamental questions about the earliest
evolution of eukaryotes: When and how did Earth’s earliest eukaryotes emerge,
evolve, and subsequently radiate? Studying the excellently preserved fossils in
the 1.5-billion-year-old Appekunny and Greyson Formations of the lower Belt
Supergroup in western Montana will develop a unique and vital record for
understanding eukaryotic evolution. The rocks are predominantly located on
public lands, which are heavily utilized both locally and internationally for
recreation and as tourist destinations. Through the development of educational
resources and training sessions with natural tourism guides, this project will
work to increase the public’s scientific literacy about deep time, the evolution
of life, and local geology and integrate non-traditional STEM educators into the
process of public science engagement.

A comprehensive paleontological study has never been conducted on the Appekunny
and Greyson Formations, but the formations contain the world’s third oldest
macroscopic fossils—Horodyskia moniliformis and Grypania spiralis. This work
will combine lithostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy, and detrital zircon and
monazite geochronological analysis, in conjunction with a broad expansion of
their paleobiological data, to understand the temporal, environmental and
paleobiological correlations between these two units. This project will
additionally test competing hypotheses regarding taphonomic versus
paleoenvironmental-ecological controls on fossil assemblage composition and
diversity, perform stratigraphic microfossil sampling and resampling known
macrofossiliferous strata, and characterize problematic fossil-types. Connecting
the paleobiology, sedimentology, and geochemistry of these key units will enable
broader inferences regarding the environments, ecosystems, and diversification
patterns of Earth’s earliest eukaryotes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.