* 2321762
* Collaborative Research: Arecibo C3 - Center for Culturally Relevant and Inclusive Science Education, Computational Skills, and Community Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Wanda Diaz Merced, Universidad del Sagrado Corazon, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2028
* USD 487,452.00

This award establishes a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education and research center at the federally owned site in Arecibo,
Puerto Rico and location of the Arecibo Observatory. Arecibo Center for
Culturally Relevant and Inclusive Science Education, Computational Skills, and
Community Engagement (Arecibo C3) will integrate science (ciencia), computation
(computación), and community (comunidad)—geographical, disciplinary, and
cultural—with the overall goal of promoting culturally-relevant and inclusive
teaching with science education research, outreach, and workforce development.
Arecibo C3 is a collaboration of: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, University of
Puerto Rico at Río Piedras, University of Maryland Baltimore County, and
Universidad del Sagrado Corazón. Arecibo C3 (a.k.a. "the Center") is purpose-
built to advance STEM-equity and promote full participation in the benefits of
STEM. The scholarly community of STEM education researchers will benefit from
the outputs of the Center’s education research programs. STEM students,
professional educators, and the public will benefit from the Center’s skill
building and workforce development activities.

Arecibo C3 will serve as a collaborative hub for STEM discovery and exploration
by building upon existing programs and opportunities established at the Arecibo
site by previous NSF programs, while also creating new STEM education, research,
and outreach programs and initiatives. The goals for the Center are to (1)
promote STEM education, learning, and teaching; (2) support fundamental and
applied STEM and STEM education research; (3) broaden participation in STEM; and
(4) build and strengthen collaborations and partnerships. The proposed suite of
experiences and research will be innovative and diverse. Research on STEM
education and learning will examine the impact of multisensory teaching
strategies in secondary and post-secondary education, as well as approaches for
adult learning in informal contexts, ultimately contributing to increasing
participation of all people –with and without disabilities– in STEM. A
complementary priority will be investigating how culturally sustaining pedagogy
supports student STEM identity development. Introductory research experiences
for all will be offered through DNA Barcode Puerto Rico, an experience using DNA
to study the biodiversity of the island. Modeled on Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory DNA Learning Center barcoding programs, collaborations with high
schools and science centers across Puerto Rico will be served by new Arecibo C3
molecular and computer laboratory spaces and equipment loans. Visitor groups
will also access DNA Learning Center field trips and summer courses. Visitors
will also experience a multisensory course and exhibition featuring sensory
experiences of data, such as the merging of black holes or behavior of
bioluminescent organisms. Teachers and faculty working with experts in
scientific and education research will be mentored to create, implement, and
assess curricula of course-based convergent research experiences for high school
and undergraduates. Arecibo C3 will create workforce development opportunities
focusing on data science, computation, and biotechnology. Computational training
will also reach into communities empowering women and girls in public housing
with data science skills and career opportunities. Biotechnology training and
credentials will tie to local industries and jobs. Arecibo C3 will feature a
meetings program that convenes researchers, educators, policy makers, industry
partners, and other stakeholders for think tank style conferences on pressing
STEM topics. Additionally, the Center will pilot a fellowship program in which
participants are trained and certified in scientific community management.
Arecibo C3 Fellows will then serve as ambassadors using recently acquired
collaborative strategies to involve, organize, train, support their peers in
community science experiences, and build communities of practice. Ultimately,
Arecibo C3 will foster equity-enabling STEM research and education, enrich
Puerto Rico’s vibrant STEM communities, and serve as a catalyst for inclusive
STEM education globally.

Arecibo C3 is jointly funded by the following programs at NSF: Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12), Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST), Hispanic-Serving Institutions
(HSI), and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.