* 2321057
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Controls on the Origin and Environmental Functioning of Oxbow Lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kory Konsoer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 216,906.00

As meandering rivers move through their floodplains, they eventually intersect
themselves to remove a portion of the channel. That channel segment can exist as
a water body, called an oxbow lake, or become filled with sediment. The ability
to predict whether a segment will transform into an oxbow holds significant
importance, given that these lakes serve as repositories for pollutants and
provide unique habitats. During the initial stages following cutoff, the
geometry of the connection is decisive in determining how oxbow evolution plays
out. Notably, cutoffs with high-angle junctions tend to accumulate sediment at
the entrance, initiating oxbow formation. To evaluate the idea that the initial
cutoff geometry determines the likelihood of oxbow formation, the researchers
will undertake a comprehensive analysis of recent cutoffs in the West Fork White
River (Indiana, USA). They will employ both field data collection and numerical
modeling methodologies. Furthermore, collaboration with the Indiana Department
of Environmental Management will enable estimates of pollutant storage within
oxbows. Additionally, partnerships with the Indy Water Connection Camp and the
Williams Summer Science Program will facilitate experiential learning
opportunities for local students.

Once a meander cutoff occurs, it establishes a bifurcation with the primary
river channel. The stability of this bifurcation determines whether it
ultimately transforms into an oxbow lake. If the bifurcation is unstable and
rapidly fills with sediment, the formation of an oxbow lake becomes more
probable. To investigate the role of initial bifurcation geometry in
facilitating sedimentary plugging and oxbow development, the project will focus
on cutoffs on the West Fork of the White River in Indiana. Various tools,
including multibeam bathymetry, sub-bottom profiling, and sediment core
analysis, will be employed to assess the geometry and chronology of sediment
fill. Subsequently, these data will be utilized in morphodynamic models that
simulate the evolution of bifurcations following a cutoff event. The presence of
different bifurcation geometries will allow the researchers to model and
evaluate how specific geometric configurations lead to accelerated sediment
plugging and subsequent oxbow formation.

This project is jointly funded by Geomorphology and Land Use Dynamics and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.