* 2321144
* Effects of 3-D Mantle Wedge Flow and Crystal Preferred Orientation on Shear-Wave Splitting in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ikuko Wada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 210,288.00

The Earth’s mantle is solid, but it flows very slowly under high pressure and
temperature, like a thick fluid. This flow affects important geological
processes such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, but it occurs too far
below the Earth’s surface to be observed directly. In subduction zones, where
oceanic plates descend below continents, mantle flow patterns are thought to be
very complex. Though these patterns can be estimated using computer models, we
need real data to check their accuracy. One way to indirectly obtain mantle flow
data is to use seismic waves that are generated by earthquakes. Seismic waves
that travel through the mantle are affected by fine layering that forms when
mantle minerals line up in response to flow. Recordings of such waves at the
Earth’s surface can be interpreted to identify mantle regions where minerals are
lined up, showing what the flow patterns look like in 3D (at least, in parts of
the mantle that many of the recorded seismic waves have passed through). In this
study, Dr. Wada and her group will develop computer models of mantle flow in
selected subduction zones, and predict how mantle minerals should line up. Next,
they will use different software to predict what seismic waves travelling
through this model mantle should look like when they reach the Earth’s surface.
By comparing these predictions with data from seismometers, they can test the
model and fully describe the geometry of mantle flow. The project will provide
training for a postdoctoral scholar and an undergraduate student in seismology
and scientific computer programming. The software and scientific results will be
used in an undergraduate geophysics course at Minnesota and will be freely and
publicly shared.

One of the indirect observations that are used to infer mineral orientations
and mantle flow directions are shear-wave splitting (SWS) observations. Minerals
in the mantle, in particular olivine, become aligned relatively to the mantle
flow direction, developing crystal preferred orientations (CPO). Shear waves
that are generated by earthquakes travel through the upper mantle and become
polarized into two orthogonal components that travel at different speeds.
Measurements of the polarization direction of the fast component and the delay
time between the two components provide information about the CPO of minerals in
the mantle and thus the mantle flow pattern. However, the interpretation of the
SWS parameters (i.e., the fast direction and the delay time) in terms of CPO and
mantle flow directions is not trivial, and large uncertainties remain,
particularly in subduction zones with oblique plate convergence that induces
complex mantle wedge flow patterns. The previously funded project generated a
suite of 3-D steady-state coupled kinematic-dynamic models for generic
subduction systems with a range of subduction obliquity to examine its effect on
the mantle wedge flow pattern. The model-predicted variation in mantle wedge
flow pattern with the local subduction obliquity allowed prediction of along-
margin variations in the mantle wedge flow pattern based on the local subduction
obliquity, for subduction zones worldwide. Using calculated steady-state mantle
velocity fields, the evolution of olivine and pyroxene CPOs in the mantle wedge
was simulated. The calculated distributions of CPO were fed into the forward
modeling of SWS. The results highlighted the complex evolution of CPOs in the
mantle wedge for different CPO types and their impact on the SWS parameters. The
proposed study is aimed to fill the gaps in the previous work through the
following three activities: (1) Quantifying the variations in the CPO
distribution and SWS parameters due to along-margin variations in the margin
strike and the slab geometry. (2) Testing the model-predicted SWS parameters
against observed SWS parameters in NE Japan where sufficient detailed SWS
analyses have been performed. (3) Investigating the relative importance of the
impact of transtensional and transpressional strains in the mantle wedge during
slab rollback and advance on the CPO evolution and SWS. The results provide
foundational understanding of the impacts of subduction zone geometry and slab
motion on deformation and CPO evolution in the mantle wedge and the dependence
of SWS parameters on the CPO distribution. The synthesis of the results with
those from the previously funded project will be used to address the observed
variations in SWS parameters within and among subduction systems globally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.