* 2321788
* Integrating Perception and Communication: The Function of Acoustic Fine Structure in Natural Zebra Finch Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2026
* Robert Dooling, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2026
* USD 421,321.00

Birds and humans have an overlapping hearing range, but this does not mean they
are perceiving complex sounds the same way. In fact, birds have an auditory
temporal processing ability that far exceeds humans. From research on humans, it
has been shown that such temporal processing abilities make it easier to
understand speech in noisy environments and facilitate the identification of
familiar talkers. Thus far, there has been no research testing the function of
bird’s enhanced temporal processing ability. This proposal will test the
function of birds exceptional temporal processing ability. It would be striking
if birds are using these fine acoustic details which lab studies have shown they
are capable of hearing. Such acoustic details have so far been largely beyond
the scope of what traditional biological approaches have been able to capture.
Thus, this proposal may fundamentally impact how birdsong is described going
forward. Reciprocally, studying bird species with such exceptional temporal
processing abilities may have broader impact on research related to individual
differences in hearing of people over their lifetime. Finally, both being around
and listening to birds is something many people enjoy. Therefore, this proposal
also includes developing an accessible multimedia outreach program. Too often
disabled people are excluded from active participation in outreach programs due
to different communication abilities. Furthermore, there is a powerful
opportunity to leverage diversity in animal communication to help create
inclusive spaces for thinking about and relating to diversity in human
communication.

To understand mechanisms of social behavior and communication, it is critical to
have a comprehensive understanding of the perceptual space, or ‘umwelt,’ of a
species. This proposal combines expertise in social behavior with the precision
of a psychophysical approach. A bird’s ability to discriminate fine acoustic
details in vocalizations is about ten times better than a human’s ability. So
far, this exceptional ability to discriminate acoustic fine structure (AFS) has
been identified in all seven avian species studied. This proposal aims to
discover potential functions of this perceptual ability in birds. To properly
situate the perception of AFS in the natural ecology of birds, this proposal
pursues three distinct lines of inquiry. (1) To determine whether perception of
AFS shapes vocal learning, song learning experiments will be conducted using
natural and artificial stimuli that vary in their complexity and type of AFS.
(2) To test the effect of noise on an individual’s ability to perceive natural
vocal signals, classic psychophysical experiments will be used. (3) To identify
the role of AFS in shaping social communication, artificial and natural stimuli
will be used to determine if AFS is important during courtship and pair bonding.
Combined these three perspectives will clarify the function of bird’s perceptual
ability in natural communicative contexts. Furthermore, these studies will
provide a foundation for future research aiming to integrate basic perception
and natural ethology more fully across taxa.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.