* 2321504
* III: Small: A New Machine Learning Paradigm Towards Effective yet Efficient Foundation Graph Learning Models
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yanfang Ye, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,573.00

Inspired by the success of foundation language models in applications such as
ChatGPT, one can envision the far-reaching impacts that can be brought by a pre-
trained Foundation Graph Learning Model (FGLM) with broader applications in the
areas such as scientific research, social network analysis, anomaly detection,
drug discovery, and e-commerce. Despite the significant progress of pre-trained
graph neural networks, there has not yet a FGLM that can achieve desired
performance on various graph-learning-related tasks. To bridge this gap, the
goal of this project is to design and develop a new machine-learning paradigm
(techniques, methods, and models) towards effective yet efficient FGLMs, which
will help researchers and practitioners advance their work in a wide range of
real-world applications driven by the prevalent graph-structured data, thus
helping to enhance national safety, public health, and welfare. The project
outcomes (such as open-source code, benchmark data, and models) will be made
publicly accessible and be broadly distributed through demos, publications,
media presentations, and the like. This project will integrate research with
education, including novel curriculum development, student mentoring,
professional training and workforce development, and K-12 outreach activities
aimed at women and underrepresented groups.

By developing a new machine-learning paradigm to jointly solve the multi-task,
cross-graph, and cross-domain challenges in graph learning at the first attempt,
this project includes three interconnected research components towards effective
yet efficient FGLMs. First, to realize the strong and consistent task-
generalization ability for FGLMs in an effective yet affordable way, given a
graph, the team will design and develop a new multi-task self-supervised graph
learning framework with a novel multi-gradient descent optimization algorithm
coupled with adaptive data augmentation to learn each task equitably well.
Second, as real-world graphs are always incomplete, to learn comprehensive
knowledge for a specific domain, the team will develop a new multi-graph co-
training framework, specifically a variational expectation-maximization
framework with relational knowledge distillation, to jointly train the generated
graphs in an effective yet efficient manner while tackling the challenge of
diversified node attributes of different graphs. Third, to further enable cross-
domain knowledge transfer for pre-trained FGLMs, the team will develop mixture-
of-expert based meta-learning techniques to characterize the latent properties
of graphs from different domains and adaptively utilize the knowledge learned
from existing domains to infer on a rarely seen or unseen domain. The new
machine-learning paradigm developed in this project will accelerate the
development in the rapidly evolving area of pre-trained graph neural networks,
advance the field of information integration and informatics, and help
researchers and practitioners in different domains to advance their work in a
variety of real-world applications driven by the ubiquitous graph data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.