* 2321726
* Collaborative Research: CISE: Large: Systems Support for Run-Anywhere Serverless
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Vincent Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2028
* USD 333,333.00

Computing resources are more abundant and more distributed than ever before. In
principle, this abundance of compute and storage should allow applications to
run faster, cheaper, and more energy efficiently. Yet applications that do so
are few and far between, and usually belong to one of the very few large tech
organizations. This project aims to democratize access to the full space of
computing resources by enabling, and then optimizing, correct and safe execution
of application logic anywhere: across client devices, edge computing locations,
and multiple clouds. To realize the project’s execute-anywhere vision it will be
necessary to develop a new co-design for four layers of system support: 1) a
runtime that can execute applications anywhere; 2) an abundance of caches that
enable seamless access to data anywhere; 3) a data store that collaborates with
caches to ensure application consistency and data durability; and 4) a scheduler
that integrates information from the other layers to decide where to run
computations and move data in order optimize performance, availability, cost,
and energy.

The development of these co-designed layers will leverage the diverse expertise
of the six investigators in close collaboration. Its development has the
potential to improve the online applications that are an integral part of
people’s lives. The project should make automatic optimization of an
application’s latency, cost, bandwidth usage, and energy efficiency accessible
to many applications, even those developed by a single person. The optimization
of an application’s latency will improve the experience of all users with an
especially large effect on users in rural communities and other locations with
poor Internet connectivity. Further, it has the potential to make the full use
and optimization of compute and data resources ubiquitous and available to all.
In addition, it will advance discovery and broaden participation by involving
undergraduates from the investigators’ universities and especially institutions
that serve under-represented groups in research experiences, training graduate
students, and broadening undergraduate participation in Computer Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.