* 2321661
* PFI (MCA): Enhancing Grid Reliability and Stability with Distributed Energy Resources
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wencong Su, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,897.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Mid-Career Advancement (PFI-MCA) project is to make the US national power grid
more reliable and stable. At the same time, this project looks to handle a large
number of distributed energy resources that connect to the grid in different
ways than traditional power plants. One of the key goals is to gather
fundamental knowledge that will help better assess the reliability of US power
grid in real-world conditions. Another goal is to develop novel control
algorithms to enable distributed energy resources to react better to changes in
the grid, which can help improve overall grid stability. This project also plans
to create a shared platform that many research groups can use for testing their
research ideas. This work will help strengthen relationships between the
university and industry by working together for mutual benefit. All project
materials, processes, designs, and results will be disseminated in the public
domain via public-access websites, top-ranking conference and journal
publications. Lastly, this project will positively impact the society and
education by offering valuable research opportunities for students who don't
typically get involved in STEM, thus helping to diversify the people working in
these fields.

The proposed project is to develop multidisciplinary and integrated approaches
to collectively improve low-inertia grid reliability and stability in the face
of uncertainties and to explore a commercialization roadmap. The proposed
research will have intellectual merits in the following areas: (1) Establish a
fundamental knowledge base of understanding the practical challenges of low-
inertia power grids with high penetration of grid-forming inverter-based energy
resources, (2) Design a holistic assessment framework and visualization tool to
qualify the causal reliability relation between diverse grid-forming inverter-
based energy resources and their collective impact on system reliability, (3)
Develop a self-adaptive, robust, and stability-aware grid-forming controller
capable of learning power grid behaviors, and (4) Leverage the existing power
system testbeds to validate the real-world performance of the proposed
stability-aware grid-forming controllers and enable research resource sharing
among the resources-constrained research and education community in Southeast
Michigan.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.