* 2321143
* SBIR Phase II:  Affordable Onsite Wastewater Treatment Solution
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* James Roberts, WAIHOME LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2025
* USD 996,717.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project addresses the poor performance and unaffordability of existing,
onsite, wastewater treatment technologies. In Hawaii, the state government has
mandated the upgrade of 88,000 cesspools across the state by 2050, but studies
have shown that 97% of homeowners will not be able to afford the upgrade.
Further, an estimated 55% of Hawaiian homeowners will need to install a system
other than a conventional septic system due to site sizing, grading, and
sensitive receiving environment constraints. The proximity of Hawaiian homes to
the ocean makes them particularly susceptible to rising sea levels that disrupt
soil-based treatment technologies like septic systems. This is a problem in many
coastal communities in America, but perhaps most notably in Miami-Dade County,
FL where an estimated 64% of county septic tanks will begin to fail annually by
2040. Existing upgrades to septic systems exist but they take the form of septic
system add-ons or package plants that invariably drive up the cost of treatment
systems.

This SBIR Phase II project is developing a wastewater treatment technology
similar in shape and size to a solar hot water heater. The system is designed to
operate passively, similar to a septic tank, but utilizing photosynthesis within
a symbiotic algal-bacterial biofilm to provide high quality aerobic treatment on
par with expensive package plants. The aboveground typology of the treatment
unit protects the treatment process from high groundwater levels even during
extreme flooding events, preventing the spread of disease and pollution.
Further, situating the unit aboveground greatly simplifies the installation
process to avoid expensive excavation costs and unearthing of homeowner
backyards. This team has successfully piloted a proof-of-concept with Phase I
funding. Moving into Phase II, the team will perform design iteration on the key
geometric and operational parameters of the treatment unit and subject
prototypes to sequential pilot tests in the field. The objective is to identify
optimal manufacturing and design criteria for a resilient commercial treatment
product that meets industry standards for use in sensitive receiving
environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.