* 2321186
* Self-Concept of Neurodivergent Undergraduate Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stephen Podowitz-Thomas, Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,498.00

Self-concept is the set of ideas that people hold about who they are, how they
behave, and who they have the potential to become. The self-concept of students
has a strong impact on their academic success and persistence in higher
education. This project aims to develop a tool to measure self-concept as a
neurodivergent student in STEM and investigate its relationship to academic
motivation and identification with STEM. Although a significant and growing
number of undergraduates are neurodivergent, neurodivergent students continue to
be underrepresented in STEM and disproportionately leave STEM disciplines. Only
recently has national attention begun to shift towards supporting neurodivergent
students in ways that go beyond providing legally-required accommodations as
they develop positive self-concepts and engage in self-determined behaviors.
This project plans to support that effort by providing a deeper understanding of
the self-concept of neurodivergent STEM undergraduates. The research seeks also
to illuminate ways in which STEM departments (partnering with campus disability
resource centers / disability services offices) may cultivate, not only an
accessibility-focused, but inclusion- and equity-focused culture for their
neurodivergent students. Developing this culture is one means of supporting the
persistence of neurodivergent students in STEM. This project will also involve
the professional development and mentorship of the principal investigator,
building the capacity of the principal investigator to conduct mixed methods
education research focused on partnering with neurodivergent students to support
their identity development and learning in STEM.

The self-concept scale under development will be based on an item pool developed
by the principal investigator within existing theoretical frameworks of self-
concept and models of disability, using an existing qualitative dataset of
neurodivergent STEM students’ perspectives on disability. Items will first be
evaluated by panels of experts and members from the study population. Then, the
measure will be tested through cognitive interviews, followed by large-scale
testing and validation based on internal structure through factor analysis.
Finally, the measure will be examined for consequences of assessment with focus
groups comprising disability resource center staff, STEM faculty/administrators,
and neurodivergent students. Data will be collected from neurodivergent
undergraduates at a range of institution types. As a potential benefit to
participants and the broader community, throughout the project timeline, the
research team will seek to engage neurodivergent undergraduate students and
disability resource center staff through online discussion panel events with
neurodivergent STEM graduate students and professionals meant to help contribute
to students’ visions of their possible selves. For this individual investigator
development grant, the principal investigator will be mentored by experts in
psychometrics, neurodivergent students in higher education, and disabled
students in STEM, while engaging in professional development workshops on scale
development and structural equation modeling. The principal investigator will
also work with an advisory board with a broader range of expertise related to
the project. Through this mentorship, the principal investigator will build on
their previous training in statistical analysis and their recent research on the
experiences and learning of neurodivergent STEM undergraduates to develop core
knowledge on scale development for this student population. The project is
supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.