* 2321410
* Collaborative Research: 3D Imaging of Controls on Subduction Zone Megathrust Rupture and Slip Behavior
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Susan Beck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 241,402.00

The largest earthquakes worldwide occur in ‘subduction zones’ where plates under
the oceans descend beneath continents and into Earth’s deep interior. These
earthquakes, which occur on faults that separate the descending oceanic plate
from the overlying continental plate, can have devastating human and economic
impacts. Regions of the world at risk from these earthquakes include the U.S.
Pacific Northwest and Alaska, Central and South America, Japan, and Southeast
Asia. In this project, Meltzer, Beck, and their team will analyze data recorded
by seismometers that they deployed in northern Ecuador between 2020 and 2022, in
coordination with European scientists. Their analyses will result in detailed 3D
images of the subduction zone beneath Ecuador, where a magnitude 7.8 earthquake
occurred in 2016. Using machine learning techniques, the researchers will also
comb the seismometer data for signs of small earthquakes, whose locations can
outline the geometry of the main subduction zone fault and other local faults.
The research team will use the images and earthquake data to infer which parts
of the main subduction zone fault could give rise to large earthquakes. These
findings and related activities by the research team and Ecuadoran colleagues
will help Ecuador anticipate and plan for potentially devastating subduction
zone earthquakes.

Increasingly high resolution seismic studies reveal the complexity and diversity
of structure and physical properties within and between subduction zones.
Downdip and along-strike heterogeneity influences plate coupling and slip
behavior on the plate interface, in the downgoing plate, and in the upper plate,
ultimately culminating in large magnitude earthquakes with significant human and
economic impacts. Between October 2020 and November 2022, the team collected
onshore-offshore active and passive seismic data recorded by a dense array of
3-component short period nodes and broadband sensors in coastal Ecuador. These
data were acquired as a complement to the HIPER project (High Resolution Imaging
of the Pedernales Earthquake Rupture Zone) supported by French and German
funding agencies. The data were collected in and adjacent to the 2016 Mw 7.8
Pedernales rupture zone to significantly densify the onshore portion of HIPER
for active-source recording, and to widen the aperture of passive recording to
improve lateral coverage and imaging at depth across the forearc. The combined
arrays present an exceptional opportunity for multiscale 3D imaging to examine
the relationship between physical properties, structure, fluids, and variations
in slip behavior from seismic to aseismic. Analysis of these data will employ
machine learning to significantly increase source detection, and a combination
of traveltime and ambient noise tomography and high frequency receiver functions
as input to a multi-step series of inversions to constrain earthquake locations
and seismic structure along and above the seismogenic zone and across the
forearc.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.