* 2321946
* Transforming STEM Education through Participatory and Community-Engaged Research:   An Incubator Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Rashida Harrison, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,721.00

Community-engaged schooling focuses on assets, perspectives, questions, and
solutions emerging from communities and is beneficial for a wide array of
students not always included in STEM. Infrastructure is needed to build
connections through which geographically distributed community-engaged educators
can be supported as co-researchers in STEM education research. This effort seeks
to enact change in the research process itself including where research is
undertaken, how research is conducted, and who holds power to initiate, enact,
and use STEM education research. This Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure
Incubator is enabling researchers, communities, and educators in co-developing
and pilot testing infrastructure to increase the speed and scale of equitable
STEM education research.

The network will bring together stakeholders from five core communities: STEM
education research, formal education, informal education, participatory and
community-engaged research, and diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) research.
Through two in-person large meetings, multiple in-person small meetings, and
virtual meetings, the network will plan the development and pilot testing of 1)
a geographically distributed facility and field site infrastructure, and 2) a
federated, interoperable digital infrastructure. Field sites are local,
community-engaged STEM learning spaces and facilities are spaces that connect
field sites together. The federated, interoperable digital infrastructure will
enable individual Field Sites to connect to their facilities, and through those
facilities, connect to a larger network. This design will provide shared
communication protocols and common data standards while enabling local
communities to shape the structure of their own field fite. The network will
explore the scientific and technical requirements underlying the facilities,
field fites, and digital infrastructure.

This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. Funding is also
provided by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Program at NSF.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.