* 2321265
* MCA: Diversity of mycoviruses in fungal endophytes and their cryptic roles in plant health
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Priscila Chaverri, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 323,258.00

Microbes are ubiquitous and associated with almost all living organisms. The
associations or interactions microbes have with their hosts may range from
beneficial to detrimental, and may be direct or indirect. However, considering
that there are trillions of microorganisms on Earth, much of that diversity and
their interactions are unknown. A poorly studied group are viruses. The
objective of this project is to begin to discover the diversity of viruses that
inhabit fungi (a.k.a. mycoviruses) that live inside plants, the effects of
mycoviruses on those fungi, and the indirect interactions and consequences on
the plant hosts. One hypothesis of this study is that mycoviruses serve as an
“invisibility cloak”, so that fungus can penetrate the plant without activating
the plant defenses. The project will focus on beneficial and pathogenic fungi
that inhabit coffee plants. While some mycoviruses may make a fungus more
pathogenic on its plant host, others may make them less pathogenic
(=hypovirulent mycoviruses), thus having potential applications in the
engineering of those fungi to benefit crops. For example, inoculating
hypovirulent mycoviruses into a plant pathogenic fungus to make it non-
pathogenic, or, on the other hand, inoculating a beneficial fungus so that it
can colonize an whole plant and provide a broad and innate protection against
diseases or the effects of climate (e.g., drought or high temperatures). The
project will also contribute to the growth of Bowie State University’s research
agenda and the training of students at the first historically black
college/university (HBCU) in Maryland.

The project will study the diversity of mycoviruses (viruses of fungi) and their
effects on endophytic fungi, the plant hosts, and consequently, the tripartite
symbiosis (virus-fungus-plant). The specific objectives of the project are to
assess the diversity of mycoviruses in a selected collection of fungal
endophytes from wild Rubiaceae (the coffee family); determine if there is a
phylogenetic and mycovirus-incidence relationship between the plant, host
fungus, and the mycovirus; and compare, in vitro and in planta, the effects of
mycovirus-infected and mycovirus-free endophytic fungi. The objectives will be
accomplished by collecting and identifying the fungi associated to wild
Rubiaceae plants in Costa Rica, screening them for mycoviruses using traditional
and metagenomic/metatranscriptomic approaches, eradicating the mycoviruses from
the fungi, and assessing the effects of mycovirus eradication on the phenotype
of the fungus (i.e., fungal growth rate in vitro, antagonistic ability in vitro,
and in planta capacity to infect and become endophytic). Results from this
project will add mycoviruses as another potential group to control plant
pathogenic fungi. For example, if mycoviruses are not host-specific, it may be
possible to infect plant pathogens or mutualists with hypovirulent mycoviruses.
In addition to mycoviruses, from the metagenomic and metranscriptomic data, we
may obtain data from endohyphal bacteria and phages, which are attractive in the
discovery of new CRISPR-Cas systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.