* 2321453
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Gram Stain Interpretation Via Digital Holographic Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Kyle Spafford, MACULA VISION SYSTEMS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the improvement in hospital laboratory
results by automating and standardizing a manual test procedure that is critical
for the diagnosis of infections. Faster, higher quality and less expensive test
results will help to ensure that patients receive timely treatment with the
appropriate medications, reduce employee burnout through the automation of
tedious laboratory tasks, and lower healthcare costs. Just as automated blood
analyzers largely replaced manual blood cell counting, the proposed platform
will eventually replace manual counting of bacteria and yeast cells. The new
imaging technology developed as a part of this project will generate advanced
manufacturing jobs and increase the economic competitiveness of the United
States by introducing an innovative product to a market dominated by foreign
firms. Long-term benefits to society include decreased antimicrobial (medicines
that kill microorganisms) resistance as infections are managed with fewer
unnecessary antimicrobials.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the
development of a novel microscopy platform for automating the interpretation of
tests performed in hospital laboratories. This project fills an important gap
specific to microbiology labs that are facing a trained labor shortage without
affordable automated alternatives. Microbiology labs in hospitals are
responsible for examining patient samples (e.g., urine and blood) for the
presence, type, and quantity of microscopic organisms (e.g., bacteria and
yeast). This project includes the engineering of a special light source, a
customized camera, and a suite of artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled
algorithms to analyze the microscopic images captured by the camera. Once the
platform is built, its performance will be evaluated on real patient samples to
demonstrate the feasibility of the technology by comparing it to experienced
human lab technicians. The project will measure how often the platform produces
the correct answer as well as how long it takes. The platform will also be
tested in terms of image quality to demonstrate that it can take pictures of the
smallest bacteria and accurately capture color.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.