* 2321575
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Enabled African Language Database
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Michael Odokara, ESM GLOBAL PRODUCTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is creating a tonally proficient Artificial Intelligence
(AI)-enabled translation database for African languages. There are no such
product or service that can accurately translate African languages, as African
languages have traditionally been under-resourced by Western corporations. By
2050, almost 25% of the earthâ€™s population will be Sub-Saharan African and
currently more than 60% of Africans are under 25 years old. The African
continent is projected to have $5.6 trillion in consumer and business spending
by 2024 and the U.S. is investing over $350 million to expand digital access and
literacy and promote U.S. corporate investment in the continent. By expanding
opportunities to accurately translate and learn African languages, this project
will support economic growth for both the U.S. and African countries and support
health and welfare by facilitating communication with African-speaking Americans
and recent immigrants.

African languages are very diverse with more than 2000 distinct languages
across the continent. They are difficult for non-native speakers to learn and
for translation apps to correctly interpret, primarily due to the tonal and
guttural sounds and slight pronunciation differences that make similar sounding
words have completely different meanings. The proposed AI-enabled database is
first-of-its kind. The project will establish the data processing, model
training, and database evaluation steps necessary to produce AI-enabled
databases. The goal is to train a database to decipher these tonal shifts and
ensure that the correct meaning is conveyed, beginning with a large dataset of
correctly spoken audio and visual examples of words and phrases. The primary
objective of this project is to develop the entry-level, consistent, Machine
Learning (ML) core functionalities and multimodal interactions in a database
that can be utilized in the creation of other tonally based language ML/AI
databases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.