* 2321443
* Research Infrastructure: CC* Campus Compute: Next-Generation Shared HPC Cluster to Coordinate Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Accelerate Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ryan Knutson, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 492,652.00

This project acquires and deploys state-of-the-art high-performance computing
(HPC) resources to serve the researchers and educators of the four-campus
Montana State University (MSU) System. The resources will significantly improve
speed and capability of HPC-enabled simulations, computational modeling, data
analysis, and machine learning, which will accelerate research productivity and
capacity and enhance educational curricula. The resources will promote economic
development around emerging technologies and strategic problem solving, such as
advancing quantum science, addressing energy security, securing infrastructure,
advancing semiconductor research, and improving environmental and climate
forecasting. Combined with increased low-barrier access to HPC, new classes,
trainings, workshops, and hands-on assistance enable more students and
researchers to develop skills needed to apply HPC, and will thus broaden the
workforce and research base for in-demand fields in a low-density and
historically underinvested state. Targeted partnerships with minority-serving
units on campus and institutions across Montana focus on increasing
opportunities for underrepresented populations in or through the use of expanded
computational science capabilities.

The deployed resources are optimized for accelerating growing areas of data
intensive research at MSU and partner institutions, including artificial
intelligence, quantum computing and material science, bioinformatics, precision
agriculture, microbiology, computational chemistry, spatial sciences,
topological data analysis, optics and photonics, and more. Resources include
next-generation machine learning optimized graphics processing units (GPUs)
paired with the latest central processing units (CPUs) and leverage an
established foundation of high-speed storage and networking for a high
performance/cost ratio. A portion of these resources will be available to the
national research community through Open Science Grid.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.