* 2321463
* Collaborative Research: Design Decisions under Competition at the Edge of Bounded Rationality: Quantification, Models, and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhenghui Sha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2026
* USD 282,698.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the impact of information
uncertainty on design rationality under competition among teams and to develop a
competition-aware artificial intelligence (AI) assistant for design space
exploration and exploitation. Communication issues have been broadly recognized
as a critical factor that impacts design outcomes in team decisions, because the
information shared during communication can be incomplete and imperfect.
Therefore, addressing such issues by understanding the role of information
uncertainty on human design decisions in teams could lead to better coordination
of team decisions, advancement in human-AI collaborations, and significant cost
savings in large-scale engineering design projects. However, despite the
significant progress in modeling design decision-making in teams, current
literature neglects two fundamental aspects of the design process: human
designers have bounded rationality, and most design activities happen under
competition, whether consciously or unconsciously. This project is motivated to
fill this gap by developing theoretical and experimental constructs to
computationally model human designers’ sequential decisions in a competitive
environment and to experimentally measure their bounded rationality. The
expected outcome is a suite of new knowledge, including metrics, models,
algorithms, and testbeds, on human behavior in design teams under competition in
the presence of uncertainties. Broader impacts will be generated by directly
engaging diverse undergraduate students in research activities through the
Freshman Introduction to Research in Engineering (FIRE) program at the
University of Texas at Austin and the Pinnacle and Clark Scholars programs at
Stevens Institute of Technology.

This project is driven by answering two research questions: 1) what are the
effects of information uncertainty (e.g., when design information shared between
team members is incomplete) on design rationality under competition among teams?
2) How would such effects differ across a wider range of team sizes? To answer
the two questions, an interdisciplinary research approach is planned that
combines descriptive, prescriptive, and predictive analytics. In particular, we
will develop game theoretic models to model sequential design decisions under
competition, synergistically integrating two types of sequential learning
models, i.e., theory-driven prescriptive models (e.g., Bayesian optimization)
and data-driven predictive models (e.g., long-short term memory units). The new
approach explicitly models designers’ perceptions of their opponents’ past
performance and predicts the opponent’s future decisions, thereby providing a
quantitative way to study the influence of uncertain information shared among
designers in a team on their decisions in competition against other teams.
Experiments will be conducted to collect behavioral data to study how human
irrationality, benchmarking on rational behaviors predicted by the theoretical
models, would change over time during the course of the design competition. The
research findings will be validated in a real-world design challenge on solar
system design, where multiple teams compete for awards. To benefit a broader
research community, this project will build an open design infrastructure to
share the project data and findings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.