* 2321399
* A Bilevel Optimization Approach to Integrating Personalized Treatment with Healthcare Resource Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tae Woo Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 327,988.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of the national health and welfare
by developing innovative methods to personalize the treatment of diabetic
retinopathy (DR), the leading cause of blindness in American adults. Despite the
increasing availability of emerging therapies that enable various effective DR
treatment options, current clinical guidelines continue to rely on a one-size-
fits-all approach. This award supports the development of data-driven methods
that can lead to better utilization of emerging treatment techniques while
addressing the unique clinical, systemic, and social needs of individual
patients. With diabetic patients accounting for more than 10 percent of the US
population, the successful establishment of personalized DR treatment guidelines
will directly benefit numerous individuals. This project is expected to have a
particular impact on the health and welfare of underrepresented patients by
promoting equitable access to treatment. This award will fund a doctoral student
in interdisciplinary research through multilateral collaboration and create
educational materials for both operations research and healthcare professionals.

This research aims to develop personalized DR treatment guidelines through a
bilevel programming approach, which integrates two key perspectives on treatment
design: (i) optimizing patient-specific treatment schedule over time through
constrained, multi-agent Markov decision processes at the lower level, and (ii)
determining eye clinic-level operational interventions to enhance resource
allocation and provide personalized access to care at the upper level. The
complex interaction between eye clinics and patients will be approximated by a
large-scale mixed-integer program, which will be solved using decomposition
methods and patient-specific heuristics calibrated with data from the electronic
medical record system and a patient simulation model. Computational challenges
in the lower-level problems will be addressed via dimensionality reduction
techniques exploiting a unique solution structure and inverse optimization
techniques identifying model parameters that facilitate easy-to-compute decision
rules. This research will lead to advancements in the modeling and solution
approaches for bilevel, multi-agent sequential decision-making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.