* 2321842
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel electrolyzer architectures to enable electrified chemical manufacturing at industrial scales
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Bilen Akuzum, AEPNUS TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,986.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the creation of an economical and climate-friendly method to
produce valuable commodity chemicals from inexpensive feedstocks such as
chemical waste streams. Chemical manufacturing accounts for 8% of global
greenhouse gas emissions: waste produced from manufacturing battery chemicals
and recycling Lithium batteries could be converted back into input chemicals.
The technology focuses on developing new electrodes that use electricity to
produce acid and base from sulfate-containing waste streams. This innovation
will stimulate the US manufacturing sector by improving energy efficiency,
competitiveness, and environmental sustainability. This technology could
eliminate 3 billion tons of greenhouse gas emissions through electrification of
chemical manufacturing, while recycling or eliminating the production of a
hazardous waste. Moreover, the technology is more economical than current
methods, increasing the likelihood of widespread adoption. Replacing outdated
manufacturing plants with clean, efficient electrolysis systems would provide
high-paying jobs and tax revenue for the region.

Conventional salt electrolysis systems rely on titanium electrodes coated with a
precious metal catalyst (e.g., iridium oxide) to enable efficient operation. The
metal catalysts used for these coatings are expensive, rare, and fragile. This
means that the capital cost of existing salt splitting systems is high, while
their operating conditions (e.g., temperature, current density, and operating
efficiency) are fairly limited. This innovation will develop gas diffusion
electrodes that can help produce acid and base electrolytically from sulfate
waste streams at industrial cost parity. The unique microstructure and materials
design of the electrodes minimizes the use of precious metal catalysts to lower
costs, enhances lifetime for robust operation under corrosive environments, and
achieves higher operating temperature (>75 C) and improved current density (5000
A/m2) for lower operating costs. In this project, Design-of-Experiment
principles will be used to determine the best combinations of binder, catalyst,
and filler/support materials to outperform conventional systems. Optimal
chemical and electrochemical properties will be sought for high electrical
conductivity, ability to withstand corrosion in highly acidic environments, and
minimal oxidative dissolution of catalyst. The durability and efficiency of the
new electrodes will be tested first at the lab scale (25 cm2) for 100 hours and
then scaled up to 500 cm2 cells for pilot-scale analysis. In all studies, actual
sodium sulfate waste obtained from industrial partners will be utilized. The
effects of impurities ions in the feed stream on the electrode and membranes
will be tracked via spectroscopy and electron microscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.