* 2321304
* Learning Analytics for Process-driven Computer Programming Assignments
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hamid Karimi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,847.00

To develop student skills in computer programming, it is essential to understand
how students approach computer programming assignments. This knowledge can
improve teaching techniques, foster a diverse and inclusive student body, and
enhance our Nation's digital proficiency. This project at Utah State University
seeks to investigate students' keystroke patterns as they work on Python
programming assignments in introductory computer programming courses. This
innovative approach provides educators with actionable insights that could
improve computer science education. By analyzing academic and demographic data,
as well as controlled exercises, this project aims to develop targeted
intervention strategies that help struggling students succeed, while also
developing education research skills. The ultimate goal is to promote scientific
advancement and strengthen the Nation's computer science expertise, contributing
to national prosperity and welfare. This project has far-reaching implications,
potentially impacting not just current students but also our Nation's digital
capabilities and resilience in the years to come.

The rapid advancements in educational technology have presented an exceptional
opportunity to collect intricate details about students' learning processes
across various activities. The surge in computer-based learning has further
accelerated the collection of rich, granular data from students. In this
project, these advancements are leveraged to conduct a pilot project focused on
enhancing the pedagogy of introductory computer programming. The project's first
phase seeks to focus on the construction of a student dataset that will
encapsulate student programming keystrokes, demographic and academic
characteristics, as well as controlled exercises. Two innovative techniques to
examine student coding behavior through the dual lenses of computational
thinking and cognitive processes will be implemented. This project aims to
culminate in the development of an advanced and interpretative machine learning
model that will be able to predict student outcomes and detect plagiarism. The
insights from this pilot project will be disseminated among instructors and
practitioners, empowering them to formulate effective intervention strategies.
The proposed research activities are meticulously designed to bolster the PI's
capacity. They will equip the PI with broad knowledge, skills, and expertise,
fostering professional development in this dynamic field. This project is
supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation,
Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. This project is also
supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators'
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research in the core areas of
STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM
fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.