* 2321301
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Transport via Four-Phonon and Exciton-Phonon Interactions in Layered Electronic and Optoelectronic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiulin Ruan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 293,927.00

Semiconductor research and development over the past several decades have
enabled widespread use of electronic and optoelectronic devices in society.
Among the challenges that the semiconductor industry is facing, it has become
increasingly difficult to remove the large density of heat generation and
prevent overheating of silicon microchips. As one of the approaches to
overcoming this challenge, atomic layered materials are now being actively
investigated as next-generation electronic and optoelectronic materials due to
their potentially superior electric, optical, and thermal properties compared to
those of silicon. Compared to the silicon properties that have been extensively
investigated, many properties of these emerging materials have remained to be
understood. Heat can be transported by atomic vibration waves in these layered
materials and other solids. It is currently unclear how the highly nonlinear
interatomic springs influence the heat transfer ability of the atomic vibration
in these layered materials. In addition, light illumination on semiconductors
can excite electrons to high-energy states that are referred as excitons. There
is currently a knowledge gap in the heat-carrying ability of these excitons and
their influence on the atomic vibration waves. This project aims to address the
outstanding questions on these two specific fundamentals that control the heat
transport properties in these layered materials. The obtained knowledge will be
used to build new simulation tools, enhance online courses and classroom
instruction, and develop hands-on education modules to aid the recruitment and
training of a diverse population of next-generation workforce in thermal
engineering.

The goal of this project is to advance the fundamental understanding of the
effects of four-phonon and exciton-phonon interactions in thermal transport and
energy dissipation in emerging layered electronic and optoelectronic materials.
Specifically, four outstanding questions that are essential for the operation of
emerging layered electronic and optoelectronic materials will be addressed: (1)
How four-phonon interactions impact the thickness dependence of the lattice
thermal conductivity in multi-layered graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs); (2)
Whether four-phonon interactions reduce or broaden the temperature window of
hydrodynamic phonon transport in graphitic materials; (3) Whether exciton
diffusion can provide another channel for heat transport from hot spots in
layered optoelectronic and electronic materials; and (4) How exciton-phonon
coupling influences the lattice thermal transport and local non-equilibrium in
emerging TMD devices. These questions will be addressed by new computational
models that integrate frontier first-principles theory of exciton-phonon and
four-phonon coupling, and unique nanoscale thermal metrology tools including the
multi-probe thermal transport and photo-heat current measurements. The obtained
fundamental understanding of four-phonon and exciton-phonon interactions helps
to establish the foundation for modeling and controlling energy dissipation and
thermal transport in emerging layered electronic and optoelectronic devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.