* 2321366
* Excitonic electroabsorption effects in macroscopically aligned carbon nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Weilu Gao, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,657.00

Non-technical Description

Carbon nanotubes have gained tremendous interest as a nanomaterial with
potential to enable next generation optoelectronic devices. Individual nanotubes
have a strong change in light absorption under an applied electric field, a
phenomenon called electroabsorption. This makes them a promising candidate for
high-speed electro-optic modulators, crucial components for applications such as
optical communication, computing, and quantum information processing. Key to
leveraging nanotube properties will be to align large numbers of them up to
macroscopic scales. This project will use an intelligent autonomous self-
assembly system to achieve macroscopically aligned semiconducting carbon
nanotube films and then study their electro-optical properties. The research
findings from this project could lead to a new material platform and lay the
foundation for future technologies. The PI will also work to expand
participation in STEM through training and education activities in the
laboratory, classroom, and through outreach programs. The goal of these
activities is to develop a diverse future STEM workforce. Technical Description

Electroabsorption in conventional bulk semiconductors result in weak optical
modulation, requiring large driving electric field and switching energy, and are
sensitive to temperature variations. Semiconductor quantum wells can address
first two challenges but still suffer from sensitive temperature dependency,
require sophisticated manufacturing and engineering, and sometimes cryogenic
device operations. Nanomaterials are emerging as new high-performance,
versatile, and easy-to-manufacture room-temperature material platforms. However,
current demonstrations of electroabsorption effects in macroscopic materials are
limited. This project focuses on the direct experimental optical spectroscopy
demonstration of the excitonic electroabsorption effects in macroscopic films of
highly aligned and densely packed single-type semiconducting carbon nanotubes,
which are manufactured through a self-assembly system and driven under static
electric field. The goal of this project is to establish the manufacturing
platform of such macroscopic carbon nanotube ensembles and explore the optical
spectroscopy evidence of their electroabsorption effects. Specifically, the
principal investigator develops a closed-loop, automatic, and machine-learning-
assisted vacuum filtration system toward the fabrication of macroscopic films of
aligned single-electronic-type carbon nanotubes. In addition, the principal
investigator performs optical spectroscopy studies to explore electroabsorption
effects in aligned films of a few representative semiconducting carbon nanotubes
with different diameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.