* 2321069
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Broadening Adoption of Cyberinfrastructure and Research Workforce Development for Disaster Management
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Honggao Liu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 379,995.00

Disasters are prominent global issues which simultaneously pose threats to
multiple countries or regions. Disaster management is gradually empowered by
increasing geospatial big data awareness and growing computing capabilities to
produce spatial vulnerability and situational understanding for supporting
timely decisions. This project will establish an international CyberTraining for
Disaster Management (CTDM) network in which disaster research communities can
broaden their cyberinfrastructure (CI) and geospatial skills by participating in
the proposed training activities. The project will establish a CI-enabled
geospatial disaster science network among academic institutions, governmental
agencies, hazards research centers, industry, and educational organizations to
leverage the expertise of pertinent communities in developing training materials
for preparing the next-generation workforce. A novel training curriculum is
developed to consist of various training modalities such as summer schools,
workshop sessions, and online webinars, which utilize CI and scalable geospatial
analytics for effective disaster management practice. The goal is to train over
2000 students, researchers, and educators through diverse collaboration
networks. The project will broaden access to CI for disaster research
communities and help enhance workforce development among diverse disciplines
such as disaster science, geosciences, transportation, engineering, social,
behavioral, and economic sciences. A variety of disaster data, training
materials, and CI resources will be provided to underrepresented communities
through partnerships with Hispanic Serving Institutions (e.g., Texas A&M
University) and Historically Black Colleges & Universities (e.g., Morgan State
University). The project will help disaster research communities broaden their
CI-enabled disaster management and computational skills, thus improving
decision-making capabilities for enhancing community resilience. CTDM is
designed to greatly improve the well-being of socially vulnerable communities
significantly impacted by climate change and related disasters.

The project will introduce advanced CI and geospatial analytics to disaster
research communities by developing a CI-enabled disaster management curriculum.
A key approach is to apply CI and geospatial analytics in disaster management by
introducing four interconnected training modules from basic to advanced learning
levels: CI-Enabled Computing Module, Disaster Data Module, Geospatial Analytics
Module, and Disaster Problem-Solving Module. The Disaster Data Module provides
best practices of the FAIR (Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability, and
Reusability) principles and cutting-edge geospatial data analysis and
visualization techniques. The CI-Enabled Computing Module Introduces fundamental
concepts and skills of CI and high-performance computing to lower the barriers
to taking advantage of CI in disaster management research. Through the
Geospatial Analytics Module, learners will be equipped with advanced geospatial
data analysis and visualization techniques to better understand disaster
patterns across various spatiotemporal scales. Finally, the Disaster Problem-
Solving Module serves as an integration framework to ensure disaster management
concepts and practices will be well connected with the other three modules for a
holistic understanding of disaster management challenges addressed by advanced
CI.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.