* 2321055
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Education to Support Critical Energy and Chemical Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Xingya Liu, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,897.00

Critical energy and chemical infrastructures increasingly rely on integrating
information technologies (IT) into operational technology (OT) for data
analysis, automation, and remote operation. Despite recent advancement, the
infrastructures continue to be prone to cyber-attacks. Managing vulnerabilities
within OT environments is very different from that for IT. The project team at
Lamar University aims to address these vulnerabilities. The team includes
Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, and Criminal Justice faculty, and
proposes to develop an interdisciplinary cybersecurity educational program to
support the workforce needs of critical energy and chemical infrastructure. This
project will generate knowledge- and practice-oriented contents that the higher
education community can immediately utilize. The program will build the
foundation for students to understand key issues associated with industrial
cybersecurity, develop cyber-risk management strategies, build the capacity to
facilitate business continuity, and formulate disaster recovery plans.

The goal of this project is to transform the state of industrial cybersecurity
research workforce preparedness for the energy and chemical industry and broaden
cybersecurity education in engineering degree plans to support critical
infrastructures. Students will undertake research in maintaining operational
cybersecurity; data protection strategies and “Defense in Depth”; cybersecurity
incident response planning; and remote access to IT and OT Systems. This project
integrates research and education of IT and OT technologies within the context
of the three pillars of cybersecurity: people, technology, and process. The
project team will develop a new course with a cohesive series of course modules
for integration into traditional chemical engineering curriculums; develop
active case studies for chemical engineering, computer science and criminal
justice curriculums; and broaden student participation through games, tabletop
exercises, workshops, seminars and partnerships with energy and chemical
industry, cybersecurity industry, and related organizations. The target audience
are undergraduate and graduate students from chemical engineering, computer
science, and criminal justice, who will be trained to lead energy and chemical
industries in addressing cybersecurity problems. The team anticipates that the
project will directly engage a diverse group of students given the demographic
background of current enrollees in the host institution. The outcomes of this
project will be broadly disseminated through various channels as well as the
ACCESS program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.