* 2321544
* I-Corps:  All-in-One Virtual Human Testing Platform for Inhalation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Yu Feng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a virtual platform to design and test inhalers for human medical
applications. The proposed technology is designed to simulate airflow and the
inhalation of aerosolized medication emitted from various types of inhalers in
both healthy and diseased lungs, as well as drug translocation to other parts of
the human body. Currently, ineffective therapeutic outcomes cause 365 million
patients to suffer from lung diseases due to low medication delivery efficiency
to small airways. Technology to aid in the development of more effective
inhalers may help to achieve better drug delivery and therapeutic outcomes. The
proposed platform may be used to quantify airflow and the delivered dose of
aerosolized medication emitted from inhalers into human respiratory systems, as
well as the translocation of medications in the whole body. The proposed
platform may save 66% of the cost and 90% of the time for inhaler development
and approval, accelerating pulmonary healthcare research and the development of
new therapeutics that require inhalers. This may improve pulmonary health and
quality of life for patients with lung diseases.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a software platform to
simulate airflow and the inhalation of aerosolized medication emitted from
various types of inhalers. The proposed technology is a web-based user interface
and cloud-computing platform that may be used to evaluate inhaler performance
and bioequivalence. The proposed platform uses disease-specific whole-lung
models to understand how inhalers deliver accurate doses in disease-specific and
patient-specific lung environments. In addition, it may be used to evaluate how
lung disease can change lung elasticities and airway morphologies to affect drug
deposition, and provide high-resolution data to enhance the fundamental
understanding of how disease conditions, inhaler design, and drug formulation
can influence drug delivery efficiency to designated lung sites for lung disease
treatments. Evaluation of new inhalation device performance using this platform
may accelerate the process of inhaler innovation and regulatory approval of new
products to treat pulmonary diseases as well as advance inhaler innovation
beyond what existing computational lung models have achieved.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.