* 2321243
* Impacts of Inclusive Biology Curriculum on Student Attitudes and STEM Interest
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Charlie Blake, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 340,528.00

The project from Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville will work to
update instructional bioscience content in high-school curricula to increase
accuracy and decrease sociocultural biases. The proposed project will increase
our understanding of how biology instructional content can impact student
bioessentialist beliefs and has the potential to contribute foundational
knowledge about the epistemology of bioessentialist bias and the process by
which these attitudes develop. There has been limited research into the
mechanisms and tools within STEM education that can affect change in prejudicial
fundamental attitudes and beliefs about sex, sexuality, and gender. The research
instruments and curriculum materials developed as a part of this study as well
as the findings will be of use to future practitioners, encourage future
research on inclusive education, and create prospective tools for decreasing
prejudicial beliefs and implicit biases. Mixed methods analysis will explore
whether exposure to inclusive biology lesson plans can change the prevalence of
gender essentialist, transphobic, or homophobic attitudes, change STEM and
career interest, and whether any of these potential effects vary by student
identity, especially for LGBTQ students.

The project plan includes supportive activities for the PI through an aligned
professional development plan engaged through trainings, conferences, and the
support of expert mentors. These advisors will assist the PI in attaining the
skills needed for development as a STEM education researcher and scholar. The
effort will be guided by a diverse group of credentialed educators and
scientists working in accredited schools and universities. Dissemination will be
addressed through communication in STEM professional pathways, including
conferences, training, and publications. The project is supported by NSF's EDU
Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigatorsâ€™ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.