* 2321445
* Conference: Group Theory and Number Theory: Interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Mandi Schaeffer Fry, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,705.00

This grant is to support travel of participants to attend the conference "Group
Theory and Number Theory: Interactions", which will take place October 16-20,
2023 at Princeton University. Bringing together experts in the areas group
theory and number theory, this conference will provide new networking
opportunities and stimulate important research collaborations between
researchers in these two branches of mathematics. Group theory is motivated by
the study of symmetries of objects found in many areas of science, art, and
technology, from molecular structures, to the spin of particles, to the patterns
in cryptosystems, to the structure of musical chords. Number theory is motivated
by the study of the integers, prime numbers, integer-valued functions, and
generalizations of these objects, and has applications to the same areas as
group theory. In many of the key problems in group theory, one sees natural
relationships to number theory, and vice versa. Recent advances and open
conjectures in the two areas have made it clear that there is a strong benefit
to being able to combine the techniques from both. This conference will inspire
progress on important questions, while also broadening the tools and ideas
available to researchers in both areas, and fostering a new generation of
researchers studying interactions of group theory and number theory. Students,
early-career researchers, and mathematicians who identify as women and other
underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to participate.

One of the most well-known examples with a clear relationship between group
theory (and, more specifically, representation theory) and number theory is the
Langlands program. The main speakers, representing some of the most influential
names and trends currently in the two areas of group theory and number theory,
will give talks discussing new results related to the Langlands program, as well
as new results on algebraic groups, permutation groups, probabilistic approaches
to representation theory and word growth, local-global conjectures in character
theory, and other topics that bridge the two areas of group
theory/representation theory and number theory. The conference website is:
https://sites.google.com/view/tiep60conference/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.