* 2321416
* NeTS: Small: Exploring the Non-Standardized Polices, Operations, and Requirements for 5G Cellular Networks and Beyond: Advancing the Modeling, Tools, and Evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hui Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,995.00

The cellular network is a global infrastructure that provides seamless data,
voice, and text services, making it a key player in todayâ€™s connected world. The
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) is a consortium of seven
telecommunications standards organizations that work together to develop
protocols for global mobile telecommunications, such as 5G NR. However, in
practice, many non-3GPP standardized policies, operations, and requirements are
often deployed in operational cellular networks and mobile devices in accordance
with local regulatory requirements or specific operator needs. These non-3GPP
standardized elements can lead to unforeseen and detrimental issues when device
vendors and carriers need to add or revise protocols and services to comply with
them. However, the negative impact of non-3GPP standardized elements is largely
unexplored. Therefore, this project aims to advance the technology for
identifying non-3GPP standardized elements and assessing their potential
negative impact on the overall performance and security of cellular networks.
The project's novelties are to comprehensively discover non-3GPP standardized
elements, including implicit and hidden ones, which have a negative real-world
impact, using multidisciplinary techniques. The project's broader significance
and importance are to extend the state-of-the-art cellular network research to a
new frontier, investigate original problems that entreat innovative non-3GPP
standardized policies, operations, and requirements exploration, analysis,
network modeling, data collection, data mining solutions, and pave the way for a
new research endeavor to enable more robust, resilient, and secure cellular
networks. Additionally, it contributes to the nation's workforce with students
well-trained in mobile networks, artificial intelligence, and natural language
processing.

This project comprises three research thrusts: (1) developing new techniques for
identifying non-3GPP standardized elements. This includes SpecInsight, an
innovative 3GPP technical specification analysis tool that uses
multidisciplinary techniques to comprehend and search 3GPP technical
specifications efficiently and intelligently, and DocIntrpr, a tool that
automatically extracts the relevant policies, operations, and requirements from
various non-3GPP documents using natural language processing techniques; (2)
uncovering hidden non-3GPP standardized elements. Not all non-3GPP standardized
elements are written in publicly available documents. Therefore, we propose to
develop SpecVerifer, a model-checking tool that analyzes 3GPP technical
specifications formally, which aims to identify all necessary but missing
designs since they are either complemented by hidden non-3GPP standardized
elements or causing unexpected results; and (3) developing a new testing
platform, open5G-Flex, to efficiently assess the impact of various non-3GPP
standardized elements without suffering from the limited access to cellular
infrastructure and possible ethical/legal issues when conducting experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.