* 2321889
* CC* CIRA: Improving Cyberinfrastructure to Advance Research and Education (ICARE+) Addressing Montana's Digital Equity Gap
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Zachary Rossmiller, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This planning project supports the University of Montana, Montana’s Tribal
Colleges and Universities (TCU), and the American Indian Higher Education
Consortium to work together to identify each partner’s specific
cyberinfrastructure need and to identify the scientific research projects that
benefit from improved connectivity. Robust, high-speed network connections
provide access to online resources, opportunities for collaboration, and the
ability to teach and learn at a distance. Representatives from the Montana
University System, industry partners, and other infrastructure experts will join
the effort by attending a workshop aimed at identifying technical solutions and
costs for improving TCU Internet connectivity. The project will create a plan
for Montana’s Tribal Colleges and Universities to achieve digital equity in
which everyone has access to the same online resources regardless of location or
socioeconomic situation. The improved Internet connectivity will enable
Montana's TCUs to expand their research and academic activities while
strengthening their position as institutions of choice, attracting students,
educators, and researchers expecting access to advanced resources and services.
In addition, the planning process is helping to identify and facilitate
opportunities for collaborations between institutions and researchers while
furthering Montana’s ability to develop a comprehensive regional higher-
education Cyberinfrastructure Plan. The outcome of this effort is a well
thought-out and designed plan to be used for securing funding to address
Montana’s digital equity gap.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.