* 2321234
* Designing an Equitable Approach to Multiplicative Reasoning through Dynamic Measurement for Area (DYME-A)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nicole Panorkou, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This project uses technology as both a pedagogical tool and a democratizing
force to expand student access to the mathematics of area measurement and
multiplication, and to support meaningful connections between these topics and
students' everyday lives. The project builds on prior work with Dynamic
Measurement for Area (DYME-A), an approach that engages students in exploring
models of area as a dynamic sweep of a line segment over a distance. Prior
results suggest that this approach supports students' multiplicative reasoning
about area as a continuous quantity that can dynamically change based on two
linear measures: length and width. Findings also showed DYME-A's potential for
supporting students' reasoning about multiplication and division. To make the
DYME-A approach accessible to a diverse population of students, this project
aims to expand it to multiplication of whole numbers in fourth grade through the
design of dynamic area models that attends to students' culturally relevant and
context-appropriate learning experiences.

The project's guiding questions are: (1) How can students' DYME-A reasoning
support their development of multiplicative reasoning? (2) What type of an
intervention design for DYME-A can reach a more diverse population of students
and broaden its impact? (3) How may the design experiment methodology be
informed by equity research to engineer more equitable designs and theories?
This project builds the capacity of the principal investigator through a
professional development plan with mentorship that involves (a) delving deeper
into the multiplicative reasoning research to describe the interplay with
DYME-A, and (b) problematizing the current use of design experiment methodology
and finding ways to merge established methods used in equity research to
engineer more equitable designs and theories. The DYME-A approach opens novel
avenues toward establishing stronger connections between measurement and
multiplication that may support other areas of K-8 mathematics, such as
fractions and proportional reasoning. Working to develop principles for more
equitable design experiments will also contribute to research on innovative
methodological approaches.

The project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators' capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.