* 2321843
* Equipment: CC* Data Storage: Improving Research Ability with Data Storage at the University of Montana
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Erin Landguth, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,047.00

The University of Montana (UM) proposes to acquire and provision a flexible,
cost-effective, tiered data storage system that increases the overall storage
capacity of the university to 5.3PB and improves performance and researcher
usability. The storage is a step in a larger plan by UM to progressively improve
its research cyberinfrastructure by updating data centers, providing high-speed
connections to campus sites, and deploying a high-performance computing cluster
and Science DMZ. The storage upgrade supports project-driven needs identified by
UM researchers, including fuel treatments in forestry, invasive species
modeling, geophysics research, permafrost modeling, computational ecology, and
SARS COV-2 variant detection.

The data storage system leverages a 100GB internal network for processing and
communications between the head node, metadata servers, and object storage
servers. The UM storage system will share 20% of the resource through the Open
Science Data Federation. The UM storage supports a diverse research community
spread across multiple institutions within the Montana University System,
several Tribal Colleges, and the national research community. Also, in
collaboration with West Big Data Innovation Hub, the project is co-hosting a GO
FAIR US event bringing exposure to Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and
Reusable (FAIR) principles. In addition, the project provides experiential
learning opportunities for select information technology students by engaging
them to participate in the deployment, maintenance, and training associated with
the project.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.