* 2321840
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Interpretable and Noise-Robust Machine Learning for Neurophysiology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mohsen Imani, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 243,200.00

Recent advancements in machine learning have revolutionized various fields,
including the biomedical sciences. However, the adoption of modern machine
learning techniques in neuroscience remains limited. Given that neuroscience
involves identifying nonlinear systems by utilizing experimental observations to
characterize them, machine learning has the potential to be transformative in
this domain. Over the past decade, significant progress has been made in
developing powerful experimental techniques that enable the observation of
neural signals at larger scales and higher resolutions than ever before.
Unfortunately, the conceptual progress in the field has been slow due to the
lack of corresponding advancements in data analysis approaches. Many studies
still rely on classical tools that overlook the richness and complexity of
neural signals. The objective of this project is to create a toolkit that
empowers systems neuroscientists to construct models connecting sensation,
perception, and cognition. The proposed framework enables neuroscientists to fit
flexible models capable of performing essential perceptual and cognitive tasks
directly from neural recordings. The significance of this research lies in its
potential to enhance our understanding of the brain's complex functions, which
can ultimately lead to the development of advanced therapeutic methods and
diagnostic tools for neurological disorders. Moreover, it will provide valuable
insights into human cognition, potentially enhancing artificial intelligence and
machine learning applications. This project also aims to establish an integrated
educational and outreach plan, including interdisciplinary courses and programs
accessible to undergraduate and graduate students from computer science,
cognitive science, and the school of medicine.

This research project focuses on the development of a biologically plausible and
interpretable modeling framework that employs neuro-symbolic representations to
offer a hierarchical explanation of perception and cognition. The proposed
framework bridges the gap between machine learning and neuroscience, opening up
new avenues for understanding and interpreting brain function. It comprises two
main stages: (1) an encoding stage that models data transformation through
spiking neurons, emulating the anatomy and physiology of early sensory pathways,
and (2) a cognitive stage that establishes neuro-symbolic models using neural
representations and algorithms that simulate higher-level brain dynamics. The
cognitive stage will adhere to biologically plausible computations, facilitating
the interpretation of model phenomena at a mechanistic level. To validate the
framework, neural signals will be recorded across various scales and resolutions
(from single units to EEG) within the context of hearing. Furthermore,
behavioral experiments will be conducted to evaluate the model's ability to
replicate human behavior in common perceptual and cognitive tasks. All developed
tools will be released as open-source libraries, serving as valuable resources
for the neuroscience community, including non-experts in modeling or
programming. This broad accessibility not only facilitates the proliferation of
knowledge but also encourages the development of innovative solutions in the
field, further enhancing its societal impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.