* 2321179
* Critical Data Science Methods to Broaden Capacity in STEM Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Ebony McGee, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 12/31/2026
* USD 999,569.00

This project extends the training and community building activities of the
Institute in Critical Quantitative, Computational, and Mixed Methods (ICQCM), a
data science training institute established in 2019. The project seeks to
increase the number of faculty and postdoctoral researchers who utilize
quantitative and computational research methods in research on populations
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields of study. The goals are to enable participants at the Institute to
incorporate quantitative and computational methods in conceptualizing research
projects, establish collaborative networks of quantitative and computational
research practitioners, and affirm self-efficacy of researchers who are
themselves underrepresented in the field through culturally relevant, asset-
focused training opportunities. The use of critical perspectives in
race/ethnicity responds to a need for more scholars to bring these perspectives
to quantitative research to complement the larger number who already routinely
do so for qualitative research.

The Institute aims to provide a continuum of training, individual coaching, and
proposal development workshops. Towards this goal the project team will pursue
four objectives. First is to conduct an assets assessment of a cohort of 25 new
ICQCM scholars for training, with a special effort to recruit participants from
minority serving institutions. Second is to provide both in-person and virtual
data-intensive training in quantitative and computational methods and their
integration into mixed methods. Third is to expand the pool of ICQCM Institute
Fellows to provide additional networking opportunities. Fourth, and finally, is
to expand the ICQCM Knowledge Repository to include Continuing Education Modules
toward professional certification in critical quantitative and computational
methodologies. The curriculum will have a dual focus on methodological knowledge
and specialization and a critical perspective on the use of quantitative and
computational methods for research on broadening participation. Topics will
include broadening participation frameworks, research design, fundamentals of
quantitative methods, and grant proposal development. The Institute is expected
to stimulate more researchers from groups that are underrepresented in the field
to employ quantitative and computational methods in STEM education research. The
project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigatorsâ€™ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.