* 2321285
* I-Corps: 3D Printed High Performance Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Rahul Panat, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of three-dimensional (3D) printed battery electrodes that improve
energy capacity and power performance. As batteries become an integral part of
many products, from electronics to electric vehicles, the demand for high
performance batteries is expected to grow considerably. The proposed technology
may lead to advanced manufacturing techniques for Li-ion batteries that are well
suited for consumer and wearable electronics â€“ fields that are growing rapidly.
Longer lasting high-performance batteries may help reduce e-waste by increasing
device life. Supply of low-cost energy storage options also may lead to
equitable access to energy that is critical for the use of technology.
Additionally, these batteries potentially may be utilized in electric vehicles,
which is a high growth industry attracting significant investment. Enabling the
growth of electric vehicles through high performance batteries may have a
significant impact on reducing carbon emissions. This innovation may shift the
approach to battery development from materials discovery to process and
manufacturing.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of ultra-thick electrodes
(UTEs) using advanced aerosol jet (AJ) three-dimensional (3D) printing
technology. Increasing electrode thickness reduces non-active components (e.g.,
current collectors, separator, etc.), resulting in large gains in energy density
and a significant cost reduction. Increasing electrode thickness, however,
delays the Lithium transport, causing poor power performance and capacity loss.
Using 3D printing allows creation of UTEs without a loss of performance. UTEs
created using the proposed process have been used to demonstrate improved charge
times (7.5 minutes for 80% state-of-charge) and increased energy density (up 50%
to 450 Wh/kg), by taking full advantage of the energy storage capability of the
active materials. In addition, preliminary results using the AJ printed battery
show improved performance compared to conventional laminated structure. The
silver-based 3D structured electrodes showed a 400% increase in specific
capacity, 100% increase in areal capacity, and a high electrode volume
utilization compared to a thin, solid silver block electrode. The proposed
commercialization of this technology may advance battery development and change
how batteries are manufactured.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.