* 2321961
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Abhishek Dubey, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The Ninth IEEE International Conference on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP 2023) will
be held in Nashville, TN, USA on June 26-30, 2023. IEEE SMARTCOMP 2023
conference offers a valuable opportunity to present cutting-edge computing and
engineering research results, to learn about the state-of-the-art in smart and
connected computing and communities, and to train US-based undergraduate,
master’s, doctoral, and post-doctoral students (from computer science and
engineering disciplines) through the main conference and other associated events
(e.g., student forum, workshops, demo, posters, and industry sessions).
SMARTCOMP 23 will be the first in-person meeting since the pandemic and as such
will facilitate research collaborations in this important research space.This
grant will support the travel of 20 US-based students to attend the IEEE
SMARTCOMP 2023 conference in-person in Nashville, TN, USA. SMARTCOMP is the
premier conference on smart computing that is emerging as an important
multidisciplinary area. Smart Computing can be broadly classified into two major
topics: (1) how to design and build smart computing and service systems, and (2)
how to use computing and engineering technology for resource sustainability to
improve the human experience. Applications of smart computing span trans-
disciplinary boundaries such as transportation, energy, sustainability,
structural health, environmental protection, healthcare, security, and so on.
Advancements in wireless mobile communications, nanotechnology, cyber-physical
systems (CPS), internet of things (IoT), sensor networking,
cognitive/intelligent systems, control theory, wisdom computing, cloud
computing, pervasive computing, and social computing are bringing smart
computing and smart service systems to a newer dimension and improving mankind’s
quality of life and living experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.