* 2321095
* Collaborative Research: High-resolution imaging of the Elgin-Lugoff earthquake swarm sequence and subsurface structures in South Carolina using a dense seismic nodal array
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Daniel Frost, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2025
* USD 168,420.00

A prolonged earthquake swarm sequence started on December 27, 2021, beginning
with a magnitude 3.3 earthquake between Elgin and Lugoff in South Carolina, a
region with very low prior seismic activity. More than 90 small earthquakes have
been reported in this region since then, with the largest magnitude of 3.6
occurring on June 29, 2022. These earthquakes have continued until at least
summer of 2023, making this highly unusual for the region. This swarm has had no
clear main shock and has no obvious tectonic or anthropogenic causes. So far,
standard earthquake locations do not reveal a clear relationship with the pre-
existing Eastern Piedmont Fault System. This project will analyze seismic data
from a set of instruments deployed by the researchers in October 2022 to better
image the fault structure hosting the swarm and the underlying driving force.
This project will naturally provide opportunities for public engagement with the
impacted community in Elgin-Lugoff, and the broader midlands of South Carolina,
where many residents have felt earthquakes for the first time in their lives.
This project also provides inclusion and STEM workforce development
opportunities, by funding research by undergraduate students from the local
South Carolina community to perform research in their own state. Students on
this grant will participate in outreach to build STEM literacy through knowledge
transfer and further broaden participation in geoscience. This project will also
provide funding to support summer internships at both institutions.

In October 2022, 85 seismic nodes were deployed for 4 months by the research
team over the Elgin-Lugoff swarm to record further earthquakes. These
instruments were complemented by one broadband station and one nearby strong
motion station operated by the South Carolina Seismic Network. The rich dataset
can be used to identify additional smaller earthquakes, which will better image
fault structures hosting this swarm sequence and elucidate the driving forces.
The work will attempt to reveal small earthquakes during the nodal deployment
period, below the detection threshold before this deployment, by using both
machine learning and template matching techniques. The team will then relocate
these newly detected events with waveform-based techniques, followed by focal
mechanism determinations. This information will be used to construct a new model
of the seismic velocities beneath Elgin. Using both the more complete catalog
and the improved velocity model, the earthquakes earlier in this swarm can be
relocated relative to the later ones thus improving the accuracy of the whole
catalogue. Results from this project will answer the following questions: 1)
does the swarm occur in a diffuse or well-defined region, 2) how the swarm
evolved in space and time, and 3) what is the likely process that drives this
swarm. The information gained from the analysis will inform on the ongoing
tectonic processes in South Carolina, and on East coast seismicity and tectonics
generally.

This project is jointly funded by the Geophysics program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.