* 2321441
* SBIR Phase II:  Improving farmer safety and grain storage efficiencies via an autonomous grain management and extraction robot
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Benjamin Johnson, GRAIN WEEVIL CORPORATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 994,390.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project includes the development and implementation of a robot for
post-harvest grain management with the goal of reducing waste, increasing
efficiency, and improving the overall sustainability of the agricultural sector.
Post-harvest grain management is a crucial aspect of agriculture; However, it
can also be a challenging and labor-intensive process for farmers. The
incorporation of robots in this process has the potential to alleviate these
difficulties and improve overall productivity. By reducing waste and increasing
efficiency in grain storage and processing, farmers can ensure that a greater
proportion of their crops are utilized, resulting in a more substantial yield.
Additionally, the use of automation can enhance working conditions for farmers,
allowing them to devote more time to other important tasks. The findings of this
research have the potential to have a significant impact on national security,
food security, and the rural economy.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses
farmer/worker well-being with research and development on a grain bin management
robot. This robot has the potential to transform the field of post-harvest grain
storage through its ability to autonomously perform novel and innovative tasks
within granular bulk storage environments. Additionally, the robot's ability to
safely and effectively operate in harsh, hazardous environments through the
implementation of robust safety measures and the use of specialized, hardened
electronics further demonstrates the significance of this technology in
advancing the field of agricultural robotics. As this technology develops, the
autonomous robot will change the way grain is stored. Advances from this
research expand the focus from safety to the ability to do the work that no
human could. The robot will positively impact labor issues, grain quality
improvements, and workflow efficiencies throughout the grain-based supply chain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.