* 2321875
* Coupled carbonate dissolution and authigenic clay formation in the bioturbated zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2026
* USD 802,309.00

Chemical reactions that occur in ocean sediments play an important role in
global geochemical cycles, including the carbon cycle. Understanding these
reactions is key to predicting the response of the ocean to ongoing disturbances
like climate change. This project will combine field measurements, controlled
laboratory experiments, and modeling to increase understanding of the interplay
of sediment mixing by burrowing organisms and geochemical reactions, and how
they affect the ocean’s carbon and alkalinity balance. The project provides for
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in field work, experimental
procedures, the use of sophisticated state-of-the-art analytical equipment,
quantitative data analysis, and numerical modeling techniques. The educational
goals are to encourage scientific discovery while fostering creativity, promote
critical-thinking skills, enhance problem solving skills, and to encourage the
development of the next generation of scientists to be able to address the many
environmental challenges facing society.

The general objectives of the project are to advance our conceptual
understanding and predictive quantitative modeling of the impacts of complex
patterns of oxidation-reduction and acid-base reactions on biogeochemical
processes within the bioturbated zone. In continental margin deposits underlying
oxygenated water, the reoxidation of reduced metabolic products such as
ammonium, iron (II), manganese (II) and pyrite results in strong acid
production. Sedimentary pyrite oxidation in particular can drive carbonate
dissolution and silicate authigenesis. The resulting coupling of carbonate and
silicate reactions remains poorly known, and may produce or consume carbonate
alkalinity. These reactions are focused at boundaries between oxic and anoxic
zones. Oxic-anoxic zonation and zonal interaction patterns in bioturbated
deposits reflect the formation, scaling, and residence times of irrigated burrow
structures as well as feeding and mobility activity, which dynamically exposes
anoxic sediment and promotes reoxidation and oxic-anoxic oscillations. As shown
by initial experiments, these processes result not only in undersaturation of
carbonates and enhanced dissolution, but may also promote forward (alkalinity
producing) and reverse (alkalinity consuming) silicate weathering reactions. The
proposed research will utilize a combined approach of field measurements,
controlled laboratory experimental manipulations and geometric mimics, 2-D
imaging sensors, and theoretical modeling, to address how complex, dynamic
biogenic transport-reaction geometries that result from bioturbation activities,
mediate coupled redox reactions associated with carbonate dissolution and clay
authigenesis, and affect net benthic alkalinity fluxes. This novel research will
further constrain factors controlling net sediment-water alkalinity fluxes
between lithogenic deposits and overlying water, and thus models of ocean
acidification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.