* 2321079
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Algorithmic and Information-Theoretic Challenges in Causal Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Leonard Schulman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 06/30/2026
* USD 616,000.00

Scientific research is often intended to answer questions of causal effect in
various domains such as public health, medicine, economic or educational policy,
regulatory policy, business decisions, etc. However, precisely because so much
is at stake in many of these questions, scientists are frequently precluded by
ethical or other constraints from addressing them with a randomized controlled
trial (RCT), the gold standard for experimental research. This has often been
one of the greatest barriers to establishing cause and effect in matters of
public interest. The framework of causal networks is a relatively recent
elaboration of the scientific method which enables one to codify assumptions
that some parts of a system have no direct effect on some others (without ruling
out indirect effects). When certain assumptions are justified, one can in
principle use purely observational data in lieu of RCTs to determine causal
effects. However, existing methods are justified only within a narrow range of
assumptions and often do not scale well to large networks. This project, to be
carried out by the investigator, students, postdocs and collaborators, is
dedicated to increasing the range of applicability of such methods with new
algorithms and sample complexity bounds, as well as bounds on the strength of
correlations that can occur in large, sparse causal networks.

At a fundamental level, there are two obstacles to rigorous causal inference:
latent confounding and selection bias. Latent confounding occurs because
significant aspects of the system cannot (or have not) been observed. Selection
bias occurs if data is recorded only under special circumstances that are
correlated with the quantities of interest. The presence of a global confounder
(one which affects all observables) rules out causal identification---unless
additional assumptions are introduced. One such is a cardinality bound on the
range of the global confounder; however, existing methods require in addition a
statistical separation assumption. Work in this project aims to relax this
assumption in favor of model identification in Wasserstein distance. The project
also seeks to move beyond a single global confounder to efficient treatment of
multiple global confounders. Another goal of the project is to apply causal
networks to the analysis of time series data, a topic with a currently distinct
methodology. A key goal of the project is to provide strong information
inequalities: a special case, strong data processing inequalities, have been
studied for concatenations of noisy channels, the simplest example of a causal
network; but nothing of this type is known for networks with latent confounding
and selection bias. A further goal of the project is to give methods for causal
discovery (the use of statistical data rather than domain knowledge to determine
network structure) that work efficiently and are robust to noise despite a
cardinality-bounded global confounder.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.