* 2321175
* Leveraging Machine Learning to Examine Engineering Students Self-selection in Entrepreneurship Education Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Prateek Shekhar, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2026
* USD 349,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing the understanding
of undergraduate engineering students' participation in entrepreneurship
education programs. Entrepreneurship and innovation are important for economic
success, and engineers often hold a central role in leading innovation in
today's high-technology world. To compete successfully in the global
technological innovation economy, graduating engineers need to possess
entrepreneurial skills to identify opportunities and understand market and
business needs. Entrepreneurship education programs continue to be recognized as
a mechanism for developing entrepreneurial skills and innovativeness in
engineering and other STEM graduates. With increasing evidence supporting the
advantages of entrepreneurship programming, it is important to ensure that
broader engineering student populations are exposed to entrepreneurship
programming. However, students often self-select into entrepreneurship education
programs, and there is a lack of research in this regard. The project examines
engineering students' self-selection by investigating the research question: How
do engineering students' demographic, socio-economic, and academic backgrounds
predict their participation in engineering entrepreneurship programs? By
building a research-based understanding of student participation in
entrepreneurship education programs, this individual investigator development
project serves the national interest by providing insights for outreach,
recruitment, and programmatic efforts, to widen the impact of these programs in
undergraduate engineering education. The project uses innovative quantitative
methods to examine how engineering students' demographic and academic background
interactively predict their enrollment (or non-enrollment) in entrepreneurship
education programs.

As the STEM education community continues to develop innovative educational
interventions, it is critical to investigate which students are enrolling in
such programs, particularly from a demographic standpoint. Drawing on social
selection theory that highlights the importance of students' backgrounds, the
goal of this project is to leverage regression and machine learning techniques
as an exploratory, data-driven approach to examine engineering students'
engagement in entrepreneurship education programs. Because background factors
are likely to be associated with each other in complex ways, the focus of the
project is to examine social selection using an interactionist view which
examines the dynamic interplay of student demographic factors. The project
contributes to advancing conceptual understanding by providing data-driven
models explaining student participation that lay the foundation for future
research in the emerging field of engineering entrepreneurship education. In
addition, the project will study the effectiveness and suitability of
regression-based methods and advanced machine learning modeling techniques (and
their algorithmic variants), which can advance the use of similar approaches in
engineering education research. This project is supported through a partnership
with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family
Foundation. This project is also supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators' capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research
in the core areas of STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.