* 2321087
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Co-Creating Sustainable Transformations of Food Supply Chains through Cooperative Business Models and Governance
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ashley Colby, GLOBAL PHILANTHROPY PARTNERSHIP
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2026
* USD 118,200.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
develop and employ new transdisciplinary approaches to address sustainable
consumption and production as a socio-technical system to help inform decision-
making for sustainable, resilient, and just systems of consumption and
production.

The project focuses on transdisciplinary research approaches engaging local
stakeholders on how to innovate, convert, and strengthen food supply chains in
different socio-cultural-political contexts across 6 countries. Conventional,
globalized food supply chains are vulnerable to many factors such as climate
change, pandemics, political unrest, food insecurity, high food prices,
injustices against workers, and dependence on trade partners violating human
rights. Various efforts have been undertaken to transform food supply chains
towards sustainability by reducing transport, paying fair prices, adding value
in the region of origin, adopting worker safety standards, and increasing
accountability along the supply chain from production to consumption.
Cooperative business models, such as worker or consumer cooperatives, as well as
cooperative governance such as food policy councils or community-supported
agriculture adopt many of these sustainable practices. Yet, there is little
empirical, comparative research on how to implement sustainable food supply
chains through cooperative models. The project will explore entire supply
chains, and the case studies will be used to focus on specific supply chain
issues addressed, the phase of the supply chain open for the transformation, the
range of food products, and the governance elements from the supporting
entrepreneurial ecosystem. The case studies will employ a theoretical framework
that links sustainability transformation, short supply chains, and alternative
food networks, while using a research methodology that combines sustainability
assessment, visioning, strategy building, real-world experimentation, and
evaluation methods, in transdisciplinary collaboration with supply-chain and
governance actors. Results from this project will provide guidance and
inspiration to researchers and practitioners on how food supply chains can be
successfully transformed towards sustainability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.