* 2321396
* CAREER: Impact of Inlet Conditions on Interfacial Instability and Spray Formation: High-Fidelity Simulation, Characterization, and Sub-Grid Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Yue Ling, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 332,469.00

An efficient simulation that can precisely predict the process of spray
formation would be of great benefit to a variety of important applications such
as combustion engines, spray cooling, and thin-film fabrication. Two fundamental
barriers in advancing simulation of spray formation are 1) the lack of a
comprehensive understanding of the effects of inlet conditions on the
destabilization and breakup of liquids; and 2) the extreme computational cost of
a high-fidelity simulation that can capture all the physical scales. This
project aims to tackle these two challenges by characterizing the impact of
inlet conditions on spray formation through high-fidelity simulation. The
proposed work will be focused on sprays formed by planar air-blast atomizers to
better understand the fundamental fluid dynamics. The physical insights of spray
formation processes obtained in the project will assist engineers in developing
new techniques to control spray features. The educational plan will be developed
in collaboration with Baylor's Mayborn Museum's NSF-funded Portal to the Public
program and the Learning Experience (LEx) Labs of the Region 12 Educational
Service Center.

The specific objectives of the proposed project are: 1) to characterize through
high-fidelity simulation the effects of inlet gas turbulence, asymmetry in the
gas inflow velocity, and geometry of gas inlets on interfacial instability and
spray formation; 2) to establish a novel sub-grid model based on topological
skeletonization of liquid structures; and 3) to create educational activities
based on our simulation and modeling research to inspire K-12 students,
including those in grades 7-12 and those with physical limitations, to consider
a STEM education and career pathway. Former studies were generally limited to
basic features of inlet conditions, such as the mean velocity profile, and finer
aspects such as inlet turbulence and inlet flow asymmetry are usually assumed to
be secondary. This assumption has been challenged by recent experiments and will
be systematically examined in this project. The research will provide a
comprehensive understanding of the impact of inlet conditions on interfacial
instability and spray formation. The skeletonization method, which is widely
used in computer graphics, will be employed to develop a novel sub-grid model
for spray formation. The surface, curve, and point skeletons, representing
micro-scale liquid sheets, filaments, and droplets formed in atomization, will
provide a framework to model the unresolved dynamics, deformation, and breakup
of these liquid structures. The use of the new model will significantly reduce
the computational cost of numerical simulation of spray formation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.