* 2321218
* Faculty Professional Identity in Community Networks for Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Jing Zhang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 10/31/2026
* USD 349,789.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating faculty
professional identity in Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE)
community networks. Undergraduate research experiences have been shown to
benefit undergraduate students’ success by improving critical thinking skills,
retention in STEMs, and graduation rate. CUREs provide effective alternatives to
traditional and extensive undergraduate research experiences through
incorporating key components of research into classroom or lab settings so that
all students have access to research experiences and scientific practices. To
support their students in CUREs, several large community networks of faculty at
different institutions have formed; each community network focuses on a
different topical area. Research on the assessment of CURE efficacy has been
largely focused on student outcomes, such as its effect on conceptual learning,
self-efficacy, and science identity. Few studies have looked into faculty
professional identities and their roles in teaching CUREs, which will
consequently impact the success of students. To help fill this important
knowledge gap, this project will recruit and interview faculty from CURE
community networks to investigate how faculty professional identities are
influenced through participating in CURE community networks. Findings from this
project will advance understanding of faculty professional identity and benefit
a diverse pool of CURE faculty through informing faculty professional
development activities, which will in turn broaden access to research
opportunities for students from various backgrounds through enrollment in CUREs.

The goal of this Individual Investigator Development – New project is to address
how participation in CURE Communities of Practice impacts faculty professional
identities, and to refine a faculty professional identity framework which
accounts for their participation and its effects on their identities as
researchers and instructors. Prior studies identified the benefits of teaching
CUREs for faculty, including producing preliminary results for research,
contributing to tenure and promotion, and recruiting high-quality students to
faculty labs. Barriers to CURE teaching include increased time commitment, lack
of subject knowledge on research topics, and limited resources. However, the
roles of faculty teaching and research identities in CUREs have not been studied
together. This project will take the lens of identity to explore faculty
motivation and decision-making in CUREs to address this significant knowledge
gap. This project will recruit CURE faculty from Malate dehydrogenase CUREs
Community network and Biochemistry Authentic Scientific Inquiry Laboratory
network to take part in semi-structured interviews. Transcripts will be team-
coded and analyzed by thematic analysis. For this individual investigator
development grant, the principal investigator will be mentored by a diverse team
of senior researchers with expertise in qualitative education research and
participate in professional development workshops. The principal investigator
will also work with an advisory board with a broader range of expertise related
to the project. Project findings will be disseminated through conference
presentations and journal publications. This project is supported by NSF’s EDU
Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR BCSER) program,
which is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality
STEM education research in the core areas of STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.