* 2321358
* MCA: Understanding the animal movement and disease transmission interface
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Meggan Craft, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 10/31/2026
* USD 395,122.00

Transmission of infectious pathogens between individuals is often the result of
host-to-host contacts, and those contacts are influenced by host movement and
the social and biophysical environment. Yet there is not a general framework
that directly connects the social and biophysical environment to host contact
rates. The overall objectives of this research are to provide protected time and
support for a mid-career researcher to update her quantitative tools under the
mentorship of two early-career partners with said expertise, and to test how the
environment links to contact rate using high-resolution movement data and modern
movement-contact analyses. Once disease-producing host contacts are tied to
environmental features, animal movement data can be used to predict the location
of contacts and consequent pathogen transmission in novel environments. Given
current global concern over the emergence of new diseases and host reservoirs,
such as sustained transmission of SARS-COV-2 in deer, it is vital to understand,
predict, and manage disease spread in wildlife, livestock, and human systems.

The specific scientific aims of this study are to: (1) learn to use a newly
developed movement-contact model (i.e., MoveSTIR); (2) extend the theory of
MoveSTIR to understand how environmental context shapes contact hotspot
dynamics; and (3) apply the expanded MoveSTIR to empirical movement and disease
data from white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) to identify social and
biophysical contexts of transmission. This proposal will develop an approach
that integrates aspects of an animalâ€™s social and biophysical environment with
high-resolution movement data to predict contact hotspots relevant for disease
transmission, in novel landscapes. This research leverages ongoing data
collection from a new movement and disease study of 40 GPS-collared deer and
integrates empirical data into the novel workflow. This project will also
broaden participation in research by providing professional development
opportunities and training for a female mid-career researcher; lead to a NIMBioS
workshop for other scientists interested in the interface between animal
movement and disease transmission including a user-friendly R package for the
MoveSTIR model; and strengthen ties between researchers, the public, and
wildlife managers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.