* 2321044
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Transforming the Molecular Science Research Workforce through Integration of Programming in University Curricula
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2024,05/31/2027
* Thomas Crawford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 05/31/2027
* USD 792,646.00

There is a growing recognition that the modern technical STEM workforce requires
competence in computation, programming, data literacy, and more. While there is
broad consensus that science curricula should teach computational and
programming skills, achieving this goal can be difficult due to a lack of high-
quality and available materials, time constraints in the existing curriculum,
and lack of instructor expertise. This project will adopt a multifaceted
approach to transform the molecular sciences research workforce by introducing
programming, data, and computation in university curricula by developing high-
quality, reusable, discipline-specific curricular materials that adopt advanced
cyberinfrastructure skills and technology into the existing molecular sciences
curricula. This proposal has three components: (1) A Faculty Fellows Program
will provide training and mentorship for selected faculty developing curricular
resources. (2) A library of well-vetted modular, reusable curricular resources
developed by Faculty Fellows; and (3) Educator Training and support provided
through professional development workshops and a professional learning community
for science educators.

Programming, data, and computation have become essential skills for scientific
research, but are often underdeveloped in early career scientists such as
graduate students. This project develops a multifaceted approach that will
transform the molecular sciences research workforce through early introduction
of programming, data, and computation in university curricula. This program will
broaden participation in the research workforce through faculty training and
development targeted at educators serving underserved groups. Faculty training
is central to this proposal - this project will provide professional development
workshops aimed at faculty at minority-serving institutions (MSIs),and a longer-
term Faculty Fellows program that will yield training materials that can be used
across many institutions. Early integration of cyberinfrastructure (CI) skills
into the university curriculum will ensure that students have core CI
competencies as they begin scientific research, having a transformative effect
on the nation's research workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.