* 2321054
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: C2D - Cybertraining for Chemical Data scientists
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Ying Cheng, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

The project establishes a scalable and sustainable training platform for
workforce development in data chemistry, named C2D (Cybertraining for Chemical
Data scientists). The use of machine learning (ML) will revolutionize synthetic
chemistry and many fields that depend on it, including materials and energy
science, information technology and health sciences. To enable this
transformation, the existing and future workforce needs training that takes
their diversity of training requirements, backgrounds, and learning preferences
into account. The C2D is an adaptive and personalized training platform,
entailing personalized task selection from curated learning materials based on
learners' progress and automated assessment of their learning status. It
organizes training videos, reading, and assessments in a way that is responsive
to the needs of the learners and will be offered to the academic, industrial,
and general population free of charge. Specific recruitment mechanisms will
ensure the participation of underrepresented groups. Using a combination of
online and in-person training, C2D will empower the current and future workforce
to use ML in synthetic chemistry.

The Cybertraining for Chemical Data scientists (C2D) platform integrates
adaptive learning and assessment with personalized recommendations for training
materials regarding the application of machine learning in synthetic chemistry,
thereby enabling personalized instruction in the field of data chemistry. The
platform is the result of an interdisciplinary collaboration of psychologists,
computer scientists and chemists, and aims to develop C2D around the latest
psychometric principles and recommender systems for providing personalized
instruction. Starting from a survey and focus groups analysis involving domain
experts, the C2D will develop a blueprint for curating curricular material that
is fed into a personalized recommender system based on continuous adaptive
assessment. The C2D works with a number of academic and industrial partners to
ensure the wide adoption and sustainability of the platforms. It will promote
the development of research workforce integrating core ML literacy and
chemistry-specific cyber skills to enable the wide adoption of ML methods in
chemistry and ensure the continued economic competitiveness of the sectors that
depend on synthetic chemistry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.