* 2321914
* SBIR Phase II:  A Digital Platform That Engages Elementary Aged Girls in STEM Through Personalized Informal Learning
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Abimbola Olukeye, SMART GIRLS HQ LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,800.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is an increase in the representation of women in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) employment areas, enabling the US to
meet the increasing demand for STEM workers and maintain competitiveness in the
global innovation community. The factors contributing to the underrepresentation
of girls and women in STEM often take effect early in their education and extend
beyond traditional classrooms settings. Very few solutions specifically address
the support needed by parents to facilitate STEM informal learning in a way that
is engaging to their young daughters. This project intends to deliver
personalized learning pathways designed to catalyze positive STEM experiences
for girls early in their learning journeys so that they are more likely to
embrace STEM careers.

This project seeks to deliver a learning platform that operates using a novel
recommender system, which applies algorithmic modeling of surprise and curiosity
as well as best practices regarding the unique STEM learning needs of young
girls. The main technical hurdles that will be addressed in this project are as
follows: (1) refinement of algorithmic model, which will be applied to generate
recommendation sequences that elicit curiosity in manner that both increases
interest in STEM and prompts additional STEM learning and career awareness; (2)
expansion of a dataset and data representation through the enhanced features and
improvements to the data model; (3) visualization and gamification of learner
interest inputs and (4) implementation of an engaging user interface and
experience. The refinement of algorithmic models is expected to expand the
research knowledge on recommendations for behavior change, recommender systems
for a young target audience, and surprise and curiosity modeling in artificial
intelligence systems. The solution will ultimately deliver a commercial
application that personalizes STEM career exploration, particularly suited for
young women.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.