* 2321426
* I-Corps:   A machine learning model based on neural networks trained to recognize correlations and patterns that indicates possible medical complications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Alan Hunt, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a health and wellness software application that supports
individuals with chronic illnesses such as prediabetes/diabetes, cholesterol,
hypertension, infertility and obesity among others. . Many individuals have
questions, preferences, and health issues that are not adequately addressed by
routine Primary Care Physician (PCP) care. Based on algorithmic recommendations,
the proposed technology is designed to connect users with alternative health
care providers who have expertise in treating concerns such as sleep disorders,
stress management, lactation, mental health, nutrition, and pelvic floor
therapists. Currently, patients rely on recommendations and referrals from their
PCP/OBGYN for knowledge about these types of care. In addition, corporations or
insurance companies may offer the proposed product as part of their benefits
packages similar to preventative programs in tobacco cessation or stress
management. The core AI algorithms also may be applied to other healthcare
sectors.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a set of algorithms
comprising machine learning models. The models are trained to recognize
correlations and patterns that could indicate possible medical complications,
based on inputs such as electronic health records (e.g. genetic profiles) and
IoT sensor data (e.g. oxygen level, heart rate etc.). The research focus is to
explore the transformative potential of this sensor-fusion approach, with the
requisite sample size of user inputs, to develop risk scores and predict
evidence-based medical care pathways, specifically for maternal/post-partum
users. While remaining cognizant of potential harmful recommendations generated
because of dataset "blind-spots" such as those encountered in other AI
applications in healthcare, these findings could then determine optimal
recommendations to be delivered to users through user-friendly "nudges"
leveraging advancements in behavioral psychology. Prioritizing privacy, the
method of data collection would rely on user opt-in consent and a proprietary
end-to-end silent authentication mechanism instead of OAuth/RSA tokens that are
more vulnerable to hacking and privilege escalation. With a user's opt-in
consent, raw patient data as well personalized recommendations could be made
available directly to a provider to further inform care.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.