* 2321552
* SBIR Phase I:  Single-shot X-ray Phase-contrast Imaging Using Deep Learning Approaches
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Yao-Te Cheng, 3FATES-XRAY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,996.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project relates to the benefits of next-generation X-ray imaging systems. The
proposed single-shot platform overcomes the current barriers to widespread
commercialization of Differential Phase Contrast (DPC) X-ray imaging. If
successful, the single-shot technology will enable the development and
application of next generation X-ray imagers for detecting liquids, small
explosives, and other security threats for aviation and business applications.
Reducing false alarm rates at airports will increase customer satisfaction,
improve security, and reduce cost. DPC imaging could also substantially increase
the detection of food pests, thereby reducing food waste and saving billions of
dollars. In another market, non-destructive testing could significantly improve
the inspection of additive manufacturing products, reducing manufacturing time
through fewer iterations and creating high-quality products. Medical DPC imagers
would provide MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging)-like resolution and diagnostics
at an order of magnitude lower cost than current MRI.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a deep-
learning approach to realize “single-shot” X-ray phase-contrast imaging. To
commercialize the technology, the deep-learning algorithm needs to identify more
complicated real-world objects effectively and accurately. Deep-learning methods
require thousands to millions of training samples to make a reliable model.
However, no imaging library for this unique technology currently exists. The
research and development plan initially incorporates the standard slow scanning
method of X-ray phase-contrast imaging to obtain DPC tri-signature computed
tomography (CT) images. The tri-signature CT images provide the basis for
precise material characterization (e.g., absorption coefficients, indices of
refraction, and scatter characteristics). Once the materials have been
characterized, they form the basis for creating millions of numerical
representations of real-world objects. These objects subsequently form the core
for effectively and efficiently training deep-learning models without further
experimentation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.