* 2321454
* PFI (MCA): Self-Contained Soft Robotic Rehabilitation Device for Finger Extension Exercises
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Yen-Lin Han, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 311,439.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Mid Career Advancement (PFI-MCA) project is in improving accessibility to finger
and hand rehabilitation for patients suffering from stroke or neurological
movement disorders. In turn, it speeds up their recoveries. It could reduce the
overall costs for patients with clenched fists, which present as overactive
muscle activity and excessive tightness of the finger flexors, decreasing the
ability to perform finger extension. To regain hand and finger motor functions,
patients must engage in activity-based therapy to repeat hand- and finger-
specific exercises daily. Limited access to therapy makes it challenging for
patients to adhere to such a high-intensity rehabilitation routine. Hence,
robotic devices that can assist and monitor these repetitive moments at a
patient’s home could potentially improve access to rehabilitation and promote a
more sustainable recovery process. Pneumatically actuated soft robotic
rehabilitation gloves currently available on the market cannot open the fingers
of a stroke patient with clenched fists. They are also difficult for patients to
put on without assistance. Addressing existing rehabilitation gloves' drawbacks,
this project develops a self-contained, unrestricted soft robotic device made
with phase-changing materials and actuated by heat to assist finger extension
rehabilitation exercises for patients with clenched fists.

The proposed project will design, prototype, and test a thermally driven, self-
contained soft robotic device to assist at-home hand rehabilitation for patients
with clenched fists after stroke. The research merits and expected outcomes
include: 1. Design and prototype a self-contained soft robotic device for finger
extension exercises: Considering the ability to open fingers for patients with
clenched fists, the proposed design provides active extension assistance to
fingers. Using phase-changing material material-elastomer composites to form a
unique curing elastomer structure, this project will design and prototype a soft
robotic device that fits under the clenched fist in its neutral state and pushes
fingers open when actuated. 2. Testing- Data collected from mechanical and human
subject testing will be used to analyze the device's efficacy and to estimate
participant numbers for future, larger-scale clinical trials to take the design
one step closer to a marketable product. 3. Specifically designed survey
instruments to study stroke-specific patient-reported experience measures
(PREMs): Survey instruments and results could apply to others interested in
PREMs for stroke patients and verify the function and specifications needed for
the proposed design to support quality improvement and enhance patient-centered
care.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.