* 2321102
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Training Users, Developers, and Instructors at the Chemistry/Physics/Materials Science Interface
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Oliviero Andreussi, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2027
* USD 333,621.00

The training of students and researchers in computational tools and techniques
is a significant challenge in the current educational system, which tends to
prioritize analytical theory and experimental practice. This challenge is
particularly prominent in interdisciplinary fields such as the study of chemical
reactivity, materials interfaces, and materials modeling. Conventional
approaches that rely on single-tool and single-application methods limit the
range of applications and hinder innovation in academia and industry. This
project proposes a comprehensive approach to address these limitations by
offering formal and informal training events, including schools, workshops,
course modules, and hackathons. The approach emphasizes the integration of
users, developers, and instructors through feedback loops and community-building
activities. The primary objectives are to establish a robust community of
materials modeling developers and to enhance computational training at both
undergraduate and graduate levels. The project seeks to recruit and train future
leaders in materials modeling, foster community engagement, and promote coding
literacy across disciplines.

The project proposes a four-pronged approach involving formal (schools,
workshops, course modules) and informal (hackathons) training events that
address research training and more fundamental undergraduate/graduate training
in computational methods for data analysis and materials modeling. The approach
envisions a strong connection between users, developers, and instructors,
encompassing feedback loops and community-building activities. The goal is to
form a robust US-based community of developers for materials modeling and,
generally, STEM code development. The project will achieve its aims by providing
learners with various backgrounds exposure to state-of-the-art techniques and
skills, showing them how to overcome the challenges of complexity by combining
theories and algorithms or by unbiased learning of patterns. It will foster
community-building among learners, developers, and instructors at different
stages of their careers in multiple successive events designed to create a
cohesive and sustainable environment where research and educational developments
can grow beyond the project's duration. Using computational tools as functional
components of discipline-specific curricula and adopting informal learning
events allows the project to overcome common barriers given by feelings of non-
belonging and low self-confidence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.