* 2321096
* Conference: Society for Developmental Biology Annual Meetings 2023-2025
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Ida Chow, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 90,000.00

A key question in biology is: “How does a single, fertilized egg cell produce
all the different cell types, tissues and organs of the adult organism; what
genetic, molecular and cellular mechanisms regulate this process?” The field of
developmental biology addresses this question that has intrigued humans since
ancient times. Scientists working in this field study various organisms, ranging
from bacteria to invertebrates to vertebrates, including humans, and also
plants. They use up-to-date techniques and methodologies to answer their
specific questions. Knowledge acquired from such studies by numerous
investigators around the world enriches our understanding of developmental
processes, and also provides a fundamental basis for practical applications that
enhance health and wellbeing of living organisms on this planet. Since 1939 the
annual meetings of the Society for Developmental Biology (previously Society for
the Study of Development and Growth) have been the major forum for reporting
discoveries, exchanging ideas and establishing collaborations among
developmental biologists in North America and beyond. Cutting edge technologies
have moved the field into the genomic era, allowing investigators to interrogate
single cells during development and obtain high resolution images of cellular
and molecular movements. Such studies also provide information about how cells
or tissues change in disease states; and why some tissues are able to regenerate
while others cannot. These new technologies have also raised awareness of
ethical practices; the SDB annual meetings have provided an important venue for
rational discourse, as well as opportunities to train the next generation of
developmental biologists.

The goal of the three proposed annual Society for Developmental Biology (SDB)
meetings is to continue to provide the primary meeting venue for scientists in
developmental biology and related fields world-wide. Meetings will comprise
plenary and concurrent sessions with talks by seasoned and new investigators,
dedicated poster sessions and workshops/roundtables on topics of special and
current interest. Multiple talks will be selected from submitted abstracts to
ensure breadth and encourage new and diverse inputs. In keeping with SDB’s
educational mission, the programs also include professional development
workshops for trainees and pre-tenure faculty, postdoctoral symposia and
networking opportunities for all. A unique feature of this meeting is the Hilde
Mangold Postdoctoral Symposium, where two postdoctoral fellows review eligible
abstracts from their peers, select the top seven/eight for short talks and co-
chair the symposium. They practice peer review and session chairing under the
mentorship of the SDB president, an outstanding career development opportunity
for these junior scientists. The SDB meetings are planned to be in-person but
building on virtual meeting experience developed during the COVID pandemic,
recordings of platform sessions will be made available for a short period post
meeting, with permission of the speakers, for those who could not attend in-
person. While viewers will not be able to have live exchanges with speakers,
they may contact the speakers via email with questions. SDB is committed to
providing a welcoming, inclusive and respectful environment for all meeting
participants, to encourage frank exchange of ideas and to inspire future
collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.