* 2321894
* SBIR Phase II:  Composing Digital-Twins from Disparate Data Sources
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* John Blackwell, DIAMOND AGE TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,757.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project relates to the creation of a digital twin, an
interactive, 3-dimensional model of a real-world system, of complex industrial
environments and assets. This digital twin provides infrastructure necessary for
the application of virtual reality training and augmented reality live-guided
procedures in industrial workplaces, at scale. By making the full-scale roll-out
of these technologies possible, the technology seeks to impact human health and
safety, operational efficiencies, and environmental risk reduction for process
operations facilities, such as oil refineries and chemical plants. The long-term
impacts of this technology may also enable automation and optimization,
improving their efficiency, security, and safety. Such facilities are critical
infrastructure and play a significant role in the national economy. The
availability of this product may also enhance market opportunities for other
businesses in the scanning, spatial computing, and training markets. The impact
may be further broadened by adapting the process for digital twin production to
new domains unrelated to the industrial market.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is advancing
knowledge and understanding in both machine learning and spatial computing. This
project focuses on a method for digitizing a complex, real-world system, in an
efficient manner, sufficient to recreate the captured reality as an interactive
digital twin. The primary technical hurdle is the combining of different data
sources, that describe aspects of a particular real-world system, into a single,
complete description. The initial physical systems being modelled are industrial
process operations, but the core methods could apply to other types of systems,
including natural systems, such as a rainforest. For industrial process
operations, the goal is to encode the entire process operations facilities, at
the component level, with sub-centimeter accuracy, at 10% of the current time
and cost requirements. To achieve this, this project will combine physical scans
with engineering documentation and relational probabilities. Once combined, the
model will be used as the basis for a digital twin of the real-world system
projected into spatial computed environments, such as virtual and augmented
reality. These techniques replace a tedious and limited static scan and
intensive human labor workflow with rapid scans, computer vision, and a
combination of procedural and trained algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.