* 2321699
* CC* Integration-Large: Husker-Net: Open Nebraska End-to-End Wireless Edge Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mehmet Vuran, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Goldsmith
* 09/30/2025
* USD 875,000.00

The lack of network and computing infrastructure in the Midwest have been
enlarging the digital and economic gap between urban and rural America.
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) is the primary research university in
Nebraska (an EPSCoR state) and has a broad range of research activities in
various locations across Nebraska, including precision agriculture, autonomous
driving, and Internet of things. Existing wireless connectivity solutions, e.g.,
LoRaWAN, WLAN, and commercial cellular, cannot support diverse research projects
in the field, in terms of coverage, throughput, flexibility, cost-efficiency,
and performance assurance. This project outlines a novel open end-to-end
cellular edge network (Husker-Net) by designing, deploying, and operating
private 5G network over a light-licensed CBRS spectrum in multiple UNL campuses.
Husker-Net is featured with ultra-low operating cost with open-source modules,
flexible deployment with both wired and wireless backhaul (e.g., LEO in mid of
Nebraska), and zero-touch management with automatic model-free algorithms.

To achieve Husker-Net, this project will 1) design a new convergent RAN-Edge-CN
architecture with open-source RAN, Edge, and CN modules, 2) design new cost-
efficient RAN and CN virtualization techniques with isolated virtualized
resources, and 3) design a new model-free resource allocation algorithm to
support co-existed research projects via end-to-end network slicing with assured
performances. The derived solutions and real-world operation datasets in Husker-
Net will be open sourced to promote the openness of cellular networks and
broader access by the research community. Husker-Net will support more than 10
research projects across multiple departments at UNL with the assistance of ITS,
and continue exploring more projects along with the Office of Research &
Economic Development (ORED). Based on Husker-Net, a campus-wide education
experimental platform will be developed for serving a series of undergraduate-
and graduate-level courses at UNL. Husker-Net will serve as the exemplary
platform for the evaluation and testing of private networks for the Midwest
states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.