* 2321365
* Electrically Conductive 2D Metal-Organic Frameworks and Covalent Organic Frameworks Featuring Built-in Alternating pi-Donor/Acceptor Stacks with Efficient Charge Transport Capacity
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sourav Saha, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 574,757.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Sustaining the rapid advances of modern electronics and clean energy
technologies requires continuous innovation and supply of easily accessible
smart materials that can transport and store electrical charges in a
programmable fashion. Owing to their synthetic accessibility, structural
modularity, and functional tunability, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and
covalent organic frameworks (COFs) hold great potentials to serve as active
components of next-generation electronics and energy-storage devices. Electrical
conductivity—a product of charge carrier concentration and mobility—however,
remains one of the most elusive traits of MOFs and COFs, prompting researchers
to devise new design and synthetic strategies to engineer this much desired
electronic property in these crystalline framework materials. With support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
Prof. Saha and his research group at Clemson University are developing and
implementing a new design strategy to promote long-range out-of-plane charge
transport in two-dimensional (2D) MOFs and COFs by incorporating cofacially
stacked alternating electron-rich (pi-donor) and electron-deficient (pi-
acceptor) arrays and then exploiting their efficient through-space charge
delocalization capability in these solid-state materials, which are expected to
generate promising intrinsic conductivity. This research project is not only
producing novel electrically conductive 2D MOFs and COFs with unique structures
and compositions, but also creating an innovative design strategy that can
simultaneously facilitate in-plane and out-of-plane charge transport in two
orthogonal directions through the layered networks and pi-donor/acceptor stacks,
respectively, and thus boost the bulk conductivity of these emerging smart
materials. This NSF-funded project is also enabling the PI to develop skilled
workforce for future innovations by engaging and mentoring graduate,
undergraduate, postdoctoral, and high-school students in cutting-edge materials
research, inspire underrepresented minorities to pursue higher education in
STEM, and raise scientific awareness of the society through various education
and outreach activities at local schools, science museums, and public forums.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Owing to their diverse potentials to serve as active components of modern
electronics and energy storage devices, electrically conductive metal–organic
frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs) have emerged as most
coveted and explored functional materials. Yet, electrical conductivity, which
is a function of charge carrier concentration and charge mobility, remains one
of the most elusive features of these porous crystalline framework materials
chiefly because they often lack efficient charge transport pathways. In two-
dimensional (2D) MOFs, electronic conduction can occur within the planes through
coordination and conjugated pi-bonds and/or across the planes through pi-stacked
layers, whereas in 2D COFs, the latter represent the primary transport pathways.
The large disparities between in-plane and out-of-plane charge transport in two
orthogonal directions often render the conductivity of these materials highly
anisotropic (i.e., direction dependent) and dampen their overall bulk
conductivity. To address these issues and simultaneously promote both in- and
out-of-plane charge transport such that it leads to higher bulk conductivity in
2D MOFs and COFs, in this project supported by NSF's Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) Program, Prof. Sourav Saha and his research group at Clemson
University are pursuing novel design and synthetic strategies where they
incorporate built-in alternating pi-donor/acceptor stacks inside 2D layered
frameworks that can facilitate out-of-plane charge transport, bringing this
typically less efficient pathway on par with through-bond conduction pathways.
Understanding how pi-donor/acceptor stacks consisting of different complementary
pi-donor and acceptor units embedded in 2D MOFs and COFs affect their out-of-
plane charge transport capability and thus the overall bulk conductivity is
creating a new design strategy for next-generation electrically conductive MOFs
and COFs. This project is also enabling the PI to fulfill his longstanding
commitment to develop skilled workforce capable of leading future innovations by
guiding diverse group of researchers to execute complex multifaceted research,
motivate minority students to pursue higher education in STEMs, and raise a
scientifically aware society through various outreach and educational activities
in local community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.