* 2321530
* MCA: Combining Drone Imagery and Deep Learning to Map Fine-Scale Heterogeneity in Arctic Vegetation
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Loranty, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 232,268.00

The Arctic is warming nearly four times faster than the rest of the planet. As a
result of this warming, plants in Arctic lands are changing. In some places,
plants are taking advantage of warmer conditions and growing larger or spreading
across the landscape. For example, shrubs may be increasing in height and
growing in areas that used to contain only grasses, or grasses may be growing
taller. Arctic warming is also resulting in more wildfires, which remove plants
and create different conditions for new plants to grow. The investigators will
use images from satellites to tell where plant growth is increasing and where
fires have occurred. However, these satellite images do not have the resolution
to tell us what types of plant changes are occurring. In this project, the
investigators will analyze detailed images from drones using new computer
science tools to help us understand how plants are changing, and to help
interpret changes we see in less detailed satellite images. Using an archive of
drone images from across the Arctic, the investigators will map patches of
shrubs and grasses to understand how they influence estimates of plant growth
made from satellites. The investigator will use a different image archive to see
how plant growth after wildfires is related to the amount of plants present
before the fire. The results will provide insights into how changes in Arctic
plants influence the global climate. This research will also help establish new
methods for using drone data and computer science tools to map plant processes
in fine detail that can be used in other regions. The project will allow a
college professor to develop new research skills and new teaching materials and
provide research opportunities for undergraduate college students. Results from
the project will be shared through scientific journal articles, and data and
class materials will be shared publicly on the internet.

As the Arctic warms nearly four times faster than the rest of the planet, a wide
range of ecosystem changes are occurring. Besides general increases in plant
productivity, changes in the geographic distribution of different vegetation
types have also been observed. For example, in tundra ecosystems shrubs may be
expanding into grass-dominated areas, while elsewhere grass productivity may be
increasing without expansion of shrubs. Larger and more intense wildfires with
warming may be changing patterns of vegetation recovery post-fire. Satellite
images are a useful tool for observing and monitoring these types of changes.
However, the resolution of these images is not high enough to identify the
specific types of vegetation change that are occurring, which is important
because the nature of these changes will determine their impacts on global
climate. In this project, the investigators will combine high resolution drone
images with cutting-edge machine learning tools to map variation in Arctic
vegetation at the level of individual plants. Using an archive of drone images
from across the Arctic, the investigators will map the distribution of shrubs
and grasses to understand their respective changes, as well as how they affect
satellite estimates of ecosystem productivity. Using a second archive, we will
map live and dead trees and shrubs in areas affected by wildfire to determine
how vegetation regrowth after fire varies in northeastern Siberia. These maps
will help increase understanding of the processes driving Arctic vegetation
change, and aid interpretation of changes inferred from satellite images. The
results will aid our understanding of Arctic vegetation feedbacks to global
climate. The combination of drone imagery and artificial intelligence tools will
develop and refine methods for studying fine scale vegetation dynamics that can
be employed in other regions and ecosystems. The project will enable a mid-
career college professor to develop new analytical expertise and skills, and new
teaching materials to incorporate in undergraduate classes focused on geographic
analysis. Results from the project will be published in peer-reviewed journals,
and the resulting data sets and teaching materials will be published in freely
accessible online repositories.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.