* 2321834
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Point-of-Care System for Rapid Pathogen Identification and Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Amogha Tadimety, Nanopath Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 997,781.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is improved access to state-of-the-art
molecular diagnostic technologies in areas of significant unmet clinical need,
such as womenâ€™s health. During the NSF I-Corps Program, the team identified
urinary tract infections (UTIs) as pressing problem due to the currently lengthy
clinical workflows, significant unmet clinical need, and large disease
incidence. UTIs are one the most common causes of a healthcare visit for women
in the United States and represent one of largest sources of antibiotic
prescriptions in the country. Untreated UTIs can lead to severe complications
for the patient, including systemic bacterial infections such as bacteremia.
Despite the severity and prevalence of UTIs, diagnostic methodologies remain
extremely time-consuming and rely on antiquated, culture-based methodologies for
pathogen detection. This time-intensive diagnostic workflow typically leaves
women in pain for up to three days before they are prescribed the appropriate
antibiotic therapy. As a result of shortcomings in current healthcare workflows,
women who have limited access to care are subject to longer result wait times,
and often never receive the appropriate treatment.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project utilizes a novel
nanosensor embedded into an integrated diagnostic consumable for rapid detection
of target nucleic acid sequences directly from patient samples. The consumable
is coupled to a proprietary bench-top readout instrument for test analysis and
result reporting at the point-of-care. The technology eliminates the need for
bacterial culture and nucleic acid amplification through an ultrasensitive
optical detection modality, providing species-level information and genotypic
antibiotic resistance data within minutes. Applications of the proposed platform
translate beyond UTIs to other clinical scenarios that currently employ lengthy
culture-based or amplification-based diagnostic workflows, such as sexually
transmitted infections and respiratory infections. Successful product
commercialization will require meeting clinically actionable timescales and
assay performance benchmarks. Of importance is the development of a simple,
integrated workflow for healthcare workers to enable single-step operation at
the point-of-care. The Phase II technical objectives focus on the development
and pilot-scale fabrication of the nanosensor, the optimization of sensitivity
and robustness of data analysis methodologies to inform down-selection of reader
optical hardware, and system integration and user testing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.