* 2321274
* Using Quantitative Ethnography and Customized Virtual Role Models to Measure and Improve the Computing Identity of Young Girls
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Roghayeh Barmaki, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Emerging technology poses potential benefit to all Americans. Technologies
support innovations in many fields, including agriculture, electronics,
transportation, data science and computing. The workforce that forms the engine
for this growth must first receive education and training to understand and
master the advanced STEM methods that form the foundation of technological
growth. That workforce includes educators with knowledge in STEM and in learning
sciences to engage and prepare students, some from diverse cultures, who could
be candidates to enter these fields. Too often STEM fields lack diverse mentors
and role models. Many women and minorities do not see themselves following the
pathways of technological discovery if they have not seen technologists who look
like them crafting innovations. This project will address developing strategies
to reach youth, especially underrepresented youth, with opportunities and
diverse role models to motivate them to pursue STEM career paths in computing
and technology. This project through the University of Delaware will work to
increase the participation of middle-school girls who pursue computing career
paths, particularly those from underrepresented or marginalized groups. The
project is connected to ongoing studies on underrepresentation in computing and
associated emerging technologies, and integrates frameworks, such as personal
and group identity formation, embodied virtual agents, human-computer
interaction, and motivation. A team of five mentors-advisors is included in this
plan, they will guide the research project and mentor the Principal
Investigator. The project includes professional development activity that will
increase the STEM education research capabilities of the Principal Investigator,
including improving skills and understanding in role model theory, qualitative
methods, quantitative ethnography and epistemic network analysis, and grounded
and embodied cognition and theories. An intervention will be developed to
reverse damaging stereotypes and improve the motivation and identity of
underrepresented students for computing and technology careers. The
contextualized interactions with virtual role models, supported by mentoring,
are intended to enhance student experiences, and improve motivation.

Anticipated outcomes include increased participation in entering computing
careers by those currently underrepresented, outreach for public showcases, and
undergraduate and graduate student learning opportunities. Dissemination of
project results through conferences in computer science and engineering
education, learning sciences, and data science, and publication in scholarly
journals, should benefit researchers and educators. Reports using de-identified
data will be shared on the project website allowing appropriate use of the
computing identity guidelines. This project is supported through a partnership
with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family
Foundation. This project is also supported by NSF's EDU Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators' capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research
in the core areas of STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.