* 2321162
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: Assessing the Performance of Green Stormwater Infrastructure for Climate Adaptation and Coastal Resilience in the City of Cape Canaveral, Florida
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Nickolas Macchiarella, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Like many coastal communities, the City of Cape Canaveral, Florida is confronted
with the stressors of coastal flooding and harmful algal blooms (HABs) in
nearshore waters. Antiquated infrastructure in the built environment and
accelerating climate change are together amplifying these threats, with
deleterious impacts to public safety, ecosystem health, and private property.
The Cape Canaveral municipal government – in collaboration with its academic and
community partners – has identified green stormwater infrastructure (GSI) based
interventions as one of its primary strategies for climate and water quality
mitigation. This Smart and Connected Communities Civic Innovation Challenge Full
Award (SCC-CIVIC-FA) project will establish a pilot GSI bioswale and associated
hydrologic monitoring system at Veterans Memorial Park in the City of Cape
Canaveral. Performance data from this pilot will directly used to guide design,
implementation, and monitoring protocols within subsequent GSI projects in Cape
Canaveral and other similarly situated coastal communities in the Indian River
Lagoon watershed of eastern Florida. This includes Cape Canaveral’s recent
development of an ambitious 25-year master plan for GSI interventions within its
Presidential Streets neighborhood, a hotspot for recent stormwater flooding
events.

GSI refers to a set of stormwater management practices that are designed to
maintain, restore, and/or mimic pre-development hydrologic conditions within
built environments. These practices are widely promoted as a tool for reducing
flood risk, improving water quality, and creating valuable green space
amenities. However, GSI has not yet been adopted at scale in much of the U.S.,
including areas – like much of coastal Florida – where existing stormwater
infrastructure systems are largely maladapted to climate change-driven flood
risks and often identified as a primary pollutant load source. A relative lack
of monitoring and performance data, ambiguous permitting design standards, and
misunderstood maintenance protocols are all commonly cited as key barriers to
the wider application of GSI. To help overcome these barriers, Cape Canaveral is
motivated to serve as a partner and host for this pilot project that will
objectively test the field performance of GSI interventions for mitigating
stormwater-based flooding and non-point nutrient load issues. Project results
are anticipated to influence broader municipal consideration and adoption of
suitable GSI interventions within the watershed of the highly impaired Indian
River Lagoon, home to 1.6 million people and often described as the most
biodiverse estuary in North America.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.