* 2321498
* Conference: 2023 Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways Gordon Research Seminar: Enzyme Function and Mechanism in Biology and Beyond
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Margaux Pinney, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 5,000.00

Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) “Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways”
seminar will be held on July 15-16th, 2023, at the Waterville Valley Resort in
Waterville Valley, NH. This is a pivotal conference for early-career researchers
focused on the study of biochemistry, engineering, physics, and chemistry, who
are interested in dissecting the molecular mechanisms of biochemical reactions
to share ideas and network in an informal setting. The long-term goals of this
seminar are to foster interactions and collaborations among the graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers who share common research interests –
studying the roles of enzymes in the biological processes that are fundamental
for life. To achieve these goals, the GRS has created a program of 12 Speakers
(chosen from abstracts submitted by attendees, and an established investigator
as a Keynote Speaker). These talks will describe current advances in
methodology, the discovery and characterization of enzymes, engineering these
systems for industrial applications, and the relation of these enzymes to
disease processes and the environment.

The GRS will hold a Career Mentorship Panel ( young leaders from academia,
industry, and government), to expose the trainees to different career options as
scientists in the field of enzyme research. This career panel will help graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers decide between different paths and to
network with the panelists in the various careers represented in the session.
The seminar includes two poster sessions where all attendees can present their
work to their peers and the panelists. The seminar is immediately followed by
the regular GRC conference and some attendees may stay for the conference to
have opportunity to mingle and interact with senior investigators. This meeting
was supported by the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular
and cellular Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.