* 2321404
* FET: Small: LightRidge: End-to-end Agile Design for Diffractive Optical Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* CUNXI YU, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 584,209.00

Recently, there have been increasing efforts to advance emerging technologies,
which bring significant advantages for machine learning (ML) in terms of power
efficiency, computational efficiency, and sustainability. With the considerable
benefits in energy efficiency, there are significant interests in leveraging
optical computing into applications, such as medical sensing, security
screening, drug detection, and autonomous driving. Specifically, optical
computing offers unique advantages in power efficiency and extreme computation
speed, leading to significant performance improvements compared to digital
computing systems for ML tasks. This project aims to develop an end-to-end
design infrastructure to advance optical computing for ML, covering from low-
level physics to algorithms to full-stack system design. This will generate
broader impacts in cross-disciplinary research and real-world application fields
from physics to computer science to ML. This project will produce an open-source
design infrastructure, LightRidge, and conference tutorials to facilitate
technology transfers and fruitful industry-academia interactions in a
multidisciplinary community.

This project aims to develop an open-source, end-to-end design infrastructure,
LightRidge, to explore and advance Diffractive Deep Neural Networks (DONNs) in
real-world ML tasks. DONNs utilize the free-space light diffraction to form an
optical feed-forward network like conventional DNNs architecture, which can host
millions of neurons in each layer that are interconnected with those in
neighboring layers, offering orders of magnitude energy efficiency improvements
over general-purpose processor and domain-specific accelerators. However, there
are several critical technical barriers in the design, training, exploration,
and hardware deployment of DONNs. Thus, this project will produce an agile end-
to-end design and fabrication programming framework LightRidge, consisting of
precise, versatile, and differentiable optical physics kernels powered by
domain-specific high-performance-computing developments, with novel physics-
aware hardware-software codesign methodologies to strengthen the correlations
between algorithm modeling and physical hardware. This project will also develop
an intelligent and efficient design space exploration (DSE) engine LightRidge-
DSE, to enable architectural and fabrication parameters exploration, monolithic
on-chip DONNs integration, and demonstrate real-world all-optical ML tasks.
Finally, LightRidge will be fully released as an open-source hardware project,
which will contribute to multidisciplinary research domains such as physics,
electrical engineering, computer science, and can be used as a new education
platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.