* 2321663
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (ACM/IEEE SEC)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Lanyu Xu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The proposal is to seek travel support for up to 20 students to attend the 2023
ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (ACM/IEEE SEC) in Wilmington, DE. This
leading technical conference is the primary venue for presenting new research
results in the area of "edge computing", a new paradigm in which the resources
of a small data center are placed at the edge of the Internet, in close
proximity to mobile devices, sensors, and end users, and the emerging Internet
of Things(IoT). The conference will consist of technical paper presentations,
panels, PhD forums, posters, and demonstrations. It will also feature keynote
speeches from leading researchers and practitioners in the field.

Participation in SEC 2023 and similar conferences are valuable and important
activities of the graduate school experience. It provides students with the
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers, and exposes students to
leading work and practical industry practices in this important area of
research. This may have an important impact on career development. The goal of
the funds is to support approximately 20 student participants at recognized US
institutions of higher education. Funds will be dispersed with preference given
to students who would not otherwise be able to attend the conference and
students who are not already scheduled to present a paper, paying particular
attention to diversity and relevance of the student's research interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.