* 2321548
* MCA: Diversification dynamics and comparative genomics of the birds of Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sushma Reddy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 317,738.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) Award will expand knowledge of the evolution
and conservation needs of the unique birds of Madagascar. Islands such as
Madagascar are often considered natural laboratories to study how species
evolved in isolated environments. Given their smaller size, island ecosystems
are also highly vulnerable to extinction. This research project will test
fundamental theories of how species adapt, diversify, and respond to extinction
risks using the biodiversity hotspot of Madagascar, with extraordinary species
found nowhere else on the planet. Additionally, the research will develop a new
framework for studying the genomic changes that allow the evolution of extreme
morphological and functional adaptations to environmental change. For example,
some Malagasy bird lineages are considered adaptive radiations because they
exhibit dramatic features that likely evolved due to new ecological
opportunities. This project will help further our knowledge of the genomic
foundations that determine form and function in the evolution of biodiversity.
Moreover, this award will support collaboration between diverse researchers of
varied career stages and interests, foster partnerships between international
institutions, and promote undergraduate and graduate education.

This research integrates phylogenetics, biogeography, genomics, and conservation
to address two main objectives. First, using an innovative model that
incorporates island biogeographic parameters with phylogenetic diversification,
this study will investigate the macroevolutionary consequences of extinction
risk in the Malagasy avifauna. Madagascar is a unique biogeographic system that
combines both island and continental processes; this project will test the broad
applicability of diversification models and also inform conservation assessments
in this highly threatened biodiversity hotspot. Second, this project will use
comparative genomics to integrate genotype-phenotype analyses in adaptive
radiations. With a focus on three Malagasy endemic groups, this project will
catalyze research into the underlying genomic architecture of ecological and
morphological variation to better understand the origins and functions of
various traits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.