* 2321134
* Conference: Post-Alert: Data Attribution and Attack-Response
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,998.00

Over the past decades, research and industry have provided several tools for
preventing and detecting attacks; however, what to do after an attack is
detected has comparatively received less attention. This workshop brings
together an interdisciplinary team of scientists looking at future research
directions for attack recovery. The workshop's novelties are the
multidisciplinary focus on attack recovery and the plan to define a future
roadmap of open challenges and research directions to solve them. The workshop's
broader significance and importance are to improve the security of our networks.
The workshop will also look into inclusive best practices in technology and
education to attract a diverse population to fulfill the nation's needs for
incident response in our critical computer networks.

The specific technical subtopics required for fast and effective incident
response include (1) data provenance, (2) persistence, and (3) automated
recovery. Each category requires deep technical expertise to develop the next-
generation tools to protect our networks. For example, grammar induction
techniques can be applied to provenance graphs to eliminate redundancy and
correlate events. The rise of artificial intelligence tools like reinforcement
learning can also be used to teach agents to operate through post-breach
behavior. The outcome of this workshop will provide future guidance on research
directions for real-time incident response and automated forensics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.