* 2321985
* CIVIC-FA Track B: Creating the West Virginia Flood Resilience Framework for comprehensive disaster response and long-term community recovery
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jamie Shinn, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 787,594.00

Community resilience is the ability of communities to withstand and mitigate the
stress of a disaster. It is a key component of long-term recovery from natural
disasters such as floods. Community resilience requires up-to-date knowledge of
disaster risk and effective pre-disaster planning and coordination of the
complex network of actors involved in disaster response. Every county in West
Virginia has a high risk of flooding and these risks are compounded by
increasing frequency and intensity of precipitation, aging infrastructure, and
high levels of socioeconomic vulnerability. This project is a collaboration
between civic actors from non-profit organizations and state agencies in West
Virginia that play key roles in disaster preparation, response, and recovery and
university researchers with social science, legal, and geographic information
science (GIS) expertise. The science team also has extensive experience working
with flood-prone West Virginia communities. The result of research products
developed in this collaboration will be the West Virginia Flood Resilience
Framework. A freely available online resource containing materials co-created by
the project team, various stakeholders, and the end users. This framework will
support residents, local leaders, non-profits, and state officials in efforts to
increase flood resilience for West Virginia communities. It will improve
knowledge about flood risk, floodplain management, and comprehensive disaster
preparation. The online tool and its capabilities are designed to provide a
transferable model for creation of locally tailored disaster response plans with
broad application to flood-prone communities across Appalachia and the United
States.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. The
objectives of this project are to: (1) Use a state-wide survey to assess how
well West Virginia residents have recovered from past floods and how prepared
they are for future floods; (2) Create flood risk indicator reports for all 286
floodplain communities in West Virginia; (3) Develop in-depth flood risk
visualization tools for selected disadvantaged communities using Participatory
GIS methods; (4) Conduct in-person and virtual trainings about floodplain
management and flood insurance; (5) Host the Statewide Flood Resilience
Symposium and create the Best Practices Guide for Pre-disaster Coordination of
Flood Resilience in West Virginia; and (6) Build and launch the an online
utility that contains all project outputs in one accessible tool. As a result of
this innovative integration of quantitative, qualitative, and Participatory GIS
methods, the project results in a novel approach to creating flood risk
visualizations that better aligns expert knowledge with community needs than
traditional GIS and other approaches. It also provides a publicly accessible
framework and resource hub to increase community flood resilience, as well as
delivers a transferable model for community-engaged research that centers co-
production of knowledge with insights for scholarship on building resilience to
natural disaster in vulnerable communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.