* 2321925
* RHEOLOGY, ENTROPY PRODUCTION AND RATCHETING OF DEFORMABLE ACTIVE SYSTEMS
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Angelo Cacciuto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 12/31/2026
* USD 228,450.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education that aims at
understanding three important aspects of active materials that are currently
unexplored. Active matter is an exciting new field in materials engineering and
has come into prominence over the last decade. This occurred because of the
development of micro-particles capable of self-propulsion. One can think of
these particles as synthetic analogs of bacteria whose shape, surface chemistry
and velocity can be designed in a lab. There are several fundamental questions
that need to be addressed in this field and that offer new opportunities for the
development of the next generation of smart materials. What is the elastic
response to external stimuli of materials formed by active particles? This is an
important problem that can improve our understanding of the mechanical
properties of a large number of materials, from biofilms to epithelial tissue.
Another unexplored issue concerns the behavior of active surfaces. Unlike
synthetic vesicles, the motion of a biological cell is completely determined by
complex biochemical reactions. This makes their behavior similar to that of
active systems. It is therefore important to understand how surfaces/vesicles
respond to active forces. For instance, fibroblasts and epithelial cancerous
cells can acquire directional motion when confined within rigid, asymmetric
micro-channels. The PI will explore to what extent such a behavior can be
captured by a much simpler system: a synthetic vesicle loaded with active
particles. The goal is to develop simple synthetic analogs of biological cells
capable of mimicking their mechanical behavior. Finally, one of the main
characteristics of active systems is that they break time-reversal symmetry,
i.e. running time backwards on a particle trajectory does take the particle back
along the same path from which it came. The degree to which this happens in a
system can be quantified by measuring Entropy Production. The team will measure
this quantity for a number of active systems and establish a link between
spatial gradients in Entropy Production and the degree to which active systems
are out of equilibrium and capable of performing work.

The outcomes of this research will provide insight into how to design stimuli-
responsive materials capable of performing work at the microscale. The numerical
tools developed for this project should be transferable to other active systems
and will have important implications for a number of biological problems that
rely on similar physical mechanisms. The award contributes to the education of
undergraduate and graduate students which the PI will recruit to participate in
these projects, and they will have first-hand exposure to cutting-edge numerical
and statistical methods to model active systems. Furthermore, an outreach plan
in collaboration with a number of on-campus organizations such as WISC (Women in
Science at Columbia), whose efforts are dedicated to the advancement of women
and underrepresented minorities in the sciences, technology, engineering and
math, is currently underway, and will be further extended.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education that aims at
understanding three important issues of active materials that are currently
unexplored. The first issue concerns the rheological properties of active
condensates. Although a large body of work has been devoted to studying self-
assembly, dynamics and the phase behavior of active colloidal particles, limited
work has been done to understand the elastic properties of active condensates
and their response to external stimuli. This is a fundamental problem that needs
to be addressed to better characterize the mechanical properties of these
materials. The second issue concerns the interplay between elastic and active
forces on fluid vesicles using models that allow for topological transitions.
The PI will explore under what conditions rectification can occur when giant
unilamellar vesicles are loaded with active particles. While a good amount of
work has been done to understand motion rectification of single active
particles, not much is known about the transport properties of soft, deformable
interfaces activated by self-propelling particles across micro-channels. This is
an important problem given that fibroblasts and epithelial cancerous cells can
acquire directional motion when confined within asymmetric, periodic channels,
and would present a minimal model for the description of such a complex system.
The third issue deals with a fundamental question about the very nature of
active systems. Although the most intriguing phenomenological behavior of active
systems arises, at the most fundamental level, because of time-reversal symmetry
breaking, and entropy production is the hallmark signature of lack of
equilibrium, a clear relationship between inhomogeneities in local entropy
production and the degree to which active systems are out of equilibrium and
capable to perform work has not been adequately established. The PI will explore
how knowledge of spatial gradients in entropy production can be exploited to
maximize the work active systems can perform at the microscale. The outcomes of
this research will advance our current knowledge of statistical physics and will
provide insight into how to design stimuli-responsive materials capable of
performing work at the microscale. The numerical tools developed for this
project should be transferable to other active systems and will have important
implications for a number of biological problems that rely on similar physical
mechanisms. The award contributes to the education of undergraduate and graduate
students which the PI will recruit to participate in these projects, and they
will have first-hand exposure to cutting-edge numerical and statistical methods
to model active systems. Furthermore, an outreach plan in collaboration with a
number of on-campus organizations such as WISC (Women in Science at Columbia),
whose efforts are dedicated to the advancement of women and underrepresented
minorities in the sciences, technology, engineering and math, is currently
underway, and will be further extended.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.