* 2321499
* Capturing and Leveraging Data from Teacher-Student Interactions to Improve STEM Learning: An Incubator Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Teachers are extraordinarily important to student learning, but researchers have
surprisingly little data about what teachers do moment-to-moment with students.
What are the instructional moves and improvisational responses that characterize
highly effective practice? To better understand and support U.S. K-12 STEM
teachers, this Incubator project will develop a network of "tutor
observatories." Tutor observatories are learning environments that record
teacher engagements with students along with information about the context of
the interaction. These observatories can be built in classrooms, in digital
simulations for teacher education, in platforms for online tutoring, and other
new environments. These observatories will record their data in a shared format
that allows researchers to compile a dataset of one million moments where
teachers interact with students. From these data, researchers will be able to
gain a deeper understanding of STEM teacher practice, identify highly effective
practices, and develop training data that can inform a new generation of
artificially intelligent tools to support teachers and student learning. Given
important issues of privacy, security, and trust, representatives of teachers
and community members will play a vital role in the ethical development of the
tutor observatories and million tutor moves dataset.

During the period of this incubator grant, the network will convene five working
groups related to human and computer tutoring platforms, classroom recordings,
teaching simulations, emerging models for tutor observatories, and family and
teacher engagement. These working groups will conduct a set of tasks focused on
stakeholder engagement, visioning, prototyping, pilot testing, and
dissemination. Together the network will develop detailed prototypes for a
network of tutor observatories, guidelines for protecting teacher and student
privacy, and community engagement, and a plan for implementation and evaluation,
including a set of partner sites lined up for application to the Mid-scale
Research Infrastructure grant. The expected benefit to the field is a large
dataset that can be used to investigate questions about how to optimize
students' STEM learning experiences, the foundation for technology to build more
intelligent STEM tutors, and the groundwork for critical digital infrastructure
to make the U.S. more resilient to future interruptions in learning.

This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. Funding is also
provided by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) program at NSF. The
DRK-12 program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.