* 2321877
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: University of Hawaii Manoa Research Networking Upgrades
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Sean Cleveland, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 472,954.00

The University of Hawaii Manoa project supports upgrades in networking capacity
for research locations to improve networking performance and data transfer
throughput. The project covers disciplines including physics, astronomy and bio-
sciences. It supports large data transfers between research locations and UHâ€™s
Mana High Performance Computing (HPC) Cluster as well as real-time streaming
data transfers between research locations and the telescopes on the summit of
Haleakala on Maui.

This project provides upgrades for three locations by upgrading connectivity
from 1Gbps/10Gbps to 100Gbps and a minimum of 10Gbps to local
workstations/clusters. 100Gbps upgraded connectivity to the Institute for
Astronomy and the Pacific Biosciences Research Center Kewalo Marine Lab is
enabled by upgraded transponders on the existing wide area network while on-
campus fiber upgrades provide 100Gbps connectivity to the Physics building.
SciDMZ aggregation switch upgrades provide support to connect new 100Gbps
connections. Increased capacity enables 100Gbps connectivity between Mana HPC
and research locations. 100G connectivity to the Haleakala summit allows high
throughput streaming of data for camera systems at the Daniel K. Inoyue Solar
Telescope. A router based SciDMZ provides high throughput data transfer between
Mana HPC and the global Research and Education networks. Researchers are now
able to leverage the robust and high bandwidth network that the University has
built across both the State of Hawaii and to the global network to increase
their data transfer rates and increase researcher productivity.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.