* 2321283
* Conference: Plant Signaling and Behavior Symposium 2023
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Elizabeth Van Volkenburgh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The funded project supports early-career scientists to attend the 6th
International Symposium for Plant Signaling and Behavior (PSB2023). This
symposium is hosted by the Society for Plant Signaling and Behavior and is noted
for being an inclusive and provocative, stimulating symposium. Funds will be
offered on a competitive basis to early-career women from groups not well
represented in science. Applications will be reviewed by the symposium
Organizing Committee and awarded based on accomplishment and need for support.
Awardees will be introduced at a special session for discussing future research
agendas for the field of Plant Behavior. Each will be expected to participate in
moderating a group of 10 scientists, modelling ‘active learning’ in a classroom
set up for this purpose. This activity will occur on the first day of the
symposium and will jump-start conversations among participants and funded
scholars. It is particularly useful to bring this group of scientists to the
PSB2023 symposium for their novel perspectives and the likelihood that
participating in this group will enhance their careers as scientists.

Funds will be used to support participation of early-career scientists in the
6th International Symposium for Plant Signaling and Behavior. Plant Signaling
and Behavior is an emerging field of biological research, integrating knowledge
about signaling mechanisms, genetics and electrophysiology to test hypotheses
about whole plant behavior and ecology. Arising from these studies are questions
about cognition, awareness, and coordination of sensory input into responsive
behavior. Here, basic plant biological mechanisms are explored in conjunction
with modelling, behavioral studies, neurobiology and philosophy. The planned
symposium will create an opportunity to focus current questions on rigorous
science. Inclusion of philosophers of science and cognition will guide this
process. As this field becomes more mainstream, with participation of high-
profile scientists from adjacent fields, it is important to include early-career
scientists in the discussion. Also particularly germane to this group is the
inclusion of women scientists, as most of the leaders of the Society for Plant
Signaling and Behavior have been men to date.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.