* 2321195
* Increasing Employer Inclusivity by Investigating Motivation to Participate in Geoscience Disability Communities of Transformation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Megan Brown, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 259,579.00

To address the Nation’s need for solutions to the complex problems that face
American citizens, expert STEM workers from many sectors and communities are
needed. Education must engage young people from diverse cultures to train in
science and problem-solving so they can pursue the many challenges of the world
around us. Geoscience is the disciplinary home from which to study the many
resources we depend on, from air, water, and minerals, to safeguarding
communities from natural hazards such as earthquakes. Innovative STEM education
can support the development of the skills and knowledge needed to catalyze basic
research into applied solutions. To be effective, we cannot exclude possible
workers because of perceived barriers. This project addresses the need for
increased inclusion of persons with disabilities in STEM, specifically in the
geosciences. This pilot project will use the model of Communities of
Transformation, a type of community of practice, to better understand the
organizations that promote access and inclusion in geoscience for people with
disabilities. Research will also address the motivation of geoscience employers
regarding access and inclusion in the workplace. The pilot is planned to include
surveys and interviews, including students and employers, to learn participants’
attitudes on disability.

This project through Northern Illinois University will work to increase the
capacity of academic institutions to engage disabled students with aptitudes in
STEM to access educational pathways into geoscience careers. To support that
activity and to conduct associated STEM education research the Principal
Investigator (PI) will pursue learning experiences that will build her capacity
in STEM education research. The professional development plan targets five
areas: education models, mixed research methods, statistical analysis,
mentoring, mentoring graduate students in education research, and developing and
disseminating aligned manuscripts. The goal is to use these skills to increase
the inclusion and accessibility in geosciences of persons with disabilities by
decreasing the impact of perceived barriers to inclusion in education and
workforce. The PI plans to research the motivation of communities supporting
such outcomes, including geoscience employers. In addition to the PI, there is a
team of four expert advisors that will meet bi-monthly reviewing and evaluating
progress on methods, project data, address of disability issues and geoscience
education, as well as mentoring and guiding the PI. Project outcomes will be
made available through regular participation in appropriate professional
conferences, publications in the journals of associated communities, and through
data and other research products archived (de-identified) in the grantee
institution’s library system repository.

The project is supported by NSF Education Core Research: Building Capacity in
STEM Education Research (ECR:BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.