* 2321297
* Collaborative Research: Meshed GNSS-Acoustic Array Design for Lower-Cost Dense Observation Fields
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2026
* USD 116,358.00

Precise observations of seafloor deformation is important for assessing ongoing
geologic processes and the hazards they pose, including the largest earthquakes,
tsunamis, submarine volcanism, hydrocarbon changes, and submarine landslides.
Making observations of the centimeter-scale deformation that occurs over a year
or longer using a combination of sea surface and seafloor instrumentation is
currently expensive, particularly when using a large research vessel as a part
of the measurement design. In this project, the team will use a rather new but
previously tested autonomous, green-powered vessel that replaces the ship-based
measurement design, reducing measurement costs by more than an order of
magnitude over prior methods. To further reduce instrumentation costs and enable
more broad use, the project will test new design geometries that have the
potential to significantly increase capabilities where dense observations are
needed. During this project, a postdoctoral scholar will be trained as a next-
generation scientist and educator. The data collected will be contributed to a
community data archive, and methods will be incorporated into community software
for research. Following the project, the instrumentation will become a part of
an existing NSF-funded instrument pool, doubling the capabilities for deep-water
observations from 3000 to 6000 meters.

The surface vessel for these operations, a commercially available Wave Glider,
will be outfitted with antennas for positioning itself using Global Navigational
Satellite Systems (GNSS). The vessel will interrogate a mesh-network of seafloor
transponders during the summers of 2024 and 2025 using a lower frequency
acoustic signal than currently available with the US instrument pool to allow
for the extended ranging needed for deeper water operation. The 10-transponder
array will be deployed between 4 and 6 km depth along a segment of the Aleutian
trench in 2024, combining ship-activities with an existing community geodetic
experiment, that can only extend to 3 km depth. The dense mesh-network design
with the shared use of transponders could potentially allow for a ten-fold
increase in instrumental efficiency, depending on geometry, over existing
methods existing methods that require three transponders per observation point.
Lastly, the experiment will additionally evaluate the potentially increased
errors associated with necessarily high-gradient seafloor environments that are
common in subduction zones. Such steep measurements could be similarly applied
to passive continental slopes that have the potential for destructive submarine
landslides. While the design experiment tests methodology, the location was
chosen because little is known about the behavior of faults in the region, where
a large earthquake in 1946 created an outsized tsunami. Detailed information
about ongoing fault behavior in the region can illuminate the currently unknown
mechanical coupling in the region that builds for future earthquakes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.