* 2321608
* MCA: Interactions between density dependence and environmental stress in plant-microbial symbioses
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Sunshine Van Bael, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2027
* USD 332,488.00

Just as humans live with bacteria on the inside and outside of their bodies,
plants have bacteria inside their tissues and on their surfaces. Some of these
bacteria are beneficial and some are pathogenic (cause disease) to the plants.
Plants cannot move as much as humans, however, so pathogenic bacteria can
sometimes accumulate around mature plants and this might be detrimental to young
seedlings. In addition, there might be environmental gradients, like air
temperature or salinity, that change how the pathogens build up. This project
explores the interplay between plant-pathogen accumulation and salinity
gradients, using two freshwater swamp tree species that act as a storm barrier
along the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic coasts. We will test hypotheses about
plant pathogens and salinity, and we will add beneficial bacteria to plants that
are growing in an alternative substrate, crushed glass from recycle centers, for
coastal restoration. Broader impacts include engaging community organizations
and providing data to a local start-up for glass recycling.

Negative feedback occurs when microorganisms in the soil accumulate around a
mature tree and provide a negative growth environment for young seedlings of the
same species. This phenomenon has been shown across many kinds of habitats, but
much less is known about how increased stress from the environment interacts
with negative feedback. This knowledge gap is a problem as climate-related
stressors are increasing in many habitats. We address this knowledge gap in the
context of sea level rise and hurricane intensity, using freshwater swamp trees
as our focal species. Broadly we ask: what is the relationship between negative
feedback and increasing salinity stress? There is a possibility of both
facilitation or interference in our study system of plant-symbiont interactions,
and these outcomes may change with stress. Two greenhouse experiments will test
the effects of negative density dependence along a salinity gradient and in
crushed, recycled glass. We predict that seedlings will benefit from growing in
heterospecific soil when stress is low but will benefit from growing in
conspecific soil when stress is high. Because negative feedback is observed in
so many habitats, our research findings may have a large impact on our
understanding of ecological processes related to stress. For broader impacts, we
are engaging community organizations and providing data to a local start-up for
glass recycling. The Mississippi Delta provides billions in economic value for
the US. Using recycled materials that would otherwise go to a landfill, will
increase the ability to replenish swamps and restore hydrology in areas that are
becoming more and more saline.

This project is jointly funded by the Population and Community Ecology program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.