* 2321270
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: A Comprehensive Training Program of AI for 5G and NextG Wireless Network Security
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yao Liu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The emergence of 5G and next-generation (NextG) networks is transforming our
lives into a new cyber era, featuring high connectivity and intensive data
exchange. Such a highly connected world poses security and privacy challenges
(e.g., how to safeguard sensitive data and ensure individual privacy).
Traditional wireless network security designs may not adequately address these
challenges, due to the complexity of handling a large amount of operational
data. Recently, significant research efforts have been focused on adopting
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques for 5G and NextG security because of
their efficiency and capability of processing a variety of complex data to
achieve intelligent functionalities. The future workforce needs comprehensive,
coherent training in the intersection of 5G/NextG, security, and AI to gain a
fundamental understanding of deploying AI techniques for wireless network
security. This project aims to fill an essential educational gap between
wireless network security and AI techniques by creating educational materials
and training projects to train the future workforce in AI for 5G/NextG security.

The project team will develop two major types of educational materials: (i)
curriculum modules and (ii) project-based training. The lab-based curriculum
modules for AI in 5G/NextG security will consist of three categories: physical
layer, medium access control (MAC) and network layers, and network applications.
In each module, state-of-the-art wireless equipment will be leveraged to create
a real-world experiment-in-the-loop learning experience for students to observe
and understand the advantages of AI for 5G/NextG security. Project-based
training for students to will allow them to gain hands-on experience in
developing and evaluating AI techniques to improve wireless network security.
This project will enable various broader impacts, including undergraduate
student training opportunities, openly disseminated training materials, and
outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.