* 2321502
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Community-dependent CRISPR-cas evolution and robust community function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Samuel Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 833,999.00

Microbiome research has produced an incredible inventory of data from diverse
human and environmental samples. The field continues to implicate microbiomes
(microbial communities) as potentially key causal agents in many biological
processes governing human and environmental health. A major challenge for the
field is to move beyond correlative approaches and to establish mechanistic and
quantitative understanding of the forces shaping the dynamics and functions of
microbiomes. Rationally designed and experimentally assembled ‘synthetic
microbiomes’ offer an exciting avenue to decipher basic rules of microbial
organization and engineer novel microbial solutions to pressing applied societal
challenges. Yet, the robustness of synthetic microbiomes to environmental
perturbations remains relatively untested. A major class of microbiome
perturbation stems from assault by parasites of microbes, such as bacteriophage
viruses (phages). This project investigates how defined microbiomes respond to
viruses on both short timescales (via behavioral shifts) and longer timescales
(via ecological and evolutionary shifts). Using a combination of theory and
experiment, the project tests the hypothesis that robust microbiome functions
are predictably promoted by microbial communication systems, and costs of virus
resistance. The project holds broader impact through multiple societally
relevant outcomes, spanning scientific literacy, research participation, STEM
education and microbiome management.

Individual species commonly evolve resistance to phages by modifying or entirely
deleting the surface receptor used by the phage. This can have substantial
impacts on the functional capacities and species interactions of the bacterium,
due to the importance of surface factors in mediating environmental
interactions. From a synthetic community perspective, surface factor
modifications in response to phage exposure risk damaging the functional
capacities of the community. Bacteria can also evolve resistance to phages via
CRISPR-Cas, leaving the functional capacity of the cell intact, yet this pathway
of acquired resistance is rarely seen in a lab setting. The paucity of lab
CRISPR-Cas evolution presents a challenge to the understanding of CRISPR-Cas as
a primary mechanism of acquired resistance. This project hypotheses that CRISPR-
Cas immunity acquisition is an emergent property of intra- and inter-specific
cell-cell signaling mechanisms and community-dependent fitness costs, which
together promote robust community functioning. This project holds significance
by identifying general principles, math models and tools for the design of
synthetic microbial communities that are functionally robust against phage
attack. These tools in turn promote microbiome-assisted societal goals for
environmental health, human health and industry in applied settings where phage
exposure is inevitable.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council (BBSRC), where NSF funds the US investigator and BBSRC funds the
partners in the UK.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.