* 2321413
* Pivots: Creating a Pathway to a Career in Quantum Information Science and Technology
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Gaurav Khanna, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2026
* USD 998,667.00

Quantum Information Science and Technology (QIST) is an important national
priority that is expected to play a crucial role in advancing scientific
discovery and innovation. The current and anticipated demand for a quantum-
educated workforce far exceeds the available talent, which does not reflect the
diversity of the population. This project will respond to this challenge by
developing a new pathway for STEM professionals to pivot towards QIST leveraging
a new online quantum computing certificate program at the University of Rhode
Island (URI). To enhance the program's outreach to professionals seeking a
career in QIST, a strategic partnership will be formed with the MITRE
Corporation. As a not-for-profit corporate entity with extensive expertise in
quantum technologies, MITRE will be collaborating with industry, academia, and
government to support the US government in this domain. Through this
collaboration, participants in the program will have direct access to
experienced QIST professionals who will provide mentoring and focus on career
development. Additionally, they will be offered valuable experiential learning
opportunities. Successful execution of this project will lead to a model for
fostering academic/corporate partnerships in QIST nationwide, aiming to retrain
professionals for QIST careers.

The online certificate program in quantum computing at URI is a novel pathway
designed specifically for professionals holding STEM degrees. This program
comprises four 7-week asynchronous online courses. Its primary objectives are
twofold: to establish a solid foundation in quantum algorithms, which can be
applied to real-world industry use-cases, and to provide a comprehensive
understanding of various aspects of QIST, such as sensing, teleportation,
cryptography, and communication. This project's unique feature lies in its
collaboration with MITRE, which contributes to the experiential component. Real-
world QIST challenges will be integrated into the educational projects, which
will be jointly developed by the researchers and MITRE. Through active
participation in these educational projects, participants will gain practical
experience in tackling authentic QIST problems. This project will follow a
cohort model, simulating a professional environment, and will foster the
formation of a supportive community among the participants. The success of the
project will be assessed based on two key factors: the number and diversity of
participants and their achievements in transitioning into QIST careers. This
project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU
Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for
individuals from diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase
their interest in, and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.