* 2321010
* Conference: Understanding Democracy, Elections, and Political Accountability
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Andra Gillespie, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This “Understanding Democracy, Elections, and Political Accountability”
conference assesses how an important high court decision affects access to the
ballot, election administration, and the exercise of the right to vote in the
ten years after the decision. During the conference, twelve to 15 conference
participants present and discuss papers and participate in translational
contributions through community-based outreach. The conference will provide a
10-year retrospective social science examination of the effects of legal changes
to voting procedures on voting rights protections and voter participation that
will be useful for political scientists, sociologists, lawyers, and community
groups. Topics of the conference include election law, voting rights, high court
decisions related to voting rights, redistricting, electoral participation, and
democratic accountability. The conference is organized by scholars from a MSI, a
HBCU, and a PWI. Participants include the organizing committee, at least nine
junior and senior scholars from across political science and legal academia,
undergraduate and graduate students, and local community-of-interest experts.
The conference also includes public-facing engagement with the Jackson,
Mississippi community.

This conference assesses how an important high court decision affects access to
the ballot, election administration, and the exercise of the right to vote in
the ten years after the decision. During the conference, twelve to 15 conference
participants present and discuss papers and participate in translational
contributions through community-based outreach. The conference will provide a
10-year retrospective social science examination of the effects of legal changes
to voting procedures on voting rights protections and voter participation that
will be useful for political scientists, sociologists, lawyers, and community
groups. Topics of the conference include election law, voting rights, high court
decisions related to voting rights, redistricting, electoral participation, and
democratic accountability. The conference is organized by scholars from a MSI, a
HBCU, and a PWI. Participants include the organizing committee, at least nine
junior and senior scholars from across political science and legal academia,
undergraduate and graduate students, and local community-of-interest experts.
The conference also includes public-facing engagement with the Jackson,
Mississippi community. Products of the conference include a set of conference
papers presented at the 2024 Southern Political Science Association Annual
Meeting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.