* 2321225
* Collaborative Research: CSR: Small: Cross-layer learning-based Energy-Efficient and Resilient NoC design for Multicore Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ke Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 225,000.00

The proliferation of multiple cores on the chip has signaled the advent of
communication-centric, rather than computation-centric systems. Consequently,
the design of low latency, high bandwidth, power-efficient, and reliable
Network-on-Chips (NoCs) is proving to be one of the most critical challenges to
achieving the performance potential of future multicore systems. However, as
multicores are facilitating an enormous integration capacity, rapid transistor
scaling has led to a steady degradation of the device and circuit reliability:
unpredictable device behavior will undeniably increase and will result in a
significant increase in faults (both permanent and transient), and hardware
failures. The ramifications for the NoC are immense: a single fault in the NoC
may paralyze the working of the entire chip. While considerable efforts are
undertaken to tackle the reliability challenge of NoCs, most current solutions
concentrate on local optimizations within the entire NoC abstractions (e.g.,
circuit, message, and network layers). These solutions tend to possess limited
knowledge of the overall system and are therefore reactive in behavior, making
worst-case assumptions and overprovisioning, and as a result, they introduce
significant power, area, and performance overheads while not completely solving
the reliability challenge.

This research project tackles the critical NoC reliability challenge by
developing a comprehensive, cooperative, and adaptive multi-layer approach for
designing reliable NoCs from fault-susceptible components, with globally-
optimized power, performance, and costs. To achieve this research goal, this
project is organized into four interrelated research tasks. First, this research
project conducts a comprehensive study of the fundamental mechanisms that
underlie the reliability issues across NoC abstractions. A detailed analysis of
the dynamic interactions of NoC abstractions and design trade-offs. Second, the
research project develops a cross-layer NoC architecture for resilient on-chip
communication with machine-learning-based optimization. Third, this research
project aims to incorporate the application layer and off-chip communications
and develops a holistic design framework that can automatically capture and
adapt to the various computation and communication requirements of different
applications with optimized performance, power, and reliability. Finally, the
project evaluates the designed framework by developing a cycle-accurate
simulation framework and an FPGA prototype. This project will significantly
advance the fundamental understanding of the interplay between the NoC and the
rest of the components on the chip (cores, memory, etc.) as well as design
tradeoffs between performance, power, reliability, and cost in future massively
defective nanometer technologies. The developed NoC framework will benefit
future multi-core architectures and computing systems with system-level
performance and reliability improvements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.