* 2321651
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: Smarter Microbial Observatories for Realtime ExperimentS (SMORES)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2026
* USD 446,353.00

Much of the ocean floor is covered with sediments that harbor large communities
of animals, microscopic creatures, bacteria and archaea. These communities play
a role in natural carbon cycling, yet there is a lot to learn about how this
community nourishes the ocean, and stores carbon into deeper sediments. This
Ideas Lab: Engineering Technologies to Advance Underwater Sciences (ETAUS)
funded project will develop a new seafloor sensor/sampler system to study how
tides affect the seafloor carbon cycle. It will also develop “smarter” control
systems to make predictions about when and where to best collect samples. This
would be a major improvement over existing approaches that waste battery power
and have short deployment times. These advances will also provide broader
impacts by providing technologies that can be applied to other sensor sets
allowing them to record data for longer periods. The project provides mentoring
and field opportunities to high-school and college students from a variety of
backgrounds. The team will work with an award-winning filmmaker to produce a
short documentary about careers in marine science.

This project will develop a novel seafloor sensor/sampler array to better
understand how tidal pumping and subsurface currents influence seafloor
oxygenation and sedimentary carbon cycling. Equally important, it will develop
control systems that use machine-learning models (MLM) to make informed
predictions about when and where to best sense and sample based on historical
and realtime data. The development of MLM controllers will enhance remote
deployment, minimize excess power consumption and decrease the collection of
sub-optimal samples. This project is funded jointly by the following NSF
Divisions: Electrical, Communications & Cyber Systems, Environmental Biology,
Ocean Sciences, and Civil, Mechanical & Manufacturing Innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.