* 2321112
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Train the Trainers as Next Generation Leaders in Data Science for Cybersecurity for Underrepresented Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiang Zhao, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2026
* USD 87,186.00

A workforce with expertise in the integration of Data Science and Cybersecurity
is crucial to maintaining the United States' competitiveness and security in the
global arena. Trainers, including faculty and professionals, who are well
equipped with both Data Science and Cybersecurity skills are in high demand in
order to play leadership roles in underrepresented communities and generate
data-driven, robust solutions to various challenges. The project is designed to
address this immediate need with the collaborative efforts from the project team
across three minority-serving universities with a strong regional presence:
University of Houston (UH), Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU), and Alabama A&M
University (AAMU).

The overarching goal of this project is to train the trainers as next generation
leaders in Data Science for Cybersecurity for underrepresented communities,
providing them with the knowledge and skills to impart these techniques to their
students and peers. This project explores innovative approaches in teaching,
materials, tools, and training environments in the Data Science for
Cybersecurity field. Specifically, the contributions of this project are a)
enhance the research capabilities of the participating institutions in the areas
of Data Science and Cybersecurity, promoting recruitment and retention of highly
qualified researchers at HBCUs; b) update undergraduate and graduate curricula
with new Data Science for Cybersecurity teaching modules to reflect the latest
advances and best practices; c) raise awareness among African American and other
minoritizy students through trainers of the challenges and opportunities in Data
Science for Cybersecurity; and d) develop new course materials and source code
and facilitate the widespread dissemination of the project results. The project
also expands the educational benefits through its workshop series to learners
from a wide range of disciplines, leading to the potential greater adoption of
Data Science in various industries such as healthcare, green energy, smart
cities, and manufacturing. The project is dedicated to advancing the field of
discipline-based education research in the areas of Data Science for
Cybersecurity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.