* 2321040
* SCIPE: Chishiki.ai: A sustainable, diverse, and integrated CIP community for Artificial Intelligence in Civil and Environmental Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Ellen Rathje, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 08/31/2028
* USD 6,999,294.00

Chishiki.ai is an integrated community of CI professionals (CIPs) across
artificial intelligence (AI) and civil and environmental engineering (CEE)
practices to bolster U.S. infrastructure, aligning with thrust areas identified
by the 2020 National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act and the 2022
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. THe Chishiki project adopts four
strategies to build a sustainable, diverse, and integrated community of CI
professionals for AI in CEE by (1) fostering collaboration between CIPs and
domain experts through initiatives such as research summits, graduate and
undergraduate fellowships, joint research initiatives, and industrial
partnerships; (2) offering personalized and scalable learning environments
powered by AI; (3) developing innovative AI-enabled CI architectures for
reproducible and efficient workflows; and (4) creating a diverse, sustainable
CIP community through engagement with historically underrepresented institutions
through recruitment and research initiatives. Chishiki offers peer mentoring
support and works with the NSF ACCESS Computational Science Support Network
(CSSN) to support CI professionals in research activities related to CI and CEE.
The integration of CIPs into CEE research is enabled through an active community
of practice, providing opportunities for professional development,
collaboration, and well-being. The project will publish best practices on
partnerships, broadening adoption, and democratizing access to CI solutions in
CEE. Chishiki offers AI-enhanced CI solutions and supports an integrated and
diverse CIP community dedicated to transforming Civil and Environmental
Engineering.

Through Chishiki.ai, the project develops new courses for CI professionals to
build and support sophisticated CI frameworks that foster AI-driven research
innovations. The courses on AI4CI and CI4AI cover AI-enabled programming, AI-
enhanced performance tuning of High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems, AI-
driven knowledge discovery and curation, and building large-scale production-
ready AI systems. The course on Scientific Machine Learning explores techniques
for explainable AI, differentiable programming, and uncertainty propagation,
thus enabling CI professionals to understand the need and use of AI in CEE. The
Chishiki project develops a novel, scalable learning environment by building
context-aware Large Language Models through reinforcement learning to generate
personalized quizzes and explanations. The personalized AI tutor facilitates
generating individualized quizzes and customized explanations to suit the
individual's needs and learning abilities. The scalable and personalized AI
tutor-powered courses will be available as open-access content on the Cornell
Virtual Workshop (CVW) learning platform, reaching a broad community of CIPs. To
accelerate AI-enhanced research, the project supports the development of
sophisticated AI surrogates based on graph neural networks and differentiable
simulations for optimization and engineering design, develops frameworks to
deploy foundational AI models on memory-limited edge devices for structural
health monitoring and transportation planning, and HPC systems to develop
exemplar applications of AI-enabled CEE. The Chishiki project also supports AI-
assisted code development to accelerate scientific research. The project's
deliverables will be available on existing NSF-funded platforms, DesignSafe and
the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), broadening the adoption and
integration of AI-enhanced CI innovations. The developments will be publicly
accessible as open-course content and open-source solutions for broader
dissemination. The project goal is to benefit more than 500 CIPs nationwide and
to train more than 300,000 users worldwide through this personalized and
scalable learning platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.