* 2321155
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence driven environmental, social, and governance
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Irena Vodenska, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that can help increase transparency and
accountability in corporations' environmental, social, and governance practices.
This, in turn, can encourage corporations to adopt more sustainable and
responsible business practices, leading to a more sustainable future for both
the environment and society. Moreover, by providing portfolio managers with
comprehensive and accurate environmental, social, and governance metrics, the
technology can help drive investment toward companies committed to sustainable
and responsible practices. This shift in investment patterns can further
encourage corporations to prioritize environmental, social, and governance
considerations, leading to a virtuous cycle of increased environmental, social,
and governance accountability and sustainability. The technology primarily aims
to aid portfolio managers in assessing corporations' environmental, social, and
governance responsibilities. In addition to investment advisers, the technology
can help corporations improve their environmental, social, and governance
reporting. Moreover, financial consultants can benefit from the technology as
they advise and lead their clients towards better environmental, social, and
governance-reporting practices increasingly demanded by regulators. The
technology can increase environmental and social responsibilities within
vulnerable communities and improve global governance.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of technology to address issues
with existing environmental, social, and governance standards and includes the
environmental, social, and governance Knowledge Meta Model that consists of
environmental, social, and governance Taxonomy and Ontology. The model analyzes
environmental, social, and governance-related documents, including Securities
and Exchange Commission Reports, environmental, social, and governance news, and
social media posts from Twitter and Reddit, and creates a labeled environmental,
social, and governance-related dataset. It further employs an environmental,
social, and governance name, a Relation extraction model, multilabel
classification for the taxonomy elements, and sentiment detection for
environmental, social, and governance texts. These models are used to create the
environmental, social, and governance Knowledge Graph Construction pipeline,
which transforms environmental, social, and governance-related text into
knowledge graphs. The constructed pipeline is used in real-time to convert texts
from company reports and media documents into knowledge graphs. The methodology
identifies discrepancies between the two sources using a graph comparison
algorithm and reports any differences and inconsistencies between what the
company reports and what the media writes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.