* 2321167
* Evaluating the Effect of Alternative Grading Strategies on Goal Orientation, Motivation, Self-Efficacy, and Content Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Karla Rivera Caceres, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 345,553.00

Increasingly, STEM educators seek alternatives to traditional grading strategies
out of a concern that traditional ways of evaluating student work can undermine
meaningful learning. For example, when professors assign points to assignments,
students’ goals shift to achieving a high score instead of learning the content
and skills provided in the course. Furthermore, grading has also been linked
consistently with lower internal motivation, increased anxiety, and decreased
self-awareness about levels of knowledge and skill. Alternative grading
strategies have the potential to remove the harmful effect of grades by relying
on clear mastery standards of specific learning outcomes, helpful feedback, and
opportunity of reassessment without penalty. According to the theory of goal
orientation, these features should shift students’ goals from performance (e.g.,
“I perform this task to do well in the course”) to mastery (e.g., “I perform
this task because it helps me learn”). Although there are multiple reports that
alternative grading efforts have a positive effect on motivation and risk
taking, and there is a growing community of alternative grading advocates,
evidence of the effect of alternative grading strategies on motivational
beliefs, self-awareness and academic performance is scarce. It is especially
important to study the effects of alternative grading in institutions with a
high proportion of underrepresented students who could benefit the most from
experiencing learning environments that promote these mindsets and skills. This
project aims to explore whether adopting an alternative grading in college
courses increases students’ mastery goal orientation, in turn affecting
motivation, self-awareness, and content learning. This project is important
because it has the potential to inform research-driven curriculum changes to
high enrollment courses with the objective of decreasing student attrition in
high-enrollment, Biology courses. This project is designed to explore how course
grade structure affects students’ goal orientations, course motivation,
metacognitive skills, and content learning. To do this, the researchers will
focus on two high enrollment courses- General Biology II (lower division) and a
Genetics course (upper division) at Florida International University (FIU), a
Hispanic Serving institution. Two paired experiments that will compare sections
with alternative grading structure with graded sections of each course will be
performed to address five research questions. First, researchers will use a
quantitative methods approach to measure students’ goal orientations and
motivation at the beginning, middle and end of the courses. This experiment will
address whether an alternative grading structure influences students’ goal
orientation and whether there is a relationship between goal orientation and
students’ motivation to perform class assignments. Second, researchers will
apply an instrument to measure content knowledge and self-efficacy at the
beginning and end of the courses. Structural equation modeling will be used to
determine if content knowledge and self-efficacy improve in courses with
alternative grading. Finally, researchers will determine whether under-prepared
students are differentially affected by an alternative grading structure by
using the data collected during both experiments and apply measures of
educational preparation to determine if this variable improves model fit to the
data. This is one of the first studies that addresses whether alternative
grading structures have an impact on mastery goal orientations in students.
Although, it is widely accepted that grades have a negative effect on internal
motivation, anxiety, self-regulated learning, and content learning, it has been
hard to prove that the absence of grades has the opposite effect. Goal
orientation theory could explain why some students fail to benefit from an
ungraded structure. This research will enhance our understanding of how pedagogy
affects goal orientations in under-prepared students. Results can inform faculty
in their course design to incorporate practices that can benefit students that
need it the most. The project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.