* 2321460
* MCA: Artificial glycoconjugates that target the sweet spot
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Valeria Milam, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2026
* USD 426,036.00

Antibodies have long prevailed as therapeutic agents, as well as probes to
localize proteins in order to understand their function in the cellular
environment. Despite their history, antibodies are generally expensive, fragile
and not universally suitable for all protein targets. This Mid-Career
Advancement (MCA) project aims to identify and characterize oligonucleotide-
based ligands as alternatives to antibodies for protein targets. Despite their
advantages, including longer shelf-life and animal-free generation,
oligonucleotide ligands are anecdotally referred to as reagents of the future
due to their relatively limited implementation in biosciences and
bioengineering. Through strategic partnership with a collaborator from Emory
University, this project will significantly enhance the interdisciplinary skill
set and research program of the principal investigator. The research and
training activities aim to leverage advantages offered by oligonucleotides to
broaden their practical use as biological tools across the STEM community.

The goal of this research project is to expand the chemical and structural
diversity of oligonucleotide screening libraries to identify superior ligands
for protein targets called kinases. In lieu of popular evolutionary-based
screening approaches, the research team will employ a competition-based
screening platform to identify promising ligand candidates. One or more of these
candidates will be tested in vitro to ascertain its kinase-specific binding
capacity. This project combines macromolecular synthetic design with biological
activity assessment to uncover fundamental structure-binding relationships
between oligonucleotide ligands and their kinase target.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.