* 2321391
* Collaborative Research: Supporting the Whole Student: Identifying and Mitigating Barriers to Persistence for Underserved Post-Traditional Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Haiying Long, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 08/31/2026
* USD 200,041.00

While there has been important research on improving retention for Black,
Latinx, and economically disadvantaged students in engineering, these studies
typically do not account for factors associated with being a post-traditional
student. Traditional students are 18-24, First Time in College, enrolled full-
time, and reside on campus. On the other hand, post-traditional students can be
identified with one or more of the following factors: being 25 years of age or
older, enrolled part-time, working to support oneself or family, and/or a
commuter student. Consideration of these factors is important both because they
add significant complexities for a population that is already underserved in
engineering (i.e., Black, Latinx, and economically disadvantaged learners), and
because post-traditional undergraduates now comprise the majority of students in
colleges and universities. This population shift has given rise to a new term in
higher education literature for this group: “Post-traditional” students. “Post-
traditional” instead of “non-traditional” acknowledges that this population now
represents a new normal and that these undergraduates are no longer an
aberration. Aligned with the NSF Broadening Participation in Engineering goals
and target demographics, along with these population changes in higher
education, a shift is needed to understand how post-traditional factors impact
Black, Latinx, and economically disadvantaged students. This project will
collect and analyze data on underserved post-traditional engineering
undergraduates from three racially and ethnically contrasting institutions. The
project will have wide implications; post-traditional students are in all
institutions and need creative support, and their needs are known if no one
asks. This research will take a transformative approach to not only understand
those needs but also position faculty and staff to partner with students to find
solutions. This should lead to novel programs and policies that the engineering
community can implement as well as evaluate in future studies. Resources and
findings will be disseminated with institutional partners such as American
Society for Engineering Education and American Council on Education to ensure
findings are both widely understood and implemented.

The goals of this transformative cyclical mixed methods research study will be
two-fold. First, seek to understand factors that impact the retention and
persistence of underserved post-traditional undergraduates in engineering.
Second, aim to identify strategies that engineering programs can implement to be
more inclusive of and responsive to these students’ needs. Motivated by these
goals, the following research questions will be answered: 1) What factors impact
underserved post-traditional students’ retention in engineering? (Quantitative);
and 2) What are underserved post-traditional students’ experiences and
perspectives regarding their persistence in pursuit of four-year engineering
degrees? (Qualitative). The study is informed by the Model of Co-Curricular
Support (MCCS) in engineering education, the students-as-partners conceptual
model, and intersectionality. This three-year study will be conducted across
three racially and ethnically different institutions: 1) A large public
Hispanic-Serving Institution; 2) A small private Historically Black
College/University; 3) A large public predominately White institution. A
quantitative approach will assemble institutional data sets and collect survey
responses from both students and faculty/staff. The multi-phase qualitative
research design will consist of focus groups with students to understand their
perspectives. It will also involve stakeholder action meetings in which students
and faculty/staff work together to collaboratively generate recommendations for
policy and practice. A key outcome from this study will be a large dataset on
post-traditional learners from these institutions, which will include several
more post-traditional variables than are available through the MIDFIELD
engineering data file. The dataset will also allow the team and future projects
to illuminate differences across student populations depending on the number of
post-traditional variables that apply to them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.