* 2321623
* Conference: 49th Northeast Bioengineering Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Barbee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,886.00

The Northeast Bioengineering Conference (NEBEC) is one of the two longest
continually running conferences in the United States in the arena of biomedical
engineering (BME). Drexel University’s School of Biomedical Engineering, Science
and Health Systems will host the 49th NEBEC March 30 – April 1, 2023. The NEBEC
has historically been a student-centered conference. This tradition will be
continued by providing opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
present their work. An undergraduate design competition will be followed by a
career fair offering information and contacts for potential career paths for
biomedical engineers. The overall theme of the conference will be “Enhancing
Diversity in Biomedical Engineering.” Keynote speakers and session chairs were
identified in 5 themed areas: (1) Extracellular Matrix, (2) Pediatric
Engineering, (3) Immune Engineering, (4) Neuroimaging and Neuroergonomics, and
(5) Biological Computing. Activities are planned for high school students from
under-represented groups and a round-table discussion will be held on efforts to
increase diversity at universities and industry. This conference will expose
students at all levels to leading edge research in biomedical engineering,
foster interest in pursuing careers in biomedical engineering research and
innovation, and provide networking opportunities with peers and with leaders in
their fields.

This award supports the 49th Northeast Bioengineering Conference, a region that
is home to over 71 biomedical engineering programs. The conference provides a
unique opportunity for undergraduate and graduate student researchers in the
field of biomedical engineering to present their research to a broad audience.
Historically, 60 75% of the participants are students and over 60% of the
platform presentations are given by trainees. The 49th Conference will feature
over 200 poster sessions, of which 33% of the presentations are Senior Design
Projects. Over 270 abstracts were received from the expected on site attendance
of more than 450 participants, with additional participants attending virtually.
A new feature of the 49th conference is the inclusion of efforts to promote
diverse participation in the field of biomedical engineering by reaching out to
high schools serving under-represented minorities in the Philadelphia region.
The participating high school students will get to interact with current BME
students to help them envision themselves taking that step in their education,
and they will hear from recent graduates about the career paths available to
them. The goal is to encourage them to pursue STEM careers. The roundtable
discussion of efforts to increase diversity in BME programs in the Northeast is
expected to generate a whitepaper describing successes and challenges identified
that will be distributed to BME program chairs nationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.