* 2321188
* Building Capacity for Research in Technology-Based Social Entrepreneurship Education for the Next Generation of Engineering Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dayoung Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,957.00

Despite the emphasis on both entrepreneurship and social responsibility for
engineering students, education, and research on the two topics have been mostly
separate efforts. Technology-based social entrepreneurship education for
engineers has ample potential to give engineering students the opportunity to
become socially responsible engineering leaders with an entrepreneurial mindset.
However, very little research on the topic has been conducted in the field of
engineering education. This project aims to advance understanding of how
engineers who have launched technology social ventures identify business
opportunities that can fulfill the goal of utilizing technology to solve
societal problems and the required competencies for successful technology-based
social entrepreneurship. Based on this knowledge, the project team will develop
a measurement instrument to assess these competencies in undergraduate
engineering students. The research findings and the resulting instrument will
provide a basis for technology-based social entrepreneurship education for
engineering students and students from other disciplines who intend to
collaborate with engineers. In the process of participating in this project, the
principal investigator (PI) will establish domain-specific knowledge in
engineering entrepreneurship education and in-depth knowledge and experience in
educational research methods as well as project development and management.

The research aspects of this project will address the questions: (1) How do
engineers who founded technology social ventures identify business opportunities
that use technology to solve societal problems? (2) What competencies are
necessary for engineers to lead their technology social ventures? And (3) What
validity and reliability evidence can be found for the newly developed
instrument that measures the competencies for successful technology-based social
entrepreneurship? The findings from Research Study 1, which will apply a mixed-
methods grounded theory approach, will be based on the experiences of expert
engineers. The outcomes of Research Study 2, which will be a Delphi study, will
be the list of competencies for engineers to lead technology social ventures.
The outcomes of Research Study 3 are expected to be a valid and reliable
instrument that can be utilized in future research on engineering
entrepreneurship education. The PI will also develop new undergraduate and
graduate course modules based on the findings. Project findings will be shared
through workshops and presentations at conferences. The success of this project
will be assessed through regular meetings with the advisory board. The project
is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.