* 2321005
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Computational Materials Science Summer School - Fostering Accelerated Scientific Techniques (CMS3-FAST)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Lisa Perez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2027
* USD 983,166.00

Advancing Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) is not only important but
critical for discovering innovative and sustainable solutions to some of the
most pressing challenges facing our society today. The integration of
Computational Materials Science (CMS) and Machine Learning (ML)/Artificial
Intelligence (AI) techniques, along with Accelerated High-Performance Computing
(AHPC) achieved using modern hardware accelerators, can provide a powerful
platform for researchers to accelerate advancements in MSE. However, the rapid
advancement of these fields has also created a knowledge gap in the workforce,
with a shortage of professionals who are simultaneously trained in all three
areas: CMS, ML/AI, and AHPC. This project is a beyond-state-of-the-art workforce
development program that will integrate CMS, ML/AI techniques, and AHPC into one
comprehensive education and hands-on training program to drive transformative
fundamental research in MSE. The project will utilize immersive visualization
through Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR/AR) tools and AI-based natural
language generation tools to provide a tailored environment for participants
with different backgrounds and learning styles. The education and hands-on
training components of this project are both hybrid and expansive, allowing for
large-scale workforce development. In addition, the project will develop studio-
based curricula that integrate CMS, ML/AI techniques, and AHPC at various levels
of complexity for both undergraduate and graduate students. It will establish
partnerships with national laboratories, other academic institutions, and a
large network of CMS and CI professionals and contributors. These collaborations
will promote a collective impact on training-based workforce development and
advancements in MSE. The program also aims to introduce immersive visualization
and materials informatics in CMS to K-12 students to promote and encourage their
interest in pursuing higher education in related fields.

The specific objectives of this project are to: (i) Integrate CMS, ML/AI
techniques, and AHPC into one comprehensive education and hands-on training
program. (ii) Leverage immersive visualization through VR/AR tools and AI-based
natural language generation tools to provide a tailored environment to
participants with different backgrounds and learning styles. (iii) Rigorously
test and enhance the scaling of the education and hands-on training components,
while also broadening access to enable large-scale and unrestricted workforce
development. (iv) Develop studio-based curricula that integrate CMS, ML/AI
techniques, and AHPC at various levels of complexity for both undergraduate and
graduate students. (v) Expand the current network of CI professionals and
contributors to establish a powerful platform that accelerates advancements in
MSE through continuous training and development. By achieving these objectives,
this project will create a new generation of highly skilled CI users, equipped
with cutting-edge tools and techniques to drive innovation in MSE.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation within the
Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.