* 2321501
* MCA: Application of Cryo-Electron Microscopy to Determine the Structure of Epigenetic Regulatory Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Karen Glass, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2026
* USD 383,260.00

Single particle Cryo-electron microscopy (Cryo-EM) is a powerful tool for
studying the structure of proteins and other molecules in our cells. The ability
to capture exquisitely detailed images of proteins, protein complexes,
antibodies, and viruses has been facilitated by recent advancements in Cryo-EM
technology, aptly termed the "resolution revolution." With the support of Cryo-
EM experts at the University of Michigan and the National Center for Cryo-EM
Access and Training (NCCAT) in New York, the PI will receive training and gain
new expertise in using single-particle Cryo-EM methods to answer key scientific
questions surrounding gene regulatory mechanisms. This training in single
particle cryoEM will allow the PI to obtain protein-DNA structures at high
resolution that are not currently available through X-ray crystallography or NMR
due to size and other limitations. Cryo-EM has become an essential component of
modern biological research, and there is a great need to train a highly skilled
workforce to meet the growing demand. By becoming an expert in this area, the PI
will revitalize an existing University of Vermont (UVM) Cryo-EM facility and set
up training for other UVM faculty, lab personnel, postdocs, graduate, and
undergraduate students.

The primary objective of this project is to acquire the ability to lead and
conduct single particle Cryo-electron microscopy (Cryo-EM) experiments to
elucidate the molecular structures of large proteins and oligomeric complexes.
Specifically, this project will investigate how chromatin reader domains, such
as the bromodomain, interact with post-translational modifications on histone
proteins and the nucleosome to regulate essential DNA templated processes.
Utilizing Cryo-EM to collect structural data on the native complexes formed
within the cell will be essential to further current knowledge of how epigenetic
signaling regulates critical cellular processes. To obtain this expertise, the
PI has developed a training plan to learn single-particle Cryo-EM techniques
from experts at the University of Michigan and at the National Center for Cryo-
EM Access and Training (NCCAT). Through these partnerships data processing and
training workflows will be established to determine the structures of chromatin
regulatory complexes. This collaborative effort will also be utilized to develop
new educational and training resources that will facilitate access to Cryo-EM
technology at the local and national levels.

This project is jointly funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.