* 2321993
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Cyberinfrastructure and Network Architecture Upgrades to Empower Research at Shepherd University
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Jaroslav Flidr, Shepherd University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 637,210.00

This project funds Shepherd University to deploy a new network
cyberinfrastructure dedicated to data-driven research. It will greatly improve
access to national shared collaborative resources for science and engineering
research and education. The network cyberinfrastructure will provision a
connection to national research and educational networks. The network
cyberinfrastructure also provisions a Science DMZ, which is a network component
that enables high volume data transfers along with high security to support
advanced data intensive research. The new cyberinfrastructure will become an
integral component of a larger upgrade effort and is helping to define broader
objectives for transforming the old low-throughput network architecture into a
modern high-performance, resilient resource. The deployment positively impacts
the local campus community and the state of West Virginia.

This project adds 10 Gbps to the existing campus 1 Gbps bandwidth, deploys
modern Layer 3 and Layer 2 network architecture, instruments three STEM
buildings, provisions a last-mile connection to regional optical networks and
provides full integration with the Internet2 national backbone. The new network
cyberinfrastructure will increase the ability of Shepherd University to attract,
hire, and retain faculty whose research is data intensive and will improve the
attractiveness of the university to students in technology and the data
dependent fields.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.