* 2321315
* STTR Phase I:  Electrochemical Water Treatment Devices to Combat Harmful Algal Blooms
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Yang Yang, RESET WATER LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is in the development of a harmful algal bloom (HAB) mitigation
technology. HABs are cyanobacterial plumes that are often acutely toxic to
aquatic organisms, animals, and humans because of the cyanotoxins released by
them. HABs have become an emerging threat to the recreational use of lakes and
drinking water supplies. It is challenging for conventional centralized water
treatment processes to mitigate HAB events and cyanotoxins that occur frequently
and irregularly due to increased nutrient discharge and global climate change.
The direct economic impact of HABs in the U.S. is estimated to be $50 million
per year. The proposed HAB mitigation technology aims to intercept of eliminate
such blooms at the early stage. The technology is based on electrochemical
oxidation and features faster removal of both cyanobacteria and cyanotoxins. The
solution should also result in fewer disinfection byproducts compared with
conventional chlorination and ozonation methods. The technology uses cheaper,
locally sourced electrode materials thereby reducing capital costs and potential
supply chain challenges. These improvements could make the technology accessible
to larger customer base and as such, improve water quality for larger
populations. In addition, energy consumption may be reduced significantly
allowing for more effective treatment. The reduction in HABs would ensure the
continued use of water resources for recreation, reducing health risks and
increasing property values of lakeside residences.

The project is focused on the development of an innovative electrochemical
technology to remove HABs safely and effectively from bodies of water. Removal
of harmful algal blooms is accomplished through an electro-oxidation (EO)
process that does not require the addition of any chemicals, is quick, and easy
to use. Phase I research and development will include the development of new
electrode materials aimed at reducing the electrode costs by up to 50% by
substituting the base metal and the dopant in the coated electrode material. The
team will also evaluate the environmental impact of the treatment process on
non-algae model organisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.