* 2321357
* Self-Propulsion by Capillary-Dominated Faraday Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pedro Saenz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Yue Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 207,188.00

Understanding the unsteady flows generated by the oscillations of an interfacial
surface that separates a liquid from a gas is a broad research area with
numerous practical applications, from the transport of particles to the mixing
of chemicals. This research project aims to develop a mathematical framework for
understanding, predicting, and harnessing the fluid flows and spontaneous
movements produced by periodic interfacial waves, with particular emphasis on
new effects that emerge in geometrically confined liquid-air systems driven into
vertical oscillations at small amplitude, less than a few millimeters. For
example, research efforts will aim to explain why waves that oscillate in place
in a wide channel, start to translate spontaneously when the channel is narrow,
and how this phenomenon can be exploited to realize a new type of fluid pump.
Educational efforts will aim to train students to succeed in modern multi-
disciplinary work and research environments, by coaching them in diverse
scientific and soft skills, with emphasis on strong communication skills and
proficiency in the art of scientific visualization. The communication and
visualization efforts will be leveraged to promote diversity in STEM through a
range of outreach events. Faraday waves emerge when a liquid layer is subjected
to periodic vertical oscillations, initially forming a standing pattern that
begins to exhibit erratic movement as the amplitude of the forcing increases. A
relatively unexplored question of interest is whether the chaotic dynamics of
Faraday waves can be harnessed to produce coherent motion. Previous attempts to
demonstrate this possibility through spatial confinement of the waves have been
scarce and primarily focused on large, gravity-dominated Faraday waves. For this
research project, preliminary experiments demonstrated the existence of
spontaneous symmetry-breaking in small, capillary-dominated Faraday waves
confined within narrow annular channels, resulting in persistent wave motion due
to meniscus and contact-line dynamics. By integrating theory, simulations, and
experiments, the main objective of this project is to understand and rationalize
this instability and explore how similar phenomena can lead to new self-
propulsion dynamics for confined waves, slugs, and bubbles. The project will
investigate the influence of wettability and contact-line dynamics, two-layer
configurations, and explore a variety of mixing and transport applications
involving complex flow networks and fluid pumps. Special attention will be given
to elucidating the role of streaming flows. A unified theoretical framework
based on Floquet theory will be developed to analyze the observed Faraday
instabilities. Theoretical advancements will be informed and validated by in-
house experiments and direct numerical simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.