* 2321173
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Stratigraphic Paleobiology Field Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2025
* Mark Patzkowsky, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 01/31/2025
* USD 33,845.00

The Stratigraphic Paleobiology Field Conference is designed to train early Ph.D.
students to understand how the formation of the stratigraphic record controls
where fossils are most likely found. This knowledge is necessary for any
biological interpretation of the fossil record, such as patterns of evolution,
ecological change, mass extinctions, and biotic invasions. This knowledge is
also interdisciplinary and not usually covered in most Ph.D. programs. It will
allow students to address significant questions related to how life evolves in
relation to environmental change, as well as questions about subdividing
geologic time and geological correlation, approaches that are used extensively
in the energy industry to investigate the origin and development of hydrocarbon-
bearing basins on Earth.

Participants will learn how to collect, analyze, and interpret stratigraphic and
paleontologic data through field projects on rocks that represent ancient
ecosystems on land and in the sea. They will measure and describe stratigraphic
columns of sedimentary rocks. Participants will also conduct counts of fossils
and learn how to analyze fossil count data in relationship to the stratigraphic
columns using several statistical methods. They will discover how the
distribution and preservation of fossils are controlled by the structure of the
stratigraphic record. As a group, they will discuss how this understanding can
be used to address research questions in paleoecology and evolution.
Participants in the field conference will go on to hold research and teaching
positions at universities, museums, and in the private sector, making them key
actors in training future STEM leaders to address many of the most pressing
problems facing society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.