* 2321633
* Pivots: Enabling Access for Historically Underserved and Underrepresented Groups to Experiential Learning and Credentials in Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Carla Johnson, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

Diversity in the STEM workforce remains a challenge as evidenced by the
historical underrepresentation of low-income, racial, ethnic, gender
representation, and first-generation individuals in STEM education programs and
in STEM careers such at data science and artificial intelligence (AI). The
ExLENT-AI Externship project will provide experiential learning opportunities to
people from historically underserved and underrepresented groups in the emerging
technology fields of data science and AI to broaden access for diverse
individuals to learn about and potentially work in careers in these areas. North
Carolina State University will partner with Delta Air Lines, Lexmark, Charity
Navigator, Randstad, and other industry organizations to collaborate on the
design and implementation of the 40-week externship program. The externship is a
combination of live, weekly workshop sessions and real-world, industry
mentoring, job shadowing, and working on authentic tasks with partners. The
objectives of ExLENT-AI are to: 1) leverage evidence-based best practices in
experiential learning to attract diverse learners to emerging technology
careers; 2) recruit individuals with from historically underserved and
underrepresented groups to participate in the ExLENT-AI evidence-based
externship program; 3) strengthen partnerships with appropriate stakeholders to
develop an integrated, collaborative network to best support participants; 4)
establish a community of learners for the cohorts through mentorship and other
community-building activities; 5) prepare participants to gain relevant
artificial intelligence competencies, knowledge, and skills; and 6) support
participants through the job search process and placement into their new careers
in artificial intelligence.

The ExLENT-AI Externship project will leverage the use of ten evidence-based
best-practices found to be effective in delivery of experiential learning and
attracting/retaining participants from historically underserved and
underrepresented backgrounds. These ten key practices include: 1) establishment
of a STEM ecosystem, 2) use of the Collective Impact Model; 3) coursework that
has structured curricular activities; 4) inverted classroom models for
coursework delivery; 5) teamwork and group/cohort engagement in discourse and
application of knowledge; 6) sustained involvement in externships where
individuals are engaged in authentic tasks with real-world industry context; 7)
engagement of mentors; 8) clear articulation and assessment of learning
objectives; 9) use of incentives and rewards (e.g., stipends and certificates);
and 10) guidance through career coaching and job search support. This project
will contribute broadly to the achievement of societally relevant outcomes
including the development of a diverse, globally competitive emerging technology
workforce in artificial intelligence. This program model will be fully developed
and will prepare 33 new individuals historically underserved and
underrepresented in emerging technology careers, including women, first-
generation college students, veterans, persons with disabilities, and
racial/ethnic minorities. Additionally, through strong partnerships with
industry, the project team will have a mechanism to continue to provide access,
opportunity, and empowerment to diverse groups to continue a sustained talent
pipeline and direct connections to careers. This project fits well within the
NSF ExLENT program, supported by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks
to support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse
professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and
their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.