* 2321990
* Building a Resilience-focused, Social-emotional Support Structure to Enhance Persistence of Academically Talented, Socioeconomically Disadvantaged STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2029
* Katie Peterson, Bemidji State University
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 07/31/2029
* USD 2,499,950.00

This project will support the national need for a well-educated STEM workforce
through implementation of a holistic support structure for academically
talented, low-income undergraduate students with financial need. Students will
attend Bemidji State University, a regional University in northern Minnesota
located within 50 miles of three indigenous nations. Over its six-year duration,
55 unique students pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in biology, chemistry,
computer science, environmental sciences, or mathematics will receive up to five
years of scholarship support. In addition to financial support, students will
participate in a pre-orientation summer bridge week, social emotional learning
workshops, STEM-specific living-learning communities, peer and faculty
mentorship, tutoring, and research opportunities. These efforts are expected to
create a supportive community environment that cultivates a sense of belonging.
STEM faculty will also build skills in culturally responsive pedagogy and
student mentorship. Effective practices and innovations can be carried forward
to future cohorts of students both within and outside of STEM disciplines.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The aims
are to recruit and retain two cohorts of diverse S-STEM scholars, graduate 80%
of these scholars within four years, and have at least 90% obtain jobs within
six months of graduation. College students from low-income backgrounds
experience adverse childhood experiences at higher rates than their economically
advantaged peers. To address this issue, a Resilience-focused Systemic Paradigm
centered on Social Emotional Learning (SEL) will serve as the framework for this
project. Knowledge will be generated regarding how the components of the
Resilience-Focused Systemic Paradigm (SEL, school environment, community
environment, family environment, classroom environment, curriculum and
instruction quality, and biopsychosocial function) contribute to student’s
academic persistence and the sense of belonging in STEM. This project will be
evaluated with a mixed-method approach using data obtained through surveys,
focus groups, and interviews, and academic persistence data of the Scholars.
Findings will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals, professional
conferences, and regional news outlets. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.