* 2321238
* Biocompatible Flexible Microfabricated Sensors for Surgical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Maysamreza Chamanzar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to address hearing loss and exploring follow-on
applications of the technology. This project aims to improve outcomes and safety
of Cochlear Implant surgery and help relieve the burden and costs (estimated
$981B) of hearing loss to patients globally. In the US alone, lost productivity
due to hearing loss costs up to $194B annually. There is also a large personal
cost as people with hearing loss reported higher cases of loneliness,
depression, and isolation. This technology will provide real-time feedback to
surgeons to refine their surgical technique, as well as provide an unprecedented
clinical dataset to surgeons and care providers to guide post-op care. Together,
these will allow patients who undergo Cochlear Implant surgery to improve
preservation of their residual hearing and reduce the risk of poor surgical
outcomes. By addressing barriers to adoption, this technology can re-connect
more people with the hearing world.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a sensor technology and
intraoperative guidance system to improve hearing outcomes after Cochlear
Implant surgery. Hearing loss is a leading cause of disability worldwide,
responsible for an estimated $981B in global costs. This project aims to develop
and deploy Micro Electro-Mechanical System sensors integrated with Cochlear
Implants to quantitatively monitor the electrode position and forces in real-
time in order to augment the surgeonâ€™s tactile feedback. The sensor technology
coupled with a Machine Learning guidance system will allow technique refinement
within and across patients. Cochlear Implant surgery will yield more consistent
hearing outcomes, including residual hearing preservation. Moreover, the data
generated by this sensor system will enable new intra- and post-operative
protocols as the medical community better understands the pitfalls during
implantation. Improved surgical outcomes and rehabilitation plans enabled by
this approach will facilitate broader regulatory approval for expanded
eligibility and boost patient adoption. This technology will expand the market
for Cochlear Implants, can improve hearing and quality of life by helping reduce
isolation, depression, and loneliness associated with hearing loss.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.