* 2321980
* CC* Data Storage: Shareable, Equitable, and Extensible Data Storage for Collaborative Data-intensive Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Benjamin Bagozzi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 443,455.00

The University of Delaware (UD) is building a storage and data sharing platform
that will provide a sufficiently sized research data storage resource to enable
big data and data science research. The system provides long term storage that
includes data management tools that allow researchers to make their work much
more accessible to the broader research community. This system is also an ideal
solution to store long-tail data that has significant scientific value but may
not be suitable for existing data archives.

To achieve this, UD is acquiring two Open Storage Network (OSN) storage Pods
that will each provide 1.6 PB of storage. These pods expose the storage through
an S3 object store interface, and will be distributed between the UD campus and
an off-site disaster recovery location. Along with these storage pods, data
service nodes are co-located with each Pod to provide more robust data
management services for accessing and interacting with the research data stored
on these Pods. This will enable research data to be more Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). 20% of the base storage of each Pod will
also be made available to users outside of UD through ACCESS allocations.
Educational and collaborative allocations are supported and encouraged.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.