* 2321473
* Large Eddy Simulation in Complex Turbulent Flows with Coarse Resolution
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Robert Moser, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 523,552.00

Computational simulation of fluid flows is critical to engineering for a wide
variety of technologies. Often, the utility of these simulations is limited by
unreliable models for the effects of turbulence. The research proposed here is
aimed at developing models for use in large eddy simulation that enable
practical and reliable simulations of turbulence in complex flows. By developing
truly reliable and broadly applicable turbulence models, the proposed research
will have profound impacts in such fields as aeronautics, propulsion, power
generation and wind energy, with the potential of enabling great improvements in
technologies important to our country and society. The magnitude of this
potential impact would be hard to overstate. In addition, by providing training
for a graduate student and undergraduate summer interns in the development of
mathematical models of complex physical systems, this project will contribute to
the highly skilled workforce required to address a broad range of complex
problems facing our country and the world.

Large eddy simulation (LES), in which the largest scales of turbulence are
simulated while the effects of smaller scales are modeled, is one of the most
promising approaches to reliably predict the effects of turbulence. However, the
resolution requirements for reliable LES with currently available models are
generally impractical for complex turbulent flows of technological interest. In
essence, for practical applications, it is necessary that the simulations be
reliable for as coarse a resolution as possible, which generally violates the
assumptions under which the models are formulated, rendering them invalid. New
modeling approaches and tools that can address the challenges posed by coarsely
resolved -LES have been developed. These include a model-splitting formulation
to allow the subgrid models to fulfill different roles, discretization aware
model formulations to address the effects of numerical discretization, and
statistical models that allow the performance of a LES to be predicted and
models to be optimized. The models and tools need to be generalized in several
ways to enable reliable coarsely resolved-LES in complex flow applications, and
such generalization is the subject of this proposal. Generalized models will be
tested against direct numerical simulations, which require no modeling, and
experimental data, to assess their reliability, limitations, and resolution
requirements. The broader impact objectives of this project include the impact
on a wide range of technologies enabled by reliable models for complex turbulent
flows, and the training of a graduate student and undergraduate students in
computational science and the modeling of complex physical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.