* 2321884
* STTR Phase I: Machine Learning-Based Smart Data Compression Solutions for Structural Health Monitoring Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Yasemin Cetin, ZQAI LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project is to enable efficient monitoring of civil
infrastructures and rapid decision-making on their structural safety. The
conditions of aging structures are monitored using structural health monitoring
(SHM) sensors. These sensors produce very large datasets. In this project, a
data compression solution will be developed to reduce the size of such datasets
by 90%, without losing important information. As an example, one sensor can fill
up a 128 Gigabyte hard disk in about 6 hours, but with the data compression
solutions, it will take at least 60 hours to fill the hard disk. Data
compression is thus a critical factor for both storage (disk space) and
efficient transmission of sensor data. A microchip with a built-in data
compression algorithm will be developed. The sensors with microchips will need
to be visited less often for data retrieval and dramatically less bandwidth and
power will be required for data transmission over existing wireless networks.
This will enable monitoring of structures in remote areas. The data compression
will be applicable to various market segments, however the initial target market
will be the SHM of aging structures within the oil and gas industry.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop
sensor data compression schemes and encoder/decoder devices utilizing deep
learning methods. The proposed system will consist of a data encoder and
decoder, which will autonomously learn the characteristics of the sensor data,
extract relevant features, and transmit these using low bit rates. Even users
without prior experience in machine learning will be able to train the deep
neural network with transform domain layers for different sensor types. The
software version of the system will allow for data processing and transmission
over the Internet when the sensor is connected to a computer, making it possible
to handle stored data on-site. The embedded hardware version will be designed
for "edge" usage, meaning it will be implemented next to the sensor itself. This
approach will ensure computational efficiency, particularly for the feature
extraction part of the network, which needs to be executed at the edge. The
project's focus will be on detecting pipeline leakage using high-frequency
acoustic emission data on the developed microchip system. By reducing the data
transmission bitrate of SHM devices, this system will enable continuous
transmission of SHM data to the cloud or data centers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.