* 2321951
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Variability in Silcrete Heat  Treatment Technology and Implications for Modern Human Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,216.00

This doctoral dissertation research project seeks to better understand the
biological, cultural, and environmental contexts out of which modern human
behavior emerged. Research has focused heavily on the emergence of complex
cognition and the special forms of social learning exhibited by modern humans.
Archaeology is well placed to provide insight because it can use the material
record to analyze large-scale patterns across deep time to determine when,
where, and in what context these traits may have emerged. An important but
relatively understudied proxy for modern human behavior is the use of fire to
improve the quality of stone for toolmaking. This technology, known as lithic
heat treatment, is thought to be some of the earliest evidence for the ability
to recognize and combine abstract concepts through analogical reasoning and may
require social learning and teaching. This research improves understanding of
lithic heat treatment technology in the past and how it relates to the evolution
of modern human behavior and possibly other transformative technologies such as
blacksmithing and ceramics. The project provides training to two undergraduate
students in stone tool analysis, database management, and artifact curation.

This project examines how humans heat treated stone raw material in the past
through the development of the first large-scale empirical reference dataset of
heat treatment technology created through experimental archaeology. These data
serve to establish attribute criteria and develop novel methods with empirical
support for distinguishing between lithic heat treatment methods in the
archaeological record. The team develops novel methods that are quantitative,
probabilistic, inexpensive, and non-destructive to enhance its replicability and
generalizability. The archaeological application of these methods focuses on the
analysis of three Middle Stone Age archaeological sites near the south coast of
South Africa – Pinnacle Point and Boomplaas Cave – to determine how methods of
heat treatment varied from ~162,000 years ago to 40,000 years ago. These sites
specifically, are critical to this research because they preserve some of the
earliest evidence of lithic heat treatment technology and have long, well-dated
sequences that are associated with high-resolution paleoenvironmental and
paleoecological records. This allows the researchers to contextualize how Middle
Stone Age humans were heat treating stone over ~125,000 years and to determine
how this relates to the emergence of modern human behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.