* 2321446
* SBIR Phase I: CAS: Climate-Eco-friendly Biocoating for Passive Cooling of Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Andrew Caratenuto, PLANCK ENERGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to reduce global warming using an innovative passive
cooling technique. The project will develop an environmentally friendly, passive
cooling coating that can help reduce the temperature of buildings. The coating
is expected to provide energy reductions ranging from 5-25%, depending on
climate and building characteristics. The solution may reduce the need for
traditional compressor-based cooling systems (e.g., air conditioners), which
require a constant supply of electricity and coolants, stressing the environment
through the greenhouse effect. The company expects to generate commercial
revenues from both the paint-like coating featuring biocompatible passive
cooling fibers and raw hydroxyapatite (HAP) fibers. Main customer target groups
for the paint matrix include commercial and residential building owners that are
looking for ways to lower their electric bills while lessening their negative
environmental footprint.

The proposed innovation is founded on self-cleaning, fire-resistant, cooling
fibers formulated with HAP. HAP cooling fibers will be integrated within a paint
matrix for ease of application and cost-effectiveness. The aim is to develop and
commercialize this environmentally friendly, passive cooling material as a
coating with multiple functionalities. The team will identify environmentally
friendly, paint-based materials within cost constraints, determine paint-fiber
compatibility, and validate the cooling performance of candidate composites. The
durability of the paint materials will also be confirmed. The project will focus
on the design of a small-scale manufacturing line capable of producing fiber-
based cooling paint at pilot scale for repeatability and field validation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.