* 2321803
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Vincent Mooney, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 18,000.00

Trusted hardware is the foundation of cybersecurity. The International Symposium
on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST), being held in San Jose CA on May
1-4, 2023, is a leading forum for hardware security researchers. This travel
grant enables approximately 60 student researchers, especially those from
underrepresented groups in computing to attend the symposium in-person. The
project's broader significance and importance include professional development
for undergraduate and graduate students as well as continued growth of the
symposium. Studentsâ€™ attendance enables them to learn about the latest tools,
design methods, architectures, circuits, and novel applications of secure
hardware.

Technical contributions from previous symposia have covered topics such as: (1)
counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side channel analysis and fault
analysis, (3) hardware architectures for cryptography, and (4) physically
unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants encourage more students to
consider a technical submission, participation in growing hardware demonstration
space to a large diverse audience, or even to attend as a means to prepare for a
technical submission in future years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.