* 2321487
* MCA Pilot PUI: The role of proteomic changes during crustacean molting: from discovery to testing hypotheses
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lars Tomanek, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 90,393.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) award investigates the physiological
mechanisms behind the crustacean growth process referred to as molting. The
molting process allows growth in crustaceans (a group that includes crabs and
shrimp), and is an intricately regulated process involving coordinated signals
between at least two endocrine glands, the crustacean sinus gland/X-organ in the
eyestalk and the Y-organ. The endocrine signals work through changes in gene
expression, resulting in specific tissues being transformed into different
cellular phenotypes, expressed through the resulting protein complement or
proteome. In this project, the proteome of these tissues at different stages of
molting will be characterized in two crab species to understand the complex
signaling and endocrine control processes involved. The proteome is only
accessible through a multi-step analytical pathway, requiring advanced mass
spectrometry. The award provides protected time for the principal investigator
to expand his skills to operate an advanced mass spectrometer and subsequently
teach undergraduate and masterâ€™s level graduate students how to operate it. The
application of mass spectrometers to analyze the proteomes of a wide range of
organisms is advancing our knowledge of how the changing environment affects
multiple economically important organisms. For example, the results from this
work will advance understanding of the growth process of crustaceans and
insects, because the molecular processes are similar in these two organismal
groups, which are important for aquaculture and agriculture. The PI will apply
his expertise to train other investigators and a new generation of students to
extend proteomic analyses to a wide range of organisms and to build new
collaborations.

Crustacean molting is a cyclical event which replaces the carapace with a new
exoskeleton that expands before it hardens, allowing the animal to grow. This
process is suppressed during intermolt by the inhibition of ecdysteroidogenesis
in the Y-organ (YO) by molt inhibiting hormone (MIH), which is produced by the
sinus gland/X-organ in the eyestalk. Decreasing levels of MIH shift the YO from
intermolt to premolt and increase its capacity to synthesize ecdysteroids to
initiate the molt (ecdysis). The investigators hypothesize that this shift is
controlled through mechanistic Target Of Rapamycin (mTOR), a Serine/Threonine-
specific protein kinase, via a cyclic GMP-activated protein kinase (PKG). Using
recombinant MIH on YOs in vitro with and without a PKG inhibitor, the research
will test whether MIH signaling via PKG affects mTOR activity. When it is not
inhibited, mTOR affects the transforming growth factor beta family of
transcription factors, which shift the YO towards the committed state when it is
refractory to MIH. Finally, the expression of ecdysteroid receptors and
ecdysteroid responsive genes in the YO itself suggests that it is autoregulated
by ecdysteroidogenesis when it shifts towards the repressed state. The
investigators will also use the removal of the sinus gland/X-organ, which stops
MIH secretion, and multiple leg autotomy, which initiates ecdysis, to
experimentally manipulate molting. The principal investigator will characterize
how the manipulations will affect the proteome of the Y-organ with the help of
mass spectrometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.