* 2321368
* Collaborative Research: Halogen and chlorine isotope behavior during metamorphism of metapelitic rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jaime Barnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2025
* USD 65,281.00

Volatile elements are elements that volatilize (turn into a gas or vapor) at low
temperatures. Examples of such elements include H, C, O, N, and many others.
They are critically important in generating habitable conditions on Earth and in
how they influence Earth’s dynamics -- particularly their rock-weakening
effects. Despite their importance, we do not have a good understanding of how
volatile elements are distributed between different portions of the Earth (e.g.,
atmosphere/ocean, crust, mantle), nor how this distribution may have changed
over Earth history. Halogen elements (F, Cl, Br, I) are volatile elements that
have been used to trace volatile cycling between Earth’s surface and its
interior. Recent work has shown that the upper continental crust has a
distinctive halogen concentration signature that was likely generated by near-
surface weathering of rocks. This signature is similar to that seen in the upper
mantle, potentially implicating recycling of weathered upper crustal rocks into
the mantle. However, it is also possible that the signature is generated by
volatile-element loss accompanying recrystallization of the sediments at the
higher pressures and temperatures found in Earth’s interior (metamorphism). This
project will quantify how halogens and chlorine isotopes behave during
metamorphic dehydration of sedimentary rocks that started out as mud at Earth’s
surface. Such rocks have high concentrations of water and other volatile
elements that systematically decline as the rock is metamorphosed at higher and
higher temperatures. These data will inform our understanding of how halogens
(and, by implication volatile elements) are re-distributed within Earth. The
project will support the research of a first-generation PhD student as well as
two undergraduate researchers from groups historically excluded from Earth
Science.

Recent work showed that the upper continental crust is depleted in halogens
relative to lithophile elements of similar incompatibility during mantle
melting, which is likely due to volcanic degassing and perhaps some amount of
chemical weathering at the time of crust formation. Interestingly, the
crystalline upper continental crust has relative halogen abundances that are
similar to those seen in upper mantle rocks and may suggest a role for UCC
recycling in controlling mantle halogen budgets. A better understanding of
halogen, including Cl isotope, behavior during metamorphism will allow
determination of the degree that mantle halogen signatures are influenced by
terrigenous sedimentary rock recycling. This project will fund a PhD researcher
who will determine how halogen elements (F, Cl, Br, I) and chlorine isotopes
behave during metamorphic dehydration of terrigenous sedimentary rocks. The
researchers will analyze complete halogen concentrations (F, Cl, Br, I) in four
well-characterized suites of metapelites: British Caledonian mudrocks;
metapelites from the contact aureole of the Onawa pluton, Maine; Otago schists,
New Zealand; and metapelites from the Ivrea Zone, Italy. These metapelites
experienced sub-greenschist facies to granulite facies metamorphic conditions
and will allow the researchers to determine if and when halogens are
fractionated from one another during metamorphic dehydration reactions.
Accompanying chlorine isotope and total organic carbon contents of the same
rocks will allow them to evaluate the degree to which organic matter influences
halogen abundances in metapelites and how metamorphism may change these
signatures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.