* 2321632
* Conference: East Coast Operator Algebras Symposium 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Thomas Sinclair, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 08/31/2024
* USD 44,225.00

This award provides support for participants in the 2023 East Coast Operator
Algebra Symposium (ECOAS), which will be held October 21-22, 2023 on the Purdue
University campus in West Lafayette, IN. The symposium provides a venue for
early-career researchers to disseminate their findings at a national level,
providing valuable career training and workforce development in STEM. The
symposium expects between fifty and seventy participants, including many
graduate students and postdocs. This will be the nineteenth annual meeting in
the East Coast Operator Algebra Symposium series. The first meeting was held at
Vanderbilt University in Nashville, TN in the Fall of 2003, and since then,
meetings have been held each fall.

The East Coast Operator Algebras Symposium (ECOAS) is an annual conference
focusing on operator algebras (C*-algebras and von Neumann algebras) and
noncommutative geometry, with applications to a wide range of areas, including
ergodic theory, number theory, representation theory, and mathematical physics.
ECOAS enables participants to become acquainted with the forefront of research
in operator algebras and noncommutative geometry and neighboring areas, while
also providing early-career researchers with the opportunity to present their
own work and to network and interact with each other as well as with more
experienced researchers. Additional information can be found at the conference
website: https://www.math.purdue.edu/~desantir/ecoas23/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.