* 2321429
* Conference: 2023 Radiation and Climate Gordon Research Conference and Seminar; Lewiston, Maine; July 22-28, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Patrick Taylor, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,800.00

This award supports the twelfth Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Radiation
and Climate, to be held at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine, 23-28 July 2023.
Additional support is provided for the sixth Gordon Research Seminar (GRS),
convened just prior to the GRC. The GRS is a pre-conference meeting targeted
specifically at students and early-career scientists, intended to provide an
environment in which participants with comparable levels of experience and
education can come together to discuss their current research and build networks
for long-term collaboration. The theme of the GRC and GRS is "Theoretical and
Observational Constraints on Climate System Behavior", including constraints
derived from conservation principles and power law relationships. Topics include
constraints on precipitation from energy balance, emerging observational
techniques, and constraints on climate system behavior due to radiative transfer
in the water vapor continuum.

The GRC and GRS have scientific broader impacts by serving as a venue for the
exchange of results and ideas among researchers attempting to understand the
radiative processes that govern weather and climate. The meeting is expected to
be particularly advantageous for early-career scientists, as it is formulated to
promote in-depth interactions among junior and senior scientists over the course
of a week, in a conducive setting of manageable size with few distractions. The
topics to be addressed are of societal interest given the key role of radiative
effects in controlling and regulating climate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.