* 2321255
* An Individual Investigator Development Plan to Improve Undergraduate Debugging Skills and Mindset
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* John Hu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This project serves the national interest of semiconductor workforce development
by understanding how to teach circuit debugging in undergraduate courses. As the
transistor count and complexity of today’s chips grow, thanks to Moore’s Law,
fewer new chips can work perfectly for the first time. Hence, a high level of
engineering effort is put into debugging, a process that identifies and fixes
any discrepancies between the expected and measured chip behavior. This project
seeks to explore how immersive and domain-specific training can significantly
enhance undergraduate students’ ability to debug complex circuits and improve
their overall approach and mindset to problem-solving. In parallel to the
research component, the principal investigator will participate in an intensive
professional development plan to expand his knowledge and skills in study
design, quantitative methods, and educational psychology. Other potential
benefits of this project include increased employability and career prospects,
strengthened industry-academia collaboration, and reduced debug time and cost in
new product development.

The goal of the project is to design a rigorous pilot study to infer a causal
relationship and quantify how much a holistic and domain-specific debug training
intervention improves undergraduates’ circuit debugging skills and mindset. The
PI will adopt design-based research to create the intervention and a quasi-
experimental design to study the impact. The cognitive portion of the
intervention will include teaching common circuit issues and global debugging
strategies adapted from industry content. The affective component will consist
of mandatory bug reporting and extra credit incentives for students to
participate in building root cause tables. The debugging mindset will be
measured using established instruments. The debugging performance will be tested
via custom-developed tools validated by industry experts. This project will
advance our understanding of how to teach debugging in college. The project is
supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators’
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.