* 2321673
* Scholarships to Support Students at Hawaiian and Pacific Island Institutions of Higher Education in STEM Degree Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2028
* Robert Richmond, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,999,715.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the recruitment,
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need enrolled in several Pacific Islands institutions of
higher education. This project, which builds on an existing and successful
partnership between the University of Hawaii at Manoa, American Samoa Community
College, the College of Micronesia - FSM, the College of the Marshall Islands,
Northern Marianas College, and Palau Community College, will provide
scholarships of up to $15,000 per year to up to 250 scholars over five years.
Scholars will be prepared to serve their communities and meet national needs in
critical STEM areas including ocean health, natural resource assessment,
protection, restoration, and resilience in the face of climate change and other
challenges to environmental and natural resource sustainability. Island-based
students including Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders (NHPIs) are often
hindered in pursuing higher education by financial limitations. Over 65% of this
group of students are the first generation in their families to attend college,
and often graduate at lower rates compared to their peers. Elements of this
project, specifically scholarships, mentoring, cohort activities, professional
skill development, and a network of academic support can make the difference in
helping students succeed in earning degrees in STEM. Lessons learned from this
project will be applied to help increase opportunities for low-income, island-
based students, including first-generation college students and NHPIs, to enter
the STEM workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. It will
support a group of highly intelligent, culturally connected, and largely
underrepresented students in pursuing STEM careers. Project research and
evaluation efforts will contribute new knowledge on the effectiveness of
approaches and activities that strengthen students’ self-efficacy, science
identity, and sense of belonging in entering the STEM workforce. A specific
focus of the project research will be to explore the impact of a novel mentoring
structure. Scholars will be assigned a faculty mentor to provide academic and
professional support, and will select a second socioemotional mentor that can
tailor their advice to a scholar's culture, identity, family roles, and other
personal factors that might impact their engagement and success. Scholars will
be trained for employment in rapidly expanding STEM fields, broadening
participation in the STEM workforce by NHPIs and other populations represented
in the pool of scholars. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.