* 2321088
* The Contributions and Consequences of Achievement Emotions in Early Arithmetic Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Traci Kutaka, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,943.00

Young children experience and express many emotions as they learn to make sense
of and solve story problems. Mathematics anxiety is the most well-studied and
familiar achievement emotion and, as a result there are now teaching practices
and policies to reduce its impacts on learning. Yet, much less is known about
how basic, universal emotions such as joy, surprise, sadness, anger, and fear
impact learning and achievement. This project addresses this knowledge gap
through two primary activities: (1) a review of the literature intended to
synthesize what is known about the relationship between emotions and mathematics
achievement; and (2) investigate which emotions emerge and how they influence
important problem-solving outcomes, including solution accuracy, strategy
sophistication; and the number of unique strategies used. This project will be a
critical first step toward developing teaching practices that can help children
manage their emotions as they go through the steps of solving a story problem.

This project aims to clarify the contributions of achievement emotions to the
development of problem-solving outcomes in the domain of numbers and operations.
This will be accomplished through two project aims that leverage an existing
database connecting achievement emotions with the microgenetically encoded
problem-solving behaviors of 40 kindergarten students (19 girls / 21 boys) as
they solve increasingly complex story problems. Aim 1: Characterize the nature,
form, and function of achievement emotions that emerge as children learn to
solve arithmetic story problems by recording which discrete emotions (e.g., joy,
surprise, sadness) and combinations of emotions (e.g., joy and surprise) are
present during problem-solving episodes. Functional data analysis tools will be
employed to describe their temporal dynamics. Aim 2: Explicate the relationship
between achievement emotions and number and operations outcomes, including
solution accuracy, problem-solving strategy sophistication, and strategy
breadth, using functional regression models. The results of Aim 2 will inform
the development of instrumental case studies, which will contextualize the
antecedents and consequences of achievement emotions in relation to arithmetic
problem-solving behaviors and outcomes.

The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigatorsâ€™ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.