* 2321486
* Understanding the Structural Transformations of Aluminum Foil Anodes during Electrochemical De(alloying) for Sustainable Lithium-ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Arumugam Manthiram, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 489,453.00

Lithium-ion batteries will play an essential role in the transition to a
sustainable economy by enabling the adoption of electric vehicles and renewable
energy sources. However, as Lithium-ion batteries production grows rapidly,
there are serious supply chain risks associated with the use of critical
minerals (e.g., nickel, cobalt, graphite), which may restrict domestic
production. Meanwhile, continuous improvements to lithium-ion battery
performance – particularly energy density – are needed to meet the demands of
commercial and military applications. To that end, it is imperative to develop
battery anodes with higher lithium-storage capacity and lower cost than
traditional graphite anodes. One promising, yet largely unexplored, alternative
to graphite is aluminum (Al) foil, which can increase battery energy density by
up to 40%, while improving safety, fast charging capability, and cost. However,
research on Al foil anodes is in its infancy, and the fundamental mechanisms
underlying the structural transformations of Al foil anodes during
electrochemical (de)alloying must be uncovered to improve their poor cycle life.
The fundamental research project will fill this knowledge gap through an
interdisciplinary research approach that integrates materials science and
electrochemical engineering. The project team will work with a local public
school and the Ysleta Del Sur Pueblo reservation students and provide outreach
on topics of the importance of clean energy technologies and opportunities in
STEM careers.

Aluminum foil anodes undergo fundamental changes in microstructure during
battery formation (i.e., the first cycle), which largely control the
electrochemical performance in subsequent cycles. It is hypothesized that the
same mechanochemical processes, which cause dramatic structural changes during
formation, when repeated continuously, are responsible for the rapid capacity
loss during cycling. The goal of this research project is to understand: (i) how
the structure and composition of the pristine Al foil anode, along with the
kinetics of nucleation, phase transition, and solid-state diffusion, control the
structural transformations during formation, and (ii) how the foil
microstructure resulting from formation, and its evolution during cycling,
control the failure modes of diffusional trapping and mechanical degradation.
The dynamic electrochemical kinetics of these processes will be evaluated
simultaneously with cycle life by conducting operando impedance spectroscopy in
lithium iron phosphate full cells. An extensive suite of materials
characterization techniques will be employed at various stages during formation
and extended cycling to understand the mechanisms of structural transformation
and identify the associated failure modes. These techniques will be used to
interrogate Al foil anodes with diverse composition and microstructure, ranging
from pure Al to nanocomposite foils. The structural transformations during
formation will be correlated to operando kinetic measurements to establish
quantitative relationships between initial foil structure/composition,
electrochemical processing conditions, and the resulting foil microstructure.
Finally, by correlating the microstructure after formation to the measured cycle
life, and identifying the root causes of failure with advanced post-mortem
materials characterization techniques, comprehensive processing-structure-
performance relationships will be established to guide rational design of Al
foil anodes with improved cycle life. This novel strategy of using the battery
formation process as the final step of electrode manufacturing enables control
of the microstructure through electrochemical engineering, which will lead to a
paradigm shift in the research efforts to develop Al foil anodes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.