* 2321547
* I-Corps: Non-invasive intracranial pressure sensing
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Jana Kainerstorfer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a non-invasive method for monitoring intracranial pressure
through near-infrared spectroscopy. The current invasive method for measuring
intracranial pressure carries a high risk of complications and is not accessible
to all patients. The proposed technology aims to provide a cost-effective and
easily accessible alternative to the current method. This technology has the
potential to improve patient outcomes by enabling early detection of elevated
intracranial pressure, thereby allowing for early intervention. The project aims
to identify the commercial viability of this technology and explore the
potential markets and regulatory processes both domestically and abroad.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a non-invasive alternative
to the current invasive method of measuring intracranial pressure. The proposed
technology, based on near-infrared spectroscopy, has the potential to
significantly improve patient outcomes by enabling early detection of elevated
intracranial pressure. This technology uses an optical sensor placed on the
forehead of the patient. The project aims to clarify the beachhead market within
neurocritical care centers and the attractiveness of markets and regulatory
processes abroad.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.