* 2321861
* SBIR Phase I: Real-Time Allergen Detection Technology for Dietary Proteins Transferred to Human Milk
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Trillitye Paullin, FREE TO FEED, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,946.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide the first test to determine the
allergen content of human milk accurately, quickly, and cost-effectively. As
much as 25% of infants have reported allergic responses to dietary proteins
found in human milk which often results in breast/body feeding termination.
Breast/body feeding is incredibly beneficial to health and continuation of
nursing is a human health issue. Studies indicate that human milk is superior to
hypoallergenic formula, providing natural antibodies to fight illness, lowering
the risk of sudden infant death syndrome, and reducing the probability of
developing disorders such as diabetes and leukemia. There is currently no at-
home, real-time test for milk allergens on the market.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a real-time at-home allergen detection test. This project lays the groundwork
for providing the first mechanism to research early and often allergen
introduction through human milk when the immune system has been shown to be
susceptible to allergy reduction strategies. The companyâ€™s patent-pending
technology has the potential to provide a tool to identify allergens quickly and
cost-effectively, allowing parents to monitor the presence of likely allergen
triggers. The test is performed by the user in a real-time, in an at-home
setting, which is a significant advantage over existing tests that require
samples to be sent to a laboratory for labor and resource-intensive assays. The
lateral flow technology provides a rapid and easy-to-read result, allowing the
user to quickly determine whether the milk contains specific non-human protein
fragments which are also known to elicit allergic responses in some patients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.