* 2321384
* Collaborative Research: Novel Hybrid Metal-Piezoelectric Biomaterials for Anti-infectious Implantable Medical Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Geelsu Hwang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Scientists have made remarkable advancements in
developing materials suitable for use in our bodies, such as medical devices and
implants. However, there is a significant challenge related to the risk of
infection when these devices are placed inside bodies. When bacteria infiltrate
the surface of the body through the area where the device is located, it can
cause infections that are hard to treat and can even be life-threatening. This
obstacle hampers the progress of developing improved medical devices. To address
this problem, this NSF project aims to create medical devices that can
effectively prevent microbial colonization. Here, advanced hybrid composite
biomaterials will be designed to make the devices resistant to bacteria. The
research team will study how bacteria that typically stick to surfaces in human
mouths respond to these novel biomaterials by examining their biochemical,
physical, and physiological reactions to the electric signals produced by these
materials. By developing these innovative and environmentally friendly
materials, the team hopes to create medical devices that are better at
preventing infections. This will contribute to making healthcare safer and more
effective for everyone. This research project will be accompanied by education
and outreach activities that aim to bring together students and professionals
from engineering and dental medicine fields to promote Growing Convergence
Research. In particular, these activities will focus on fostering the next
generation of underrepresented groups in STEM, which will create a more
inclusive and innovative scientific community.

Technical Abstract: This collaborative NSF project represents an innovative
multidisciplinary experimental program that connects material science,
electrical engineering, and oral microbiology. The overarching objective is to
investigate cutting-edge multifunctional biomaterial platforms with the capacity
to prevent biofilm formation on medical devices. To this end, the research
objectives are aimed at i) advancing hybrid metal-piezoelectric nanocomposites
for implantable medical devices by integrating various metallic and
piezoelectric components, ii) elucidating the underlying mechanism of the
antibiofilm activity of metal-piezoelectric nanocomposites, and iii) validating
the antibiofilm activity using in vitro mixed-species and ex vivo saliva-driven
oral biofilm models. In-depth analyses of microbial biochemical, physical, and
physiological responses to electric potentials derived from advanced hybrid
biomaterial will be investigated. The proposed biomaterial platform will likely
render an effective, innovative, and ecological biofilm prevention strategy,
achieved through the integration of diverse metals and piezoelectric materials
without relying on broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents. The central ideas
explored in this project are also incorporated into education and outreach
initiatives, including i) mentoring young researchers in minority communities
and 2) integrating research and education for students and professionals in
dental medicine and engineering. Promoting inclusivity and diversity in STEM
education will create a capable and diverse workforce that can contribute to
scientific advancements and innovation in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.