* 2321969
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B Design for Community Resilience: Participatory Civic Technology to Close the Last-Mile Disaster Relief Gap in Puerto Rico
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Robert Soden, FOUNDATION FOR PUERTO RICO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,999.00

We seek to pilot a participatory civic technology initiative, re+connect, to
close the last-mile disaster relief gap and create long-term resilience for
underserved communities with software technology, data intelligence, and social
infrastructure. Building on extensive collaborative research and design efforts
from the past three years, we aim to mobilize, inform, and coordinate collective
action across residents, community groups, and governmental and non-governmental
entities in disaster management to direct the right responses, to the right
places, at the right time. The pilot initiative integrates an accessible,
reliable, and user-friendly software application with an inclusive community
engagement program to enable and empower residents to act as “community
ambassadors” to crowdsource key information to bridge the gap between essential
resources and services provision and community needs in the face of disasters.
Through the 12-month stage 2 period, we aim to crowdsource information for at
least 50,000 residents from across Puerto Rico, with the goal of yielding a
sustainable, scalable, and transferable initiative for the entire archipelago in
the next five years. In the face of climate change, island, and coastal
communities, such as those in Puerto Rico, will face more frequent and
destructive disasters such as hurricanes and floods. Our initiative aims better
prepare for future disasters through the following aspects: 1) Strengthen social
bonds as the core of building resilience and survival mechanisms. 2) Integrate
local knowledge to make disaster management more human-centered and effective.
3) Enhance collaboration as a path to building resilience and reducing risk. 4)
Provide valuable lessons for building disaster resilience and risk reduction in
other contexts.

Our project uses participatory design research to build a civic technology
initiative that enhances several key factors of community resilience: 1)
including local knowledge and information into overall disaster mitigation and
response activities; 2) supporting collaboration through enriching social
capital within and across key stakeholder groups in disaster-prone areas; and 3)
augmenting and facilitating prosocial behaviors by informal actors during
emergency response. We bring together an interdisciplinary team to design,
validate, and pilot a more adaptive and inclusive participatory civic technology
solution in Puerto Rico, with implications for other relevant contexts such as
the Caribbean islands, Central America, and the Gulf Coast of the United States.
Our findings will contribute to an improved understanding of overcoming the
challenges that hinder the effective management of disaster information and
knowledge, leading to improved coordination and collaboration across
individuals, community groups, and formal institutions to achieve disaster
management goals.

This project is jointly funded by CIVIC and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The CIVIC program is jointly funded by NSF, Department of Homeland Security, and
Department of Energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.