* 2321763
* CRII: CNS: RUI: Exploiting Robust Deep Learning Framework for Wireless Localization Systems in Adversarial IoT Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Xuyu Wang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 109,324.00

With the proliferation of wireless networks and mobile devices, wireless
Internet of Things (IoT) applications (e.g., location-based services) have
gained considerable attention. Indoor localization faces a number of challenges
in the radio propagation environment, including the multipath effect, shadowing,
fading, and delay distortion. To tackle the non-line-of-sight (NLOS) indoor
environment, fingerprinting based wireless localization methods using deep
neural networks (DNN) have been proposed. However, a data-driven only approach
using DNN may perform poorly in adversarial IoT environments (e.g., wireless
jamming). Specifically, DNN models are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial
examples generated by introducing a subtle perturbation. Thus, the primary aim
of the proposed research is to develop robust solutions for wireless
localization in adversarial IoT environments, which fills in the gap between
wireless localization accuracy and robustness. Particularly, we consider
adversarial machine learning for wireless localization in IoT environments. The
successful completion of this project will significantly improve the state-of-
the-art of wireless localization and enable robust IoT applications. The
project's educational plan includes developing a new graduate-level course on
deep learning for wireless IoT systems and enhancing various core undergraduate
and graduate-level courses. Also, the project strives to broaden participation
from under-represented groups in research and will continue to greatly
strengthen such efforts throughout the project years.

The project research agenda is composed of two closely integrated research
thrusts. In Thrust I, this project will use adversarial deep learning for indoor
localization in a way that leverages adversarial training in the offline stage
to improve the robustness of the deep network, thus alleviating the threat of
the adversarial example attacks on wireless data. This project will consider two
wireless localization tasks: adversarial examples for wireless localization in
black-box attacks and unsupervised learning for adversarial examples detection.
In Thrust II, this project will combine deep learning and Gaussian processes for
uncertain location estimation, to improve robustness for wireless localization
algorithms. Specifically, this project will exploit uncertainty location
estimation with deep Gaussian process against both white-box and black-box
attacks. Also, this project will model and analyze the fundamental limits and
robustness of wireless localization. For all the proposed tasks in the two
thrusts, this project will develop mathematical models and solution algorithms.
The proposed algorithms will be implemented with wireless IoT devices/platforms
(e.g., Wi-Fi, RFID, and LoRa), and validated with extensive experiments in
representative indoor environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.