* 2321754
* Triggered slip events following the 2010 and 2021 Haiti earthquakes and their implications to seismic hazard in Hispaniola
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Shimon Wdowinski, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 345,926.00

Hispaniola is the most populous island in the Caribbean and is split into two
countries, Haiti and the Dominican Republic. It is also where the North American
and Caribbean plates push toward and slide past past each other, making use of
two major fault systems: the Enriquillo Plantain Garden Fault (EPGF) in the
south part of the island and the Septentrional Fault (SF) in the north. Both
faults are active and hazardous; the EPGF ruptured in the devasting 2010 and
2021 Haiti earthquakes, together causing over 250,000 deaths and US$ 9 billion
in damage. After the 2010 earthquake, sections of the EPGF that were expected to
rupture next did not; the 2021 earthquake occurred elsewhere on the fault. After
each earthquake, satellite-based radar data showed that parts of the EPGF were
continuing to slip without producing any small earthquakes at all, hinting that
these segments might not generate large earthquakes. Following up on this
finding by investigating all SF and EPGF segments is crucial for assessing
seismic risks throughout Hispaniola and for understanding why the 2021
earthquake happened where it did. This project will primarily use satellite-
based radar and GPS data, along with seismometer data from local agencies, to
determine the motion and earthquake potential of the EPGF and the SF. The
project will foster collaboration between the Florida International University
(FIU) and stakeholders in Haiti and the Dominican Republic, as well as
scientists in France and South Korea.

The island of Hispaniola hosts the Enriquillo Plantain Garden Fault Zone (EPGFZ)
and Septentrional Fault Zone (SFZ) fault systems that accommodate most of the
strain at this part of the North America-Caribbean (NA-CA) transform plate
boundary. NA-CA strike-slip rate of ~17 mm/yr is partitioned on the EPFGZ and
SFZ while a shortening component of the relative motion (~5 mm/yr) is
accommodated via thrust faulting. Studies of the Mw 7.0 2010 and Mw 7.2 2021
Haiti earthquakes that ruptured the EPGFZ suggested that most of the seismic
moment occurred on thrust faults that take up transpressional motion. Also,
following both large earthquakes, satellite-based radar revealed an induced
triggered slip on the EPGFZ, suggesting that segments of the EPGFZ may creep.
Furthermore, the segments of the fault with the maximum Coulomb Failure Stress
following the 2010 earthquake did not rupture during the 2021 earthquake. The
dynamics of two earthquakes indicate that the EPGFZ is seismogenically
segmented. The SFZ hosted historical large earthquakes and is capable of
rupturing in a Mw ~7.6 earthquake. This research project will characterize
strain partitioning and accumulation along the EPGFZ and SFZ by synthesizing
satellite-based radar data from the c-band Sentinel-1 and L-band ALOS-2
missions, Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) observations, and
earthquake data from the relevant local agencies in Haiti and the Dominican
Republic. The main research activities include (1) detecting transient aseismic
slip events, (2) calculating interseismic surface velocity fields of the EPGFZ
and SFZ, and (3) constraining mechanical models that will characterize fault
segment depth of lock, creeping, or transition from lock to creeping. The
research project products will greatly aid in the seismic hazard assessment of
the island.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.