* 2321815
* SBIR Phase II:   Developing scale-up manufacturing of engineered waste coal ash based lightweight aggregate for concrete applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mohammad Balapour, SUSMAX LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to increase the accessibility of construction lightweight
aggregate (LWA) for the concrete industry using a thermodynamics-guided
technology to locally produce a cost-effective and engineered LWA from waste
coal combustion ash (W-CCA). The traditional LWA manufacturers are only
available in few locations and states in the U.S. due to the manufacturers’ raw
materials dependency, and therefore, LWA customers (e.g., ready-mix concrete
suppliers) in some regions pay more than 70% of the LWA price to transport the
LWA hundreds of miles to their plants. At the same time, coal ash landfills are
abundant and are scattered around the country. According to the EPA, more than
500 W-CCA landfills are leaching toxic substances into the groundwater at levels
exceeding federal safe standards due to improper landfill construction and
management. The consequence of these contaminations is continuous damage to the
environment, groundwater, and human health. By implementing this technology to
produce an engineered LWA from W-CCA locally, both the supply chain issue of LWA
and the environmental damage of W-CCA accumulated in the landfills will be
alleviated.

This project’s goal is to scale up manufacturing of a waste coal combustion ash
(W-CCA) based lightweight aggregate (LWA), designed through a thermodynamics-
guided technology. The product will be produced through a two-step approach to
demonstrate the successful use of the LWA for lightweight concrete production.
This technology addresses the main challenge of LWA production from W-CCA which
is chemical composition variability in the feedstock from one landfill to
another. The engineered LWA is based on the chemical composition of the raw
W-CCA and the required conditions for the formation of a porous LWA. The project
will consider formation of the optimal amount of molten phase, the appropriate
viscosity for partially molten ash, and the gas release from the ash to form the
pores. To achieve this project’s goal LWA manufacturing at batch scale will be
developed and tested and the properties of the product will be assessed
according to relevant American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
standards to demonstrate compliance. The product LCA will be used for structural
lightweight concrete preparation and characterization and the team will develop
a continuous manufacturing system for LWA production at tonnage scale. Finally,
field scale concrete will be cast and characterized using the produced LWA at
tonnage scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.