* 2321462
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award. The role of Hillforts in  Integrating Settlement and Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Erina Baci, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 31,484.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines long-standing questions about
settlement and mobility during a key period of social transformation from
1450-800 BC (conventionally known as the Late Bronze to Early Iron Age [LBA-
EIA]). Specifically, it evaluates the potential ways in which hillforts–a
traditional type-site in the region–influenced where people lived and how they
interacted with one another. Previous scholarship demonstrates the complex roles
played by such burial tumuli in shaping social organization, cohesion, group-
identity formation, and trade during the LBA. However, little progress has been
made in understanding hillforts as part of the region’s broader settlement
pattern. Existing interpretations present hillforts as places of refuge during
times of sociopolitical conflict. While these highly-defensible and
strategically-located sites certainly fulfilled this purpose, preliminary
research as well as hillfort location and prominence on the landscape point to a
multitude of other roles and interactions hillforts facilitated through time.
Through its ability to tap into the longue durée, archaeology provides a unique
lens to understanding the social, political, and environmental influences that
affect settlement strategies. The project involves local community members, and
students as well as the international research community and the public. Various
stakeholders are integrated into the project through four primary venues; public
archaeology days and guest lectures, participation of archaeology students in
the project, publication of research findings in peer-reviewed journals, as well
as free and accessible content presented via various social media platforms.

The research team focuses on the potential ways in which hillforts influenced
settlement and mobility in prehistory. Previous research in the area has
demonstrated that its prehistoric inhabitants were transhumant, migrating
seasonally from the coast to the interior. Combining the collection of data from
systematic excavation, controlled surface collection, magnetometry, as well as
chemical and artifact analyses, the researchers conduct rigorous evaluation of
changes in patterns of land use, mobility and exchange during this dynamic
period. This interdisciplinary dataset explores the various roles of hillforts
in influencing settlement and mobility in the region in the context of complex
social, political and environmental factors. The team generates new comparative
methods for the study of multiscalar settlement pattern analyses, by combining
absolute dating techniques, systematic survey data, excavation, isotope
analysis, and large-scale GIS analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.