* 2321728
* SBIR Phase II:  An artificial intelligence system for autonomous numerical control programming for advanced manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Tanmay Aggarwal, LAMBDA FUNCTION, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,942.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project includes an increase in efficiency and productivity in
manufacturing supply chains, which can lead to economic growth, job creation,
improved product quality, and reduced waste. The project can also enhance the
U.S. industrial base, which is critical to national security by mitigating
manufacturing supply chain risks. This technology can provide new learning
opportunities for students, facilitate increased partnership between academia
and industry, and advance scientific knowledge on precision manufacturing,
leading to the development of new artificial intelligence algorithms and
techniques with applications beyond manufacturing. The solution will be a step
towards addressing the challenge of reshoring manufacturing given the technical
skills gap crisis in the U.S. by helping increase the productivity of computer
numerical control machinists and sparking greater interest in this field among
new workforce entrants. The manufacturing landscape is shifting to more
automation, and this solution could help train the next generation of artificial
intelligence-augmented machinists. This solution has broad applicability across
commerce, government, and academia, in a range of end market applications such
as aerospace, defense, and MedTech.

This SBIR Phase II project will result in a fully functional “beta” prototype of
an artificial intelligence-assisted, autonomous, numerical control programming
software that can be tested within an operational environment and be near-ready
for commercial launch. The end product will be an artificial intelligence-
powered software embedded in the computer numerical control programmers’
existing workflow environment. The software will provide machining strategy,
cutting tool and machining parameters, and tool path recommendations across
milling, drilling, and turning operations. By offering these recommendations to
the end user (i.e., the numerical control programmer), the product has the
potential to: 1) shorten the learning curve for new talent, 2) reduce the degree
of variability across skill levels, 3) reduce the time / iterations needed to
generate computer numerical control programs, and to 4) increase the probability
of generating optimal (i.e., lowest overall machining cost) programs. The
product has the potential to significantly increase productivity of the existing
and new workforce, while also reducing the non-recurring and recurring costs for
precision machining.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.