* 2321506
* CIVIC-FA Track A: Codeveloping local flood thresholds and high tide flooding predictions with community science and innovative technology
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Tora Johnson, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 996,977.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge is jointly funded by the Division of Ocean
Science and the Office of the Assistant Director in the Directorate for
Geosciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). The research addresses the increase in sea level and coastal flooding,
that is affecting Maine’s coastal communities, to enhance their resilience to
climate change impacts. Near and long-term flood projections, that combine local
observations of water level and flood impacts, are critical to communities’
abilities to adapt to the new climate and sea level reality. Nationally, sea
level rise adaptation-research commonly focuses on urban centers where the
greatest losses in property value occur. Rural coastal communities, however,
face unique adaptation challenges due to their remoteness, isolation from
central planning agencies, limited resources, and intergenerational poverty.
According to the US Census Bureau, Maine is the most rural state in the US with
only 11% of its municipalities having a town planner. The absence of a local
planner or insufficient to no regional planning support affects 72% of these
communities. To help these communities, the Gulf of Maine Research Institute
leads a team of civic, community, education, and industry partners in co-
designing and building social and technological infrastructure to expand the
collection of local tidal flooding data and leverage it to build resilience in
small and rural Maine coastal communities. Partners include four coastal Maine
communities where low-cost tide gauges will be installed to collect local water
levels in flood prone areas. The project will also support local capacity
development to run and sustain a community science program that collects geo-
and time-referenced observations of local flood events and impacts, develop data
products for use by the community, and provide mini-grants to leverage the new
data to support ongoing flood resilience projects. An integral component of the
work is the engagement of local youth by piloting a three-part curriculum that
includes participation in the community science program and working with local
municipal leaders on climate adaptation. Localized and co-developed data
supporting coastal flood resilience will provide information that is
foundational to multi-dimensional, multi-sector, climate adaptation planning
issues faced by a broad array of community stakeholders. The project will also
involve and train a female postdoc and two early-career project staff,
contributing to a new generation of resilience researchers and practitioners who
can work collaboratively with civic leaders and community members.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. Sea level
rise has created a situation of routine flooding in many of Maine’s coastal
communities. Such flood projections that combine local observations of water
level and flood impacts are essential for communities to adapt to this new
reality. Maine faces significant barriers to building coastal flood resilience
due to sparse tide gauge coverage combined with observation-based flood
thresholds and the absence of a network of researchers, civic leaders, engaged
community members (particularly youth), and resilience practitioners ready to
leverage such data to support coastal planning and resilience. To address this
need, the Gulf of Maine Research Institute has assembled a team of civic,
community, education, and industry partners to create social and technology
infrastructure that expands critical coastal flooding data and leverages it to
help with community resilience. The pilot project will be initiated in four
coastal Maine communities (Portland, Boothbay Harbor, St. George, and Machias)
that are experiencing regular flooding and that have a range of demographics and
municipal capacities. Research questions to be addressed include: What is the
optimal location for tide gauges so they can inform resilience planning at the
municipal scale? Can a well-structured community science program yield data that
supports resilience activities and catalyzes community engagement, particularly
among youth, to drive flood adaptation? Project success relies on partnering
with community organizations to develop local capacity for running and
sustaining coastal flooding community science programs that collect geo- and
time-referenced flood impact data. This is done by working with youth and
creating a three-part science curriculum with middle and high school teachers
who will pilot it in their classes. Goals are to develop students' conceptual
understanding of the science and physical drivers of coastal flooding, have them
participate in collecting and contributing data to the coastal flooding
community science program, and support their participation in a facilitated
coastal resilience learning exercise alongside adult community member mentors.
The science team will use data and information obtained through this approach to
develop and provide customized data products. It will also issue community mini-
grants that support ongoing flood resilience projects in each targeted
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.