* 2321494
* Improved Constraints on Mantle and Crustal Source Signals in CO2 well gases: New Insights from Ultra-high Precision Noble Gas and Clumped Isotope Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Barry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,983.00

Volatile elements (like carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, water, and other gases) are
critical for life on Earth. But there are still many open questions about how
Earth formed, where volatile elements originated from, and how they move between
the atmosphere, oceans, and Earth’s deep interior. By studying the gases that
are released from inside Earth, we can learn more about the original sources of
volatile elements. Different volatile origins will have different chemical
signatures – akin to a fingerprint. Some of these chemical signatures may have
been preserved deep within Earth's mantle for most of Earth’s history. In this
research project, researchers will use new analytical techniques to study the
composition of gases from Earth's mantle, focusing on samples from magmatic
carbon dioxide (CO2) wells in Australia and the Colorado Plateau. This team also
hopes to gain insight into how carbon dioxide can be stored underground, which
could help us combat increasing levels of CO2 in the atmosphere and climate
change. The natural movement of CO2 gas through Earth's subsurface can provide
clues about how we can store CO2 effectively over long periods of time. In the
Australian field site, magmatic CO2 gas is being re-injected into the ground to
study whether long term geological storage is a viable tool to tackling rising
atmospheric CO2 levels. This project will also provide opportunities for
undergraduate students to gain experience in various aspects of scientific
research such as fieldwork, laboratory work, modeling, and data analysis.

Past measurements of noble gases in CO2 well gases in the Colorado Plateau
provide important constraints on the cycling of volatiles within Earth’s mantle.
Owing to their chemical and biological inertness, noble gases are exceptionally
conservative tracers of sources and processes. New high-precision measurements
of Ar, Kr, and Xe isotopes in CO2 well gas samples – made at 10 to 100 times
higher precision than was previously attainable – will shed new light on the
timing of volatile cycling and the cosmochemical origin of heavy noble gases in
our atmosphere. Novel state-of-the-art measurements of clumped N2 and CH4 in
these systems will provide unprecedented insight into the formation temperature
and sources of volatiles, which will aid in understanding the recycling of deep
nitrogen to the atmosphere and in disentangling biotic from abiotic methane
production in hydrothermal systems. In cooperation with colleagues working on
CO2 sequestration projects in Australia, measurements of noble gas isotopes made
before, and after, test injection will be utilized as a novel tracer for
subsurface transport of injected CO2, with possible implications for monitoring
other sequestration sites worldwide. The new measurements made in this study
will be shared with the broader community through a series of peer-reviewed
publications, conference presentations, and will be made freely available to the
public through online data repositories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.