* 2321405
* NSF-BSF: Unraveling Link between Interfacial Properties and Chemo-Mechanical Performance of Na-ion Cathode Materials via Surface Modification Approaches
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Omer Capraz, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 288,357.00

Non-technical abstract:

The increased demand for renewable energy sources and associated energy storage
technologies is forcing society to diversify battery chemistries. The relative
scarcity and cost of lithium have resulted in increasing interest in
rechargeable sodium-ion batteries. Unfortunately, the practical performance of
sodium-ion batteries suffers from short cycle life due to interfacial
instabilities on the electrodes. This project, jointly supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research
and the Electrochemical Systems program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, aims to identify desirable
properties of the artificial surface coatings for mitigating interfacial
instabilities. Such knowledge provides guidance to improve the electrochemical
performance of sodium-ion batteries by tuning interfacial properties of
cathodes. Through collaborative research opportunities between U.S. and Israeli
researchers, this project establishes the international cooperation model on
sharing complementary resources, developing invaluable depth of perspective from
diverse backgrounds, and accelerating joint progress to address global interests
in energy technologies. The project not only fosters integration of research but
also of educational activities, for example, through workshops, and research
experiences for local high school students from underrepresented groups on the
US side, and from various nationalities on the IL side. The outreach efforts are
aimed at strengthening the pipeline of talent for material chemists and
engineers for battery technologies.

Technical abstract:

This collaborative project, which is jointly supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research and the
Electrochemical Systems program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems, identifies key interfacial properties that
induce mechano-chemical stability and establish material engineering strategies
for optimizing redox reversibility for Na-ion storage. The principal
investigators in the US and Israel investigate the coupling between the
properties of artificial surface coatings and chemo-mechanical instabilities in
Na-ion cathodes. Polyanionic-type cathodes and high entropy oxide cathodes are
chosen as model cathode materials through three specific thrusts. The thrust
develops Na-ion-conducting artificial surface coatings by atomic layer
deposition and investigates their electro-chemical stability in the Na
environment. The second thrust elucidates the role of surface coatings on the
structural and interfacial instabilities of cathodes. With the last thrust, the
researchers identify the impact of surface coatings on the rate capability of
cathodes. Curvature interferometry, digital image correlation and online
electrochemical mass spectroscopy techniques, supported by an analytical model,
are utilized to probe in-operando dynamic changes in the Na-ion cathodes. The
outcome of the project is expected to advance the concept of mechano-chemical
stabilization of cathodes using an interfacial engineering approach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.