* 2321205
* Preparing Science Teachers To Engage Multilingual Learners in Scientific Argumentation Through Mixed-Reality Simulations
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Mariana Castro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Multilingual learners are the fastest growing student population in the United
States. Therefore, it is concerning that they have shown poor performance on
national science assessments. Despite this concern, few teachers report feeling
prepared to engage them in science instruction. This project aims to prepare
science teachers to increase their knowledge, skill and efficacy in facilitating
multilingual learners' engagement in scientific argumentation, which is an
essential skill in science education. Teaching scientific argumentation is
critical because it empowers students to express their thoughts, make decisions
and solve problems in daily life. For multilingual learners to engage in
scientific argumentation, this requires teachers to be able to elicit their
thinking while also paying attention to language. Teachers must note and
evaluate multilingual students' science knowledge and their language abilities
in order to determine how to best help students build on scientific knowledge
and amplify their language skills. Specific to scientific argumentation,
eliciting student thinking can help educators guide students through the process
of developing and strengthening their arguments. This project aims to help
science teacher candidates learn how to do this through mixed-reality
simulations of teaching and learning.

The goals of this project are (1) to identify the essential elements in
teacher–student interactions that help elicit student thinking to improve
scientific argumentation among secondary multilingual learners and (2) to
explore the preliminary effects, acceptability, and feasibility of mixed-reality
simulations as part of the training of pre-service science teachers. The
essential elements in teacher-student interactions involve the sampling of
students’ scientific knowledge and linguistic abilities to engage in formative
responses within existing frameworks for eliciting the construction and critique
of scientific arguments to address multilingual learners’ specific linguistic
needs. The identification of these elements will inform the development of
criteria for success that can be used to assess teacher candidates’ recorded
simulations and provide them with feedback on their facilitation of scientific
argumentation among multilingual learners. As part of this study, tasks and
criteria for success for the facilitation of multilingual learners’ engagement
in scientific argumentation will be developed. The study will use a convergent
parallel mixed methods design to develop and test the inter-rater reliability of
the tools used to rate the simulations and to provide feedback to teacher
candidates. This research has the potential to advance knowledge and
understanding of how to support science teaching quality that is also equitable
in its inclusion of multilingual learners. Such studies have important
implications across the field of science education, teacher education, and the
teaching and learning of multilingual learners. Most important perhaps is its
role in foundational collaborative work across disciplines (i.e., science and
second language acquisition) that supports the enactment of social justice in
authentic and complex environments.

The project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to build
investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.