* 2321329
* SBIR Phase I: A hybrid phasor/waveform simulation tool for the accurate and efficient simulation of large electric power systems with high shares of inverter-based resources
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Richard Kenyon, ENCOORD INC
* Standard Grant
* Mara E. Schindelholz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,375.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop refined approaches to power
system dynamic stability assessments, enabling the efficient, mass integration
of renewable energy into systems worldwide. Decarbonization goals and economic
opportunity necessitate the increase of inverter-based resources, such as solar,
wind, and battery energy storage. A dynamic stability assessment is required
before the interconnection of every renewable, inverter-based resource on all
power systems. Current simulation approaches do not capture the critical details
of inverter operation or are too computationally complex and expensive to be
effective with real-world systems. This results in the enormous potential for
unique simulation capabilities that streamline this process. There is a global
market opportunity for more effective and efficient planning solutions that
enable power system operators to meet this need. In the United States, alone,
the licensing opportunity for a solution is hundreds of millions of dollars. The
proposed hybrid approach combines computational flexibility with accuracy. This
solution will leverage the maturity of these approaches and eliminate their
weaknesses. The final solution will yield an invaluable, novel simulation tool
for power system operators and planners navigating the challenges of the energy
transition.

The intellectual merit of this project results from the development of
mathematical methods that will comprise the foundation of this hybrid power
system dynamics simulation tool. Existing tools have clear weaknesses. For
example, reduced-order, phasor domain simulation approaches do not capture the
critical aspects of inverter operation. Detailed waveform domain approaches are
sufficient to capture relevant dynamics but are too computationally expensive to
be effective with real-world systems. These domains are mature, but separately
they do not meet the changing need. Hybridizing them in a single platform is a
solution, but it requires research in the following three foundational pillars
of the proposed tool: 1) autonomous boundary determination – identifying the
spatial (across the network) and temporal (across the simulation length)
boundary that partitions the two simulation domains; 2) intra-simulation model
order adjustment – applying dynamical model granularity for all simulations, but
singularly perturbing the differential systems to create algebraic relations and
reduce computational burden when substantial detail is not required; and 3)
seamless simulation mode switching – identifying criteria necessary for
switching between domains. With the successful completion of this SBIR Phase I
project, the viability of the hybrid approach will be confirmed, and a roadmap
for implementation will be realized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.