* 2321802
* I-Corps:   Remote monitoring and assessment tool for spinal care patients
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Youseph Yazdi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a system to measure musculoskeletal function and monitor patient
movements throughout the day. Lower back pain is the leading cause of global
disability and up to 80% of Americans will experience lower back pain in their
life. The diagnosis and treatment pathways for these patients are complex,
expensive (ranging between $10,815 to $87,000 for non-surgical and surgical
interventions), and often ambiguous. For the 1.62 million Americans who undergo
fusion procedures each year, their treatment is plagued with complication rates
as high as 50% and revision rates upwards of 36%. Despite this, rates of these
procedures are growing. Between 1998 and 2008, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar
fusions rose by 90%, 61%, and 141%. Recent studies have found that up to 17% of
spine fusions performed were on patients who should not have been recommended
surgeries. The proposed technology may allow for longitudinal tracking and
functional quantitative assessment of musculoskeletal disorders and provide
personalized care and decreased complications. In addition, the proposed
technology may be applied to pain management, the orthopedic extremity market,
and sports training.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a remote monitoring and
assessment tool to provide dynamic metrics and guide personalized treatment for
spine care patients. The proposed technology uses a three-part system that
consists of a wearable array, a motion analysis and calibration algorithm that
models the spine in 3D, and a clinical report that translates recorded data into
clinical metrics. The goal is to analyze dynamic movement, muscular
compensation, and pain over a 48-hour window, providing spine surgeons and pain
management practitioners with objective measurements of their patients outside
of the clinic. The technology builds on recent studies that show that the
average spinal curvature may drastically differ from standing radiographic
images, which can lead to significant errors in surgical planning when not
considered. The proposed sensing array will be placed on the patient in a
controlled environment at the end of a standard consultation. Developed sensor
calibration methods will be used to increase accuracy and reduces placement
error, providing a predictive pose estimation system. Advancements in this field
may enable previously uncaptured functional assessments of patients in a natural
environment and lead to substantial improvements in remote monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.