* 2321958
* MCA Pilot PUI: Data Intensive Research Training (DIRT) in forecasting soil respiration at core terrestrial NEON sites
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Zobitz, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 184,420.00

In this NSF Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) award, the PI will expand his knowledge
and skills in advanced ecosystem informatics to a “big data” environmental data
science problem. The science of ecological forecasting makes predictions about
ecosystems in response to environmental change. Ecological forecasts in turn,
aid in development of nature-based solutions for Earth's changing climate. Some
forecasts have a large degree of uncertainty, such as those for terrestrial
carbon cycling. Gains and losses of CO2 from the soil, known as soil efflux, are
an important source of this uncertainty because they depend on climate inputs
with a high degree of variability, such as temperature and precipitation. This
research will develop open-access real-time forecasts of soil CO2 effluxes using
mathematical and computational approaches. Forecasts will be developed across 47
long-term research sites in the continental United States that are part of the
NSF-supported National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). The principal
investigator (PI), in partnership with a mentor from the NSF-supported
Ecological Forecasting Initiative, will further develop a tool to address a
community forecasting challenge for soil effluxes, leading to its broader
adoption in the ecological community. The skills gained through this project
will provide a long-term and sustainable research trajectory for the PI, and
will help him develop new undergraduate research and training experiences.

Real-time forecasts of components of the terrestrial carbon cycle (i.e. gross
primary productivity and net ecosystem carbon exchange) are important for
understanding and developing nature-based solutions in a changing climate.
Despite the importance of soil carbon storage to climate mitigation,
standardized prediction of terrestrial soil carbon efflux across seasonal and
interannual timescales lags behind other terrestrial carbon forecasts with
increased model forecast uncertainty from a (current) lack of structural
representation of soil processes. This project will develop forecasts for soil
carbon efflux across seasonal and interannual timescales at all NEON terrestrial
sites. Project deliverables include incorporation of a suite of soil carbon
models (spanning a range of model complexity) into an integrated informatics
toolbox for ecosystem modeling (the Predictive Ecosystem Analyzer or PEcAn) to
generate soil efflux forecasts. Modeled effluxes will be validated against
existing measurements or databases (e.g. Soil Respiration Database or the
Continuous Soil Respiration Database) where appropriate. This project will
directly connect NEON data and ecological forecasting techniques with the
broader ecological community. Developed methods and tools will be open-access
for the scientific community, notably through an open-source R package and by
incorporation of models into the PEcAn ecological informatics workflow.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.