* 2321117
* CyberTraining:Pilot:CyberTraining for Space CI in Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Ovidiu Daescu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 10/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

In recent years, the research community has witnessed an explosive increase in
the launch of spacecraft, particularly small satellites destined for Low Earth
Orbit (LEO). This new era in space is primarily enabled by advancements in low-
cost booster technology and the miniaturization of microelectronic (ME) devices.
These developments have sparked rapid growth in both business and commercial
applications, as well as in the expansion of space-based research; consequently,
a large number of research groups are now developing technologies for space
cyberinfrastructure (CI). However, a lack of systematic and principled practices
in space operational procedures has led to insufficient utilization of space CI.
Recent studies have reported a success rate of only 44% for small satellite
projects. Most of these failures can be attributed to a shortage of a trained
workforce who are updated with the latest operational practices, accustomed to
the harsh conditions and microgravity in space, and proficient in working with
the limited computing resources and network connectivity available. The
burgeoning research opportunities in space underscore the need for adequate
workforce training. It is essential to equip the next generation of researchers
with the skills required for operating CI in outer space.

To accelerate and broaden the adoption of emerging space CI across diverse
research domains, this project aims to design and implement an accessible
training framework. This framework not only falls within an affordable cost
range, but it is also flexible enough to meet the cyber and physical demands of
diverse research fields. As a pilot project, the initial effort will involve
creating a virtual testbed environment for space CI, an underlying technology
for facilitating versatile framework support capable of integrating with various
physical devices. To effectively reproduce realistic exterior conditions, the
investigators will refer to real-world traces obtained from industry
collaborators. To validate the vision for a comprehensive training framework
that addresses the needs of various research communities, the proposed research
includes a prototyping effort. This effort will be conducted in collaboration
with materials science researchers who are currently focused on developing
miniaturized sensors for space exploration. The major outcomes of the project
will include training materials generated from two workshops planned for later
stages. The first workshop will be geared toward experienced researchers, while
the second will target undergraduate and graduate-level students with basic
research experience. Both workshops will place particular emphasis on the
potential benefits of the training program for underrepresented populations.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Community Infrastructure for Research in Computer and Information Science
and Engineering (CIRC) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.