* 2321219
* Challenging Cultural Norms through Asset-focused Narratives: Examining Intersecting Stigmatized Identities from Graduate Student and Faculty Perspectives in the Natural Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Angela Google, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 349,958.00

Given the national need for a compositionally diverse and culturally competent
workforce in the field of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM), higher education has begun to recognize that cultural norms must change
to create a welcoming environment for all in STEM fields. This project aims to
create greater understanding of how to broaden participation in biology,
chemistry, and physics by (1) examining how graduate students with more than one
potentially stigmatizing identity marker (e.g., religion, race/ethnicity, and
gender) perceive the culture and climate of academic STEM, (2) foregrounding
asset-based narratives of graduate students of color, and (3) leveraging faculty
mentors’ equity-minded mentoring practices. This project is also designed to
build capacity in STEM education research by expanding the principal
investigator’s skills with research design and the use of theory to inform data
collection and analysis.

The core of the project is a qualitative study examining the experiences of
biology, chemistry, and physics graduate students of color and their faculty
mentors regarding culture, climate, and mentoring approaches in the academy.
Data collection will involve semi-structured individual interviews with students
and faculty mentors as well as in-depth focus groups with students. Participants
will be drawn from a range of institutions with different minority-serving
status and levels of research activity. Concepts from theories of professional
science identity, intersectionality, and equity-minded mentoring will inform
data analysis. One of the salient characteristics of science identity is that it
relates to multiple other identities, such as gender identity, religious
identity, and ethnic identity. Thus, to fully consider the role multiple
underlying identities play in shaping science identity, this study seeks to
leverage the concept of intersectionality as both a conceptual framework and a
methodological tool. This study also seeks to identify mentoring/ mentee
practices that can be used to cultivate a learning environment in which graduate
students of color can thrive. Throughout the project, the principal investigator
will be mentored by both an individual mentor and an advisory board. In the
latter stages of the project, modules for graduate student orientation and
faculty mentor training programs will be developed. These modules will strive to
showcase asset-based narratives of graduate students of color with interactive,
positive examples of embracing cultural and social identities in a
transformative manner. Further, these group-specific and discipline-specific
training modules will aim to provide faculty mentors training in managing
interpersonal relationships with mentees from diverse backgrounds and in
recognizing marginalized forms of capital that may challenge pre-established
disciplinary norms. The project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) program, which is designed to
build investigators’ capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.