* 2321981
* MCA: Defining the role of the small GTPase Rap1 in a slow cell intercalation event in the Drosophila melanogaster eye
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jennifer Curtiss, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 247,911.00

This project will probe the role of a protein called Rap1 in the mechanisms that
drive morphogenesis: the changes in cell and tissue shapes and arrangements that
occur during development of all animals, and that are essential for their form
and function. The Curtiss lab has laid the groundwork for this project by
employing a combination of molecular genetics and conventional microscopic
approaches on preserved tissues. However, as morphogenesis is a dynamic process
that occurs in minutes to hours, it is essential to visualize these processes in
living tissues. Dr. Curtiss will collaborate with Dr. Franck Pichaud at
University College London to learn state-of-the-art live-cell imaging and how to
measure biological and mechanical properties during morphogenesis in eyes of
fruit flies. Although a lot has been learned in recent years about the
mechanisms that drive morphogenesis of cells and tissues, much of this work has
been done on a few relatively simple organisms containing very similar cell
types. This project will examine morphogenesis in a tissue containing multiple
cell types, to understand how they can work together to promote morphogenesis of
the whole tissue. Dr. Curtiss will bring knowledge of these state-of-the-art
techniques and measurements back to New Mexico State University. With advice
from Dr. Pichaud at University College London and from Dr. Charles Shuster at
New Mexico State University, Dr. Curtiss will train graduate and undergraduate
students in these techniques, which will enrich their educations and give them
the skills needed to compete at top levels in future research endeavors.

Recent years have seen remarkable advances in understanding of cell
intercalation in morphogenesis. These insights stem from equally remarkable
advances in live-cell imaging, careful measurements of cell shape, adhesion, and
contractility, as well as mathematical modeling. Most current models focus on
fast cell intercalation (occurring in minutes) in homogeneous cell populations.
Using conventional immunofluorescence, the Curtiss lab has discovered a role for
the small GTPase Rap1 in a slow cell intercalation of cone cells that occurs
over hours and with influence from multiple cell types during pupal eye
development in Drosophila melanogaster. Dr. Franck Pichaud has developed live-
cell imaging and mathematical modeling approaches to understanding this same
morphogenetic event. The goals of this project are for Dr. Curtiss to travel to
Dr. Franck Pichaudâ€™s lab at University College London to learn and apply: 1)
Live-cell imaging to determine whether Rap1 affects cell adhesion molecule
localization, Notch signaling, and/or Myosin II localization during cone cell
intercalation, and; 2) Quantitative analyses and use of vertex models to
determine the effects of Rap1 on previously measured biomechanical properties
during cone cell intercalation. Dr. Curtiss will bring these new techniques back
to her lab at New Mexico State University, and, with help from Dr. Pichaud at
University College London and from Dr. Charles Shuster at New Mexico State
University, will instruct her graduate and undergraduate students in these
techniques. Achieving these goals will contribute to existing knowledge about
morphogenesis in all animals and will enable students to compete at top levels
in their future research endeavors.

This project is jointly funded by the NSF/BIO/MCB Cell Dynamics & Function
Program and the NSF Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.