* 2321593
* ISLS 2023: Building Knowledge and Sustaining Our Community: ISLS Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Erica Halverson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 31,241.00

The United States has historically been a global leader in the field of the
learning sciences, an interdisciplinary field that draws on multiple theoretical
and methodological perspectives with the goal of advancing knowledge about human
learning and development in a variety of educational settings, frequently in the
context of emerging technologies. The preeminent conference in this field is the
Annual Meeting of the International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS). At
this conference the latest research is presented and practitioners learn the
state of the art techniques in learning science research, and the related
research area of computer-supported collaborative learning.

The project provides partial travel support to the ISLS Meeting for six Ph.D.
students from the United States, selected through a competitive process, to
present their work and receive additional mentoring outside of their
dissertation committees as part of a doctoral consortium. The project also
supports partial travel support for five early career researchers from the
United States, to discuss their research programs and career trajectories with
peers and senior researchers in the field. The intellectual merit of the work is
in improving the dissertation research of the graduate students and building
impact and opportunity for early career researchers; in both tracks the work is
enhanced by guidance from world-class mentors who meet with the students in a
structured format to improve their research. The broader impact includes
multiplying opportunities to develop collaborations in the field of learning
sciences, and supporting the career development of some of the best and
brightest researchers in multiple disciplines who work in this interdisciplinary
area. By supporting a pipeline of high-quality US scholars from multiple
disciplines into this interdisciplinary field, this proposal helps ensure US
participation and parity in this productive and vital area of research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.