* 2321680
* SHF: Small: Automated Verification and Synthesis of Input Generators in Property-Based Testing Frameworks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Suresh Jagannathan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2026
* USD 597,785.00

Testing is one of the most popular and effective ways to discover bugs in
software, so that they can be fixed before a system is deployed. In recent
years, automated testing has emerged as an important strategy for identifying
software defects. Under this paradigm, developers specify the environment in
which they expect their program to execute, and the behaviors it should exhibit
in that environment. Given these constraints, automated testing frameworks
attempt to systematically explore a program's behaviors by executing it in
randomly generated environments consistent with the developer's
characterization. Any unexpected behaviors are then reported back to the
developer, so that they can diagnose and repair the underlying problem.
Property-based testing is a popular automated testing approach that relies on
handwritten programs, called generators, to construct the environment under
which a target system is tested. Since they are also programs, generators may
themselves have bugs which hamper the efficacy of automated testing. On the one
hand, a generator may be unsound, constructing spurious environments that are
inconsistent with the developer's requirements. An unsound generator results in
a poor utilization of resources, as time is wasted looking for valid inputs. On
the other hand, a generator may be incomplete, failing to produce valid
environments. An incomplete generator lowers the level of assurance provided by
the testing framework, as potentially faulty behaviors may be unexplored.
Typically, developers rely on manual inspection and postmortem analysis of test
runs to assess the soundness and completeness of a generator; not surprisingly,
these approaches are error-prone and difficult to scale with generator
complexity. The goal of this project is to develop new techniques that enable
precise reasoning about the soundness and completeness of generators. The
project's novelties are the development of new specification and reasoning
frameworks, expressive type systems, and synthesis algorithms, specialized for
the construction and validation of generators in property-based testing
frameworks. Taken together, the project's impacts are a pathway to meaningfully
strengthen the assurance provided by property based testing frameworks,
resulting in an overall improvement in the quality of software validated using
property-based testing.

The project is comprised of three main thrusts. The first thrust considers
specification frameworks and representations for characterizing the space of
inputs produced by generators that are relevant to the systems under test. New
specification formalisms capable of describing completeness properties,
specifications that capture effectful properties, and quantitative
specifications that describe the distributions and biases used to generate
candidate inputs, will be developed in this thrust. The second thrust explores
techniques for automatically verifying the correctness of user-defined
generators. These approaches will focus on type-based verification techniques
and will be influenced by the form and expressivity of the logical
specifications developed in the first thrust. Finally, the third technical
thrust investigates the complementary problem of directly synthesizing
generators from the specifications developed in the first thrust, providing a
correct-by-construction pathway for developers to automatically obtain high-
quality generators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.