* 2321572
* CIVIC-FA Track A: Reimagining Urban Resilience and Education Hubs Using a Community-Engaged, Equity-Centered Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Liqiang Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 970,975.00

Urban areas are increasingly identifying the recurring need for equitable and
efficient delivery of electricity, internet connectivity, and other essential
services. As climate change is exacerbating the frequency and severity of
extreme weather events, evidence shows that historically marginalized
communities have been disproportionately impacted. This Civic Innovation
Challenge project pilots a Resilience, Education, and Advocacy Center for Hazard
preparedness (REACH) hub using a design co-developed with the community and
civic partners. The portable, solar-powered REACH hub provides pre- and post-
disaster necessities and connectivity while offering hands-on learning during
non-emergency times. With strategic placement in socioeconomically vulnerable
areas, the hub is expected to improve disaster response and recovery in a more
equitable way.

This REACH hub is based on partner agency and community feedback and technical
considerations unique to Central Florida, with a focus on equity in all stages
of the design process. It features a state-of-the-art hybrid DC-AC circuit that
allows for efficient, flexible, and evolving operation of power generation and
modular appliance assets. During non-emergency times, the educational curriculum
at the hub includes interactive and immersive learning using virtual and
augmented reality and incorporating advanced geospatial hazard and social
vulnerability data. There are multiple emergency and non-emergency test-run
demonstrations at community partner locations to improve operability and
community-engaged research practices. An equity-centered, all-hazards approach
coupled with machine learning techniques is applied to optimize the operation
and deployment of the hub. The modular design enables scale-up or modification
for meeting the need of other disaster-prone communities.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.