* 2321159
* Rural Veteran Personality, Delay Discounting, and the Interference Preservation Hypothesis
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Justin McDaniel, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn Suiter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 341,617.00

The transition from active-duty military service to civilian life is
challenging. Securing a job following retirement from the military is important,
not least because it is a major social determinant of health and wellbeing. Only
3% of military veterans in Illinois - compared to 7% nationally - are employed
in science, engineering, technology, or mathematics (STEM) occupations.
Furthermore, rural-dwelling veterans are nearly 50% less likely than urban-
dwelling veterans to work in STEM. Because many veterans live in rural areas and
lack representation in STEM fields, there is a considerable need to provide STEM
training opportunities to rural-dwelling veterans. This project at Southern
Illinois University at Carbondale will seek to recruit more than 180 college
student veterans from the 16 southernmost counties in Illinois, a federally
designated region of low socioeconomic status, for participation in a 17-week
training program focused on computer programming, data science, and calculating
machine learning classification models, as well as professional development in
education research methods.

A novel experiment within the training program will test a heretofore unstated
research hypothesis. Delayed performance feedback (> 7 days) facilitates
superior training performance at "time 2" over immediate feedback with is
consistent with Kulhavy and Anderson's interference preservation hypothesis.
While people may exhibit bias for the present, which is a foundational
behavioral economics principle typically operationalized by delay discounting
measures (i.e., "I prefer what I can get now"), delayed rewards or feedback may
render superior outcomes. In the context of learning and training task
performance, delayed feedback may provide enough time for learners to forget
incorrect processes. However, paralleling the forgoing discussion, personality
has been shown to be intricately associated with learning processes and
differential training task performance, yet no study has investigated whether
personality type moderates the relationship between feedback timing and training
task performance. Therefore, efforts at enhancing task performance at "time 2"
may require a personalized approach. This project aims to test the hypothesis in
a two-group randomized controlled trial. Importantly, delay discounting - a
behavioral economic measure of impulsivity - and learning style will be
controlled for so as to isolate the unique effect of personality. Results could
lead to a watershed modification of the interference preservation hypothesis.
The project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research: Building Capacity for STEM
Education Research (BCSER) program, which is designed to build investigators'
capacity to carry out high-quality STEM education research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.