* 2321008
* Collaborative Research: SCIPE: Enhancing the Transdisciplinary Research Ecosystem for Earth and Environmental Science with Dedicated Cyber Infrastructure Professionals
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Victoria Coles, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,841,159.00

In this age of big data, cutting-edge Earth and Environmental Science research
increasingly requires Cyber Infrastructure (CI) expertise. Prior advances,
including the prediction of climate change, the role and importance of
biodiversity, and changes in the condition of oceans and fisheries, were all
underpinned by the collection, organization, and analysis of massive quantities
of data derived from advanced sensors and models. Increased data throughput in
analysis pipelines has spurred advances in artificial intelligence, forecasting
models, and reliance on scientific computing. Maintaining these cutting-edge
research programs requires constant CI innovation, including collaboration with
experts trained to innovate in findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable
data and analysis. Identifying solutions to the worldâ€™s most pressing
environmental problems requires that CI experts collaborate with researchers,
science communicators, environmental agencies, and nongovernmental
organizations. This project will create this network through development of a
CyberCollaboratory, where interdisciplinary groups across institutions can
collaborate with Cyber Infrastructure Professionals (CIPs), leveraging high-
performance and cloud computing, open data science, and geospatial analytics, in
facilitated, scalable, and cyber-supported virtual and in-person spaces. The
CyberCollaboratory is a collaboration between the University of Maryland Center
for Environmental Science (UMCES) and the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County (UMBC). The project will have a broad impact on the research-facing CIP
community, offer opportunities for training diverse groups of students from UMBC
Information Systems to engage with applied Earth and Environmental Science
research, and support these professionals as they grow into a foundational
component of the environmental research, policy, and management community. We
will develop a knowledge portal that provides opportunities to extend the impact
of this project beyond UMCES and UMBC to academic partnerships elsewhere that
are also engaging in CI professionalization.

This project is developing and supporting a team of CIPs that integrates
seamlessly with our diverse research enterprise. Through an inter-institutional
partnership between UMCES and UMBC Information Systems the project will
accelerate the development of open data science, software tools, integrated
ecosystem models, and machine learning applications; engage faculty, students,
and environmental management agencies (and other stakeholders) in co-development
research training; and staff a ticket-based help desk. UMCES and UMBC will
collaboratively: (1) Build a diverse workforce of CIPs responsive to the needs
of the multi-institutional and stakeholder-inclusive environmental research
community to which UMCES and UMBC contribute; (2) Develop a hub, with physical
and virtual components, that facilitates interactions among domain researchers,
CIPs, and other stakeholders, including opportunities for CI skills training and
team science training; and (3) Establish the CyberCollaboratory as a robust and
pervasive source for CI expertise and collaboration. The CI team will adapt to
evolving research priorities enabled by the co-development process but will
initially support four active projects at UMBC and UMCES: (a) Harnessing data
and model revolution in the polar regions (iHARP); (b) Developing a nutrient
information system for agricultural sustainability; (c) Ecological forecasting
for evaluating restoration actions in estuaries, and (d) Understanding the
ecological consequences of expanding offshore wind energy generation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.