* 2321428
* MCA: Concept Mapping for Improved Technical Communication in Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stephanie Wettstein, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 388,675.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project investigates how concept mapping
activities affect the technical communication skills of undergraduate students
in a senior-level chemical and biological engineering laboratory course. The
goal is to enhance the technical communication skills of undergraduate students
by adding new concept mapping assignments to show connections between student-
generated laboratory data and their written communications. By investigating the
potential impact of concept mapping on students' ability to communicate
technical information, this research aims to address the challenges of teaching
technical communication to engineers. This project will also explore potential
disparities among students and strive to create an inclusive learning
environment that empowers students to have confidence in their technical
communications. The principal investigator will be mentored by an experienced
researcher in engineering education throughout the project. The potential
benefits of this project serve the national interest for well-prepared
engineering graduates with technical communication skills to join the technical
workforce and expanded capacity to conduct research on engineering education.

Concept mapping will be implemented as a tool to support students to learn how
to communicate complex technical concepts in written reports. The research
questions that will be explored are: 1) How does the use of concept mapping
influence students' technical communication skills in the laboratory course?, 2)
What are the the impacts of concept mapping on the technical communication
skills for different groups of students? 3) To what extent does the
collaborative development of concept maps impact individuals' communication
skills and their respective performance on communication assignments?, and 4)
What is the relationship between the quality of concept maps and scores on
technical communication assignments? To answer these questions, data will be
collected through surveys, interviews, and assessments, which will then be
analyzed for evidence of growth in technical communication skills and
confidence. The findings of this project seek to contribute to the advancement
of technical communication instruction, promote deeper learning and
understanding, and ultimately enhance the preparation of engineering graduates.
Additionally, this research has the potential to provide a valuable assessment
tool for engineering educators and to facilitate the adoption of evidence-based
practices in concept mapping across various institutions and disciplines. This
project is supported by the NSF IUSE: EDU program, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.