* 2321584
* MCA: Identifying the genomic mechanisms mediating rapid responses to environmental change in a widespread songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Britt Heidinger, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 251,741.00

Rapidly changing environmental conditions are inducing dramatic shifts in
habitat distributions, the timing of breeding, and traits that allow animals to
regulate their body temperature. One trait expected to be particularly important
in this context is body size. Smaller animals are expected to be better able to
dissipate heat than larger animals. Consequently, many organisms are expected to
shrink in response to rapidly rising temperatures. Declining body size has been
documented in diverse animals, but the genetic mechanisms that underlie these
responses are not well understood and this information will be critical for
predicting how organisms will respond to climate change. This research will use
modern genomic techniques to study how organisms are responding to rising
temperatures and provide essential training in modern genomic techniques for the
PI that will greatly enhance her ability to mentor post-docs and students at all
stages and enrich the quality of her graduate and undergraduate courses. This
research will also support the development of a daylong activity about climate
change to be presented to middle and high school Native American students at
tribal colleges in North Dakota.

Understanding the mechanisms that allow organisms to respond to changing
environmental conditions is a central goal of evolutionary biology and is
becoming increasingly urgent in the face of climate change. Although
evolutionary adaptations are expected to help mitigate the effects of rapidly
rising temperatures, the degree to which they are changing over time and related
to population dynamics is not well understood. To address these important gaps
in knowledge, a unique set of house sparrow specimens collected at sites
throughout the U.S. approximately 60 years apart will be used to: 1) identify
genomic regions associated with climate variables and body size, 2) determine
the degree of divergence between historically and contemporarily collected
specimens in these same genomic regions, and 3) assess the extent to which
genomic vulnerability predicts changes in population abundance. This research
will provide novel insight into the genomic mechanisms that underlie rapid
responses to climate change and the consequences for population level processes,
which will be essential for predicting the long-term outcomes of global warming.

This project is jointly funded by Integrative Ecological Physiology Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.