* 2321314
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Monitoring Nearshore Ice and Closing  the Arctic Tide-gauge Gap with GNSS-Reflectometry (MONICA)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Andrew Mahoney, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2025
* USD 36,888.00

Accurate and seamless monitoring of water levels along the coast can lead to
economic and societal benefits by improving storm-surge forecasting, informing
emergency responses, promoting safe navigation, and improving mapping and
charting efforts. However, only a limited number of tide gauges are located
along Alaskaâ€™s western and northern coastline. This scarcity of tide gauges is
primarily attributed to the challenging weather conditions for installation and
maintenance, as well as the seasonal presence of sea ice. Simultaneously,
routine monitoring of coastal sea ice is also insufficient, despite its crucial
role among coastal communities for harvesting marine wildlife and for safe
navigation. The aim of the project is to develop an efficient and effective
strategy for continuously monitoring the Arctic coastal marine environment by
detecting the presence of sea ice, the onset and detachment of landfast ice, and
measuring the water level throughout the year. To achieve this goal, the project
intends to develop a novel technology to monitor water level and sea ice year-
round by building technical innovations on the state-of-the-art Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) Reflectometry, referred to as a GNSS-R Water-
Ice observation System (GRWIS).

GNSS-R, which utilizes GNSS multipath signals, has become widely employed for
monitoring water levels by measuring the geometric variation of reflecting
surfaces. However, relatively few studies to date have explored the use of
GNSS-R for monitoring sea ice. This project will leverage the capabilities of
GNSS-R technique, which not only enables measurements of the reflector heights
but also calculates the roughness of the reflector, e.g., the confidence level
of retrieval (CLR). This project will investigate an optimized use of CLR to
determine the presence of sea ice and landfast ice. The detected ice will be
differentiated between landfast from open ocean or drifting ice by cross
validating them against field observations and other data collected by sea ice
radar systems and satellite imagery. Moreover, the GRWIS will monitor both the
vertical and horizontal motion of the sea ice and this ice monitoring method
will be facilitated by another novel ice monitoring technology, the Gamma
portable radar interferometer (GPRI). The GPRI will assess and validate the
sensitivity of GRWIS measurements to horizontal motion of sea ice that will aid
in understanding the potential impact on water level measurements and
determining the feasibility of GNSS-based observations for assessing the
stability of landfast ice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.