* 2321624
* Collaborative Research: Alpha-arrestins' impact on cellular physiology
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Allyson O'Donnell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,068,821.00

Eukaryotic cells are partitioned into membrane compartments, increasing reaction
efficiencies and sequestering toxic intermediates. This organization
necessitates communication between organelles to coordinate the cell’s metabolic
program. Regulated nutrient transporter trafficking and exchange of nutrients at
organelle contact sites maintain metabolite balance across membranes. This
research focuses on a class of selective protein trafficking adaptors, known as
the alpha-arrestins, and their role in maintaining nutrient balance and cell
physiology. Conserved from yeast to man, alpha-arrestins are master regulators
of protein trafficking, controlling membrane protein localization in response to
cell signaling. In the absence of alpha-arrestins, nutrient transporters are
retained at the cell surface, but studies have not yet defined how loss of
alpha-arrestins impacts cell physiology. This project tests the global
hypothesis that alpha-arrestins regulate nutrient transporters to maintain
metabolite balance and mitochondrial function. This research will transform our
understanding of alpha-arrestin function, defining their impact on metabolism
and mitochondrial function. These research goals are intertwined with teaching
and outreach objectives designed to train the next generation of scientists and
broaden STEM participation. A course-based undergraduate research experience
that uses alpha-arrestins as a paradigm to teach cell and molecular biology will
be developed, providing >120 undergraduates with research experience. Graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students will be mentored on independent research
projects, and students from diverse backgrounds will be recruited to the
research team. Research-driven lesson modules called ‘Pitt Kits’ will be
developed in collaboration with high school teachers and deployed across
Pennsylvanian public high schools.

This project will advance our understanding of how alpha-arrestins act as
sentinels to maintain nutrient balance and define how disruption of this process
leads to organelle dysfunction. Preliminary data demonstrate that specific
alpha-arrestins are required to maintain the balance of select amino acids in
the cell. This is likely because each alpha-arrestin traffics a unique set of
amino acid transporters. Amino acid imbalance is toxic and work from the Hughes
lab has begun to define the underlying mechanisms for this toxicity, which had
remained elusive for decades. In each case, excess amino acid leads to
mitochondrial dysfunction, which appears to drive the cytotoxicity. Strikingly,
initial studies from the O’Donnell lab show that in cells with dysfunctional
alpha-arrestins, amino acid excess causes mitochondrial fragmentation and
reduced mitochondrial activity. Mitochondria may act as bellwethers for amino
acid levels as amino acid intermediates shuttle in and out of mitochondria, and
this may sensitize this organelle to amino acid imbalance. During this project,
the metabolic changes in cells where alpha-arrestins are impaired will be mapped
and the nutrient transporters required for alteration in metabolite balance will
be defined. Using high-content, confocal microscopy we will determine how alpha-
arrestins regulate nutrient transporter trafficking and how this trafficking is
linked to mitochondrial function. A machine-learning, automated quantification
pipeline will help define transporter localization changes and mitochondrial
form and function changes, ensuring that the data generated are rigorous and
reproducible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.