* 2321215
* Conference: Engineering Mechanics Education Workshop; Atlanta, Georgia; 6 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Mohammad Javad Abdolhosseini Qomi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award will support an Engineering Mechanics Education Workshop to be held
in conjunction with the 2023 Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference at
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia, 6-9 June 2023. Engineering
mechanics education is now at a crossroad, facing the challenge to train an
inclusive workforce equipped with modern tools to address 21st century
engineering needs in comparison with continuing with the business-as-usual
practice. To address this urgent matter, this workshop brings engineering
mechanics education experts and enthusiasts from R1 and R2 universities to
discuss the future pathways to train and engage the next generation of
engineering mechanics students. This workshop will serve as a forum to discuss
the very definition of applied mechanics in the broader engineering curriculum
and highlights potential pathways to reshape the boundaries of engineering
mechanics in view of climate change and emerging data science technologies. The
award will facilitate the workshop and conference participation of PhD students
and postdocs with an emphasis on diversity, equity, and inclusion of underserved
and underrepresented groups in STEM.

The workshop consists of four modules including guest lectures, technology
demonstration, virtual, and in-person round table discussions and brainstorming
sessions. Module I will discuss the future of engineering mechanics education.
Module II highlights the significance and best practices of leveraging
pedagogical tools in engineering mechanics education. Module III presents
emerging education technologies and accessibility issues surrounding the broader
dissemination of engineering mechanics educational materials. Starting with
shared experience and best practices, Module III culminates with the design of
the engineering mechanics textbook of the future and the use of virtual reality
to close the accessibility gap. This tour of modern pedagogy in engineering
mechanics education will conclude in Module IV with a roundtable that will
elucidate career opportunities. A key feature of the workshop is that it will be
linked with the 2023 Engineering Mechanics Institute Conference, which will
provide opportunities for the engineering mechanics educators to network and
discuss their teaching practices with peers from academia, national
laboratories, and industry, while also ensuring that workshop discussions and
feedback will be directly relevant and accessible to participants from the
community of engineering mechanics and civil infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.