* 2321090
* Collaborative Research: SCIPE: CyberInfrastructure Professionals InnoVating and brOadening the adoption of advanced Technologies (CI PIVOT)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Matthew Huber, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrey Kanaev
* 09/30/2028
* USD 3,749,415.00

Science and engineering research and education have dynamic and growing needs
encompassing new technology requirements from physics-based simulation to
artificial intelligence and using computing through workflows spanning local
computing resources to the public cloud. The number of cyberinfrastructure (CI)
professionals critical to support these activities within the research
enterprise at higher education institutions is too few and, frequently, not
well-integrated into regional and national efforts that would serve as sources
of innovation. This project, CI PIVOT, will address these workforce issues by
creating several teams of CI professionals trained with tailored, best-of-breed
educational materials who will contribute, collaborate, and co-create as part of
local, regional, and national research partnerships. These partnerships will
promote the progress of science and result in significant advances in the fields
of geoscience, engineering, and social behavioral and economic sciences. CI
PIVOT will further contribute to the national interest of developing a globally-
competitive, diverse workforce and broadening participation through innovative
project activities.

The team's goals include: 1) enabling cross-institutional partnerships,
sustainability, and promotion of CIPs as valuable and valued research partners;
2) supporting and advancing national research projects; 3) building a scalable
workforce development in geoscience, engineering, and social behavioral and
economic sciences for the advancement of trustworthy computational science; and
4) lowering the barrier to entry for building institutional research (support)
capacity for institutions beyond our own. To actualize these goals, CI PIVOT
will employ programmatic activities prioritizing inclusiveness and broadening
representation. These activities consist of listening tours (stakeholder
interviews and requirements gathering), co-envisioning retreats (team self-
selected goal and best practice setting), future-creating workshops (method to
strategically evolve the program for stakeholders and future CI professionals),
and computational carpentries (workshops promoting computational skills
development). The CI PIVOT program will train CI professionals in various areas,
including tools to manage workflows using advanced cyberinfrastructure,
parallel, and accelerated code development, workflow performance analysis and
optimization, advanced cybersecurity, machine and deep learning techniques, and
cloud workflow orchestration. Through productive collaborations and
partnerships, CI PIVOT will advance science with technical publications relevant
to geoscience, engineering, or social behavioral and economic sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.