* 2321037
* CIU: Implementation: Medium: Computational and Data Science Curriculum Exchange Faculty Community of Practice
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Rachel Vincent-Finley, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2026
* USD 999,607.00

Under-representation or historical exclusion of minorities and women in the STEM
workforce, especially in computing, is contributing to the Computational and
Data Science (CDS) workforce shortage. Institutions are adding data science
certificates and programs as a result of student and employer demand. However,
resource constraints at community colleges, Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
(PUIs), and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) can impede their ability to
make the necessary curriculum changes swiftly enough. The direct effect of
adding more CDS courses into these institutions will allow training of a new
generation of scientists, increasing the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. Creating a more diverse STEM workforce will have
wider impacts including increasing public scientific literacy and public
engagement with science and technology and increasing economic competitiveness.
Training diverse scientists has another long-term effect, creating a larger pool
of mentors and support for future generations of scientists.

The Computational and Data Science Exchange (CDS-Exchange) project accelerates
the implementation of CDS curriculum by sharing existing courses and modules
developed in the pilot project across participating institutions, thus preparing
a larger number of students to undertake research or enter the workforce where
such skills are in short supply for advanced cyberinfrastructure. By providing
access to curriculum materials aligned with competencies for CDS education, the
CDS-Exchange is empowering small and under-resourced institutions to offer
undergraduate CDS curriculum, minors, and certificates with low investment. The
CDS-Exchange provides access to curriculum materials that are aligned with
competencies for CDS education, making it easier for faculty to teach classes
with this content in the future. This network also strengthens partnerships
among institutions, including HBCUs, HSIs, and PUIs, generating more
opportunities for collaboration and sharing of resources and effort. The CDS-
Exchange is about building a community of educators who are committed to
advancing Computational and Data Science education and ensuring that students
across the country have access to the skills they need to succeed in the
workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.