* 2321698
* Real-Time Control Co-Design for Reconfigurable Energy-Harvesting Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Vermillion, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 448,149.00

This grant will fund research that enables renewable energy generation systems,
such as wind turbines and kites, to operate optimally over a wide range of
environmental conditions, thereby promoting the progress of science and
advancing the national prosperity. Environmental variability poses operational
challenges for energy-harvesting systems that can be addressed using real-time
reconfigurability: simultaneous, on-the-fly changes to both the physical
mechanism (plant) and the system control to ensure sustained high efficiency.
Offline design methodologies can select optimal plant and control parameters for
fixed conditions. No such methodology exists, however, for real-time operation
in response to environmental variability and uncertainty, due to critical
differences in time scale and effort required to modify plant parameters and
control parameters, respectively. This project will fill this knowledge gap by
developing an innovative algorithmic framework that accounts for such
differences in real-time operation and will further quantify the computational
requirements to make real-time reconfigurability worth additional costs and
complexity. The PI will leverage engagement with the International Energy Agency
Task on Airborne Wind Energy to organize annual workshops on the use of
reconfigurable energy-harvesting-system models and open-source software tools
created in this project. Student engagement with renewable energy technology
will be promoted by implementing a “Physics of Kites” workshop in existing K-12
programming.

This research aims to develop the foundations of a receding horizon co-design
framework for real-time plant reconfigurability while also addressing
fundamental distinctions between plant and control parameters. It accomplishes
this outcome by fusing notions from nested co-design and multi-rate hierarchical
model predictive control, addressing critical knowledge gaps that arise due to
the simultaneous need to (i) consider an economic (rather than tracking)
formulation at both levels of the hierarchy, (ii) incorporate surrogate models
for tractability, and (iii) consider environmental stochasticity. Specifically,
a multi-rate architecture will be investigated whereby a low-order surrogate
model is used by the upper-level plant optimization to approximately capture the
anticipated behavior of the lower-level control system optimization. An
interconnected error system model and small gain framework will be used to
address questions of convergence and efficiency under different rates of
environmental parameter variation. Finally, recursive Gaussian Process modeling
will be used to characterize environmental uncertainty, while reformulating
deterministic objective functions into statistical ones, introducing chance
constraints, and assessing theoretical properties in a probabilistic sense. The
framework will be evaluated through an extensive simulation and scaled
experimental validation campaign on an energy-harvesting underwater kite with
real-time morphing capability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.