* 2322982
* I-Corps:  A Compact Silicon Chip for Laser Injection Locking and Optical Parametric Oscillation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Xiyuan Lu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact potential of this I-Corp project is the development of a
compact chip technology for generating coherent lasers from visible to infrared.
The proposed technology is designed to turn an inexpensive, limited performance
laser diode into a top-of-the-line diode with a broad color range. The resulting
product may be an affordable alternative to high-end laser products and extend
laser emission wavelengths to a wide range of interest. In addition, the chip
technology based on silicon nitride photonics may be produced by wafer-scale
CMOS-compatible fabrication and may support laser light generation from 350 nm
to 4500 nm, which would help solve existing scalability challenges in a variety
of application fields. The proposed technology may provide a universal and
scalable silicon photonics solution for integrated lasers for a variety of
applications including quantum science, biochemical sensing, autonomous driving
and LiDAR, and augmented/virtual reality.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a compact chip-integrated
laser for generating coherent laser sources that can produce light from visible
to infrared. The goal is to combine laser injection locking and optical
parametric oscillation (OPO) based on a photonic crystal ring (PhCR). The
proposed technology takes advantages of two nanophotonics technologies: on-chip
OPO and high-quality PhCR, to solve the challenge of integrating chip laser with
ultra-broad spectral coverage from visible to infrared. Lasers with such a wide
range have not been proposed or demonstrated previously by existing
technologies. The proposed chips may be produced in large scale, hence low-cost,
by wafer scale CMOS compatible fabrication. In addition, the proposed technology
may be compatible with other existing laser technologies, providing a versatile
platform to generate high quality laser sources and a wider wavelength range.
Such a device may significantly improve the ability of existing microcavities to
enhance the interaction between light and matter and improve integrated
commercial and research activities, particularly for integrated quantum science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.