* 2322284
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: Light in the Dark: Fiber Optic Sensing of Climate-Critical Carbon Cycle Components at Water/Ice-Air Interfaces
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ruo-Qian Wang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2026
* USD 331,771.00

Lakes play an important role in regulating the greenhouse gases that are
important to Earth’s climate, but lakes are under an increasing amount of human-
induced stress and disturbance, exacerbated by a changing climate. Monitoring of
lakes, especially those that are ice covered in winter months, is critical to
understand how lakes are changing. However, it is difficult to make such
measurements because of the high cost to install and maintain instruments in the
lake year-round. This Ideas Lab: Engineering Technologies to Advance Underwater
Sciences (ETAUS) project will advance the field of water quality monitoring by
developing a sensor that can monitor multiple water quality parameters
throughout the year and fill this knowledge gap. The goal for the sensor
development is to simultaneously measure parameters that are significant
components of measuring a lake’s influence on climate change (carbon dioxide,
methane), the health of the lake ecosystem (temperature, pH, salinity, dissolved
oxygen), and the impacts of human influence (salinity, temperature). An easy-to-
deploy, cost-effective sensor will provide an improved understanding of the
carbon footprint of all lake systems that will better inform lake management
decisions. The education programs supported by this project will also promote
learning and discovery of water quality issues, science, and solutions for
children and adults through the partnership with the Museum of Science (MOS) in
Boston. The MOS has a focus on working with women and girls from the Boston
community in engineering and a field-leading emphasis on universal design.

The overall aim of this project is to increase our quantitative understanding of
greenhouse gas cycling within lakes through the development of a novel,
miniature, fiber-optic multiparameter sensor (FOMS) capable of long-term, under-
ice deployment. A fundamental understanding of the wave-material/structure
interaction in cascaded high-Q ring resonators will be achieved to develop
miniature photonic sensors for simultaneous monitoring of multiple parameters
with high analyte specificity and fast response. The FOMS will be developed to
measure seven parameters simultaneously, including CO2 and CH4, and deployed on
a stationary mooring and mobile underwater robotic platforms for high temporal
and spatial resolution data collection. The development and calibration of the
FOMS will be guided by a novel machine learning-based sensor calibration model
that will help transform the FOMS into an intelligent sensing system, leading to
high-fidelity “fingerprint” sensing that can address hardware variations, noise
in the monitoring environment, nonlinearities and uncertainties in the sensor
response, and cross-talk between the multiple sensor inputs. Data will be
collected year-round using the FOMS across stationary and mobile platforms,
which will produce four-dimensional data. Data assimilation methods will be
compared with the goal of producing a modeling framework that can inform
measurement optimization in future deployments. Collectively, the development,
testing, and use of the FOMS will produce a measurement tool and framework for a
quantitative understanding of GHG production, consumption, and transport in ice-
covered lakes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.