* 2322056
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: ETAUS Meshed Observations of THE Remote Subsurface with Heterogeneous Intelligent Platforms (MOTHERSHIP)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Yu She, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

Melting of ice shelves by warm ocean waters destabilizes glaciers, enhancing ice
flow into the ocean and contributing to global sea level rise. Measurements of
ocean properties under ice shelves are needed to improve global predictions of
sea level rise and to anticipate its societal consequences. Such measurements,
however, are challenging to obtain. In this Ideas Lab: Engineering Technologies
to Advance Underwater Sciences (ETAUS) project, a proof-of-concept mothership-
and-passenger system will be developed to permit the future deployment of a
highly capable, autonomous underwater vehicle (the mothership), programmed to
travel as far as safely possible under ice shelves to release a swarm of novel,
low-cost passenger robots that will coordinate to explore further into the ice
cavity. The hardware prototypes, networked communication systems and protocols,
and coordination algorithms developed as part of this project’s mothership-and-
passenger system will help advance the field of underwater exploration in
confined and hard-to-reach environments. The project will also foster the
training of future scientists and engineers by engaging youths from small
fishing communities in Oregon through presentations at Oregon’s MATE ROV
Regional Competition, by employing high-school interns through the
Apprenticeships in Science and Engineering (ASE) Summer Academy Program, and by
training multiple undergraduate and graduate students at participating
institutions.

The goal of this project is to develop a mothership-and-passenger sampling
system to reach difficult-to-access glacier grounding zones via the open ocean
to measure the extent of ice cavities and surrounding water properties. The
project will innovate along three main areas of inquiry: 1) passenger robot
design, 2) acoustic communication protocols and hardware, and 3) mothership-and-
passenger coordination algorithms. Novel, low-cost passenger robots will be
conceived that can switch through different operation modes to optimize
maneuverability, power consumption, or a combination of both, as needed for
various tasks throughout a deployment. Acoustic communication protocols and
hardware will be developed to prioritize robust communication between passenger
robots over throughput and permit swarm self-localization by utilizing time-of-
flight and angle-of-arrival between passengers to estimate relative positions.
Swarm coordination algorithms will be designed to estimate flow direction and
strength from the passenger robots’ relative positions to optimize navigation
and power consumption. The performance of the network will be tested in
increasingly challenging environments, i.e., tests will be conducted in a pool,
an unfrozen lake, and finally in a frozen lake, while network capabilities with
a larger swarm will be modeled to ensure the scalability of the system to ocean
deployments. Finally, the software developed for the mothership-and-passenger
communication and self-localization protocols will be generalizable and made
available open-source to allow other research teams to adapt the system to their
own needs. The mothership-and-passenger sampling system will not only advance
under-ice-observation capabilities but also have wider oceanographic
applications such as detection and monitoring of underwater harmful algal blooms
or anoxic events threatening fisheries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.