* 2322382
* SBIR Phase I: A cancer diagnostic instrument to measure empirical treatment response
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* David Gallup, EMPIRI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,930.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve personalized cancer care by
developing a first in class cancer diagnostic instrument that can deliver
clinically actionable, personalized, drug response data from individual cancer
patients using the E-slice assay. The E-slice assay is a novel 3D culture-based
assay which has been shown to accurately predict individual cancer patients’
responses to treatments. The E-slice assay is currently registered as a Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments Laboratory Developed Tests (CLIA LDT). The
cancer diagnostic market is expected to grow from $56 billion in 2022 to $162
billion by 2027, and this test and automation could capture a significant share
of this rapidly expanding market. Beyond improving outcomes for cancer patients,
the automation of this assay could have far-reaching implications, such as
accelerating and economizing drug screening, discovery, and development for
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, and academia.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
most challenging and risky portion of automating the E-slice assay. The novel
engineering solutions that the team proposes to develop will automate the
processing of live human tissue samples from a needle biopsy or surgery,
generate precision-cut slices, and then precisely position them in a tissue
culture plate for downstream culture and analysis. The new device will do so in
a manner that maintains sterility, minimizes thermal, chemical, and mechanical
stresses, and performs in a highly reliable way. The primary technical
challenges are ensuring reliable performance that is equal to or superior than
manual methods. The technical milestones include meeting thresholds for
reliability, sterility, and tissue viability compared to manual processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.