* 2322878
* ISS: Effect of Microgravity and Mechanical Deconditioning of Tissues on the Chromatin, Epigenetic Alteration, and Multiscale Biomechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Susan Bailey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,975.00

This NSF/CASIS Collaboration on Tissue Engineering and Mechanobiology on the
International Space Station (ISS) to Benefit Life on Earth grant will support
new research focused on understanding the mechanics of tissues, such as skeletal
muscle, bone, and heart, in response to microgravity exposure or prolonged
deconditioning. Space travel advancements and establishing settlements on Mars
or the Moon will require prolonged human exposure to microgravity. Studies on
astronauts and mouse models have shown that microgravity can negatively affect
organs in the body, but precisely how this happens is unknown. Additionally,
patients on Earth can suffer from bone and muscle loss due to organ
deconditioning. However, the underlying mechanisms driving these changes remain
unclear. Utilizing experiments in mice on the ground and in International Space
Station, this project will investigate how mechanical unloading and microgravity
triggers changes inside the cell nucleus, how these changes influence gene
expression, and how this ultimately affects organ function. Novel
pharmacological interventions will be developed to mitigate organ dysfunction
that occurs with microgravity and deconditioning. This research will be
complemented by establishing an educational outreach program based on
disseminating space biomechanics knowledge to K-12 students.

This project seeks to discover how the biomechanical force at the tissue level
and the gravitational force maintain the chromatin architecture and gene
expression in a cell size and tissue type-dependent manner. By employing
cutting-edge techniques such as high-resolution microscopy, advanced mechanical
characterization, molecular biology assays, mouse models, and simulated
microgravity experiments, the researchers aim to answer several outstanding
questions in mechanobiology. Specifically, the study will investigate: 1) how
biomechanical and gravitational forces collaboratively define chromatin
architecture and regulate gene expression; 2) whether spaceflight-induced
alterations in chromatin level changes is primarily driven by altered
gravitational force or radiation exposure in space; and 3) whether
pharmacological interventions can be used to mitigate tissue degeneration caused
by spaceflight and deconditioning. This project will enable researchers to
advance the boundaries of the existing knowledge in the fields of chromatin
mechanobiology, epigenetics, and gene expression mechanisms. Overall, the
outcome of this study might influence the future of human space travel and
contribute to the development of strategies for effectively addressing organ
deconditioning in patients on Earth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.