* 2322928
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Understanding thermal transport across a condensing film by conducting experiments in microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chirag Kharangate, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 199,998.00

The utilization of the condensation process can provide significant energy
benefits to many industries including those in energy, aerospace, defense,
consumer electronics, renewable energy, and water conservation. However, there
is a lack of fundamental understanding of the different physical parameters
impacting this condensation process limiting the widespread implementation of
these systems. Gravity is one of those important parameters that strongly impact
energy transport during the condensation process in various terrestrial systems
of interest. However, there is no way of isolating gravity in laboratory
settings. Understanding the physics behind gravity and its impact on condensing
flow is the overarching goal of this project by performing testing utilizing the
condensation facility onboard the International Space Station. A better
understanding of physics will lead to better control of terrestrial systems and
also impact engineering design decisions.

Condensation increases system efficiency and reduces system footprint compared
to air or liquid single-phase systems. However, the barrier to designing an
efficient condensation heat rejection device stems from a lack of fundamental
understanding of the influence of parameters like gravity on the liquid-vapor
interfacial behavior and the corresponding thermal transport. The central
hypothesis of this research is that if gravity is isolated, the impact of
interfacial waviness and turbulence on thermal transport in the condensing film
can be captured with an integrated experimental and computational approach.
Experiments are planned to utilize the condensation module for heat transfer
onboard the International Space Station’s Flow Boiling and Condensation
Experiment facility and supplemental testing is planned in Earth gravity
conditions. In addition, the research team plans to supplement the experiments
with high-fidelity CFD simulations and modeling to capture the impact of the
two-phase interfacial behavior on thermal transport. The broader impact
objectives are to improve thermal transport modeling for processes with phase
change, thus helping the two-phase flow and heat transfer community develop
efficient condensers for a variety of industrial applications. In the education
and outreach plan, the team will develop a module for Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU)’s NSF-supported Introduction to Innovation program as well as
set up a joint Two-Phase Flow Workshop between CWRU and Advanced Cooling
Technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.