* 2322369
* CC* Integration-Small: Network cyberinfrastructure innovation with an intelligent real-time traffic analysis framework and application-aware networking
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Byravamurthy Ramamurthy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Goldsmith
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Intelligent analytics approaches leveraging machine learning techniques offer
new capabilities to analyze, model, predict and optimize traffic for high-
throughput distributed computing workflows. These techniques can be greatly
enhanced by access to real-world data from the edge (campus networks) and the
core (Internet2) as well as Just-In-Time (JIT) machine learning approaches. Such
a design allows for run-time deployment of the models at the campus
cyberinfrastructure to make real-time network decisions. Network flow data
collected from these cyberinfrastructures for analysis quickly scales up in
size, making it infeasible to perform analysis of network flows in a realistic
and timely manner. There are intrinsic difficulties stemming from data storage,
its formatting and types as well as the manner in which traditional analysis is
done to study network flow data. Although advances have been made in the past
several years in how data could be handled efficiently, the new techniques have
not been integrated well into the network operations. Improvements need to be
made in the way network flow data is analyzed by exploiting the modern data
storage formats and the intrinsic properties of the network flow data as well as
by developing efficient data structures and algorithms. Recent advances in
networking allow for fine-grained network control policies to be managed by
network applications. Although it is possible to improve the overall performance
of scientific data transfers end-to-end, problems exist with managing resources
and differentiating network services at the experiment/site level. Designing and
developing intelligent network analysis by JIT machine learning paradigms
strengthened by a scalable network flow analysis framework for an application-
aware control of the network in high-throughput computing frameworks is the goal
of this project. The project is strengthened by collaborations with Holland
Computing Center (HCC) at UNL, Open Science Consortium (OSG), Argonne National
Lab (ANL) and Internet2. The techniques and frameworks developed in this project
will be made available to the open-source community, thus benefiting other
science application use cases in Research and Education (R&E) networks.
Enriching the education opportunities for UNL School of Computing students and
conducting outreach events for the broader community are important objectives of
this project.

The project aims to transform the current cyberinfrastructure networking
approach by (1) gaining insights in real-time by the development and integration
of online-offline approaches to machine learning (unlike traditional offline
approaches) that can be deployed in data centers for real-time network traffic
analysis and prediction; (2) scalable analysis of network flow data by
implementing the developed theoretical models for transforming, indexing and
building search techniques to study the network flow data at internet-scale in
real-time and (3) application-aware control of data transfers by application-
aware software defined networking (SDN) control strategies to provide greater
flexibility in network management and service differentiation for scientific
data transfers on campus cyberinfrastructures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.