* 2322460
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Deployment of a Nodal Array to Capture Aftershocks of the 2023 Kahramanmaras Earthquake Sequences in Turkey
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Zhigang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 43,088.00

Zhigang Peng and Eric Sandvol will install over 100 seismometers in southeastern
Turkey to measure aftershocks following the deadly earthquakes of February 6,
2023. The seismometers should detect all aftershocks with magnitudes greater
than 1, and over the ten-month deployment around 100,000 are likely to be
recorded. It is important that these seismometers be installed and making
measurements soon after the major quakes because the number of aftershocks per
day decreases over time. The recorded earthquake data will be uploaded to a
website and freely shared with other scientists and the interested public. Using
these data, Peng, Sandvol, and other scientists can estimate the geometry of all
active faults in the region, image properties of the crust in 3D, and develop
models to help with forecasting earthquakes. The data will also be used to map
out where local soils amplify shaking, so building codes can be improved in
these areas. Three U.S. graduate students will go to Turkey to help Peng,
Sandvol, and their Turkish collaborators with field work and data analysis.

Zhigang Peng and Eric Sandvol propose to deploy seismometers in southeastern
Turkey to record aftershocks from the February 6, 2023 M 7.8 and M 7.5
earthquakes. The instruments will include ten broadband seismometers with a high
dynamic range, 100 5 Hz SmartSolo three-component seismometers, and six short-
period instruments, all from from Earthscope’s RAPID pool. The PIs expect to
record about 100,000 aftershocks and the catalogue should be complete down to M
= 0.5 to 1. Machine learning and template matching techniques will be applied to
the new aftershock catalogue to delineate the geometry of the East Anatolian and
Dead Sea faults, the Cyprian Arc, and intraplate faults in this tectonically
complex region. These data can also be used to image the crustal velocity
structure, using body wave travel time data and surface wave dispersions
analysis from large aftershocks and ambient noise. Data from nodal instruments
will also be used to quantify site amplification for a range of frequencies.
This project will strengthen ties between US and Turkish scientists at TUBITAK.
Three graduate students from the PIs' institutions will participate in the
fieldwork and gain valuable training, as well as collaboration experience with
Turkish scientists and students. Following the NSF RAPID data policy, all of the
data will be uploaded to Earthscope Inc.’s Data Management Center (DMC).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.