* 2322857
* Collaborative Research: Chemistry-Informed Ice Nucleation and Growth--Integrated Laboratory and Modeling Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nicole Riemer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 295,852.00

The project team in this collaborative research project will combine laboratory
experiments with numerical modeling in order to study how the chemistry of ice
nucleating particles immersed in solution droplets impact the ice nucleation
process and subsequent ice growth. There are many existing uncertainties and
knowledge gaps related to the chemistry of ice nucleating particles, primarily
associated with understanding the sensitivity of ice nucleation and crystal
growth as it relates to the chemical composition of freezing droplets. This
research will develop a detailed experiment-informed modeling framework that
aims to fill these gaps. The research includes laboratory experiments and
modeling work that will be done concurrently. Educational videos will be
produced with a professional weather communication team that will be shared
online and on local public television stations. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained and integrated during this project.

The project team will combine laboratory experiments, including both nucleation
and growth experiments, with existing ice crystal growth, aerosol evolution, and
ice nucleation models. The specific tasks in this project include: (1) the
characterization of ice nucleation of mineral dust and biological analogs
internally mixed with acids or salts using both stochastic and deterministic
modeling frameworks; (2) the characterization of ice growth in these same
systems; (3) the development of improved ice nucleation parameterizations; and
(4) the development of ice growth parameterizations for aerosol-based Lagrangian
particle models. Outreach and educational videos will be produced in
collaboration with the Pennsylvania State University Weather Communications
Group. Additional outreach will be made via the Weather World program that airs
on local public television stations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.