* 2322200
* STTR Phase I:  Next-Gen Radiofrequency Transistors on Silicon via Aligned, Residue-Free Carbon Nanotubes
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Chirag Gupta, SIXLINE SEMICONDUCTOR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,503.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project seeks to overcome the highest risks facing the commercialization
of a novel semiconductor for wireless communications devices. As the demand for
wireless communication increases (e.g., cell phones, WiFi, Internet of Things
devices), wireless component suppliers and manufacturers must utilize new
materials and integration methods to yield necessary increases in data
bandwidth, energy efficiency, and functionality, while shrinking component
footprint. Carbon nanotubes offer a solution to this problem. A carbon nanotube
is comprised of an atomically thin layer of carbon rolled into a seamless tube.
Carbon nanotubes act like tiny semiconducting wires that can significantly
outperform current semiconductors such as silicon and gallium arsenide. When
aligned into dense arrays, nanotubes offer superior wireless characteristics
including high frequency and linearity, which are vital for next-gen
communication technologies. Importantly, carbon nanotubes can be deposited onto
existing semiconductors (such as silicon), enabling the previously unfeasible
integration of multiple types of high-performance circuits on the same chip,
allowing for more functionality in less space. By addressing problems related to
wireless communication, this project will have widespread societal impact and
underpin the wireless radiofrequency technologies of tomorrow, while bolstering
American competitiveness in this important sector.

The project will leverage recently developed carbon nanotube alignment
technology that overcomes the materials and manufacturing challenges that have
limited previous nanotube research and development. The room-temperature
alignment technology is fast, cost-effective, and area-scalable â€“ enabling
seamless industry integration. The technical innovations of this project will be
to: (1) develop approaches to remove organic processing residues that coat the
surfaces and interfaces of nanotube arrays and decrease the performance of
nanotube-based wireless communications transistors; and (2) fabricate and
demonstrate wireless communications transistors based on aligned nanotubes that
do not suffer from the effects of such impurities. Spectroscopic measurements of
residues, electrical measurements sensitive to impurities, and additional high
frequency transistor characterization will be used in a feedback loop to inform
residue removal process development. Specific activities will focus on: (1)
systematically studying the effect of different treatments to selectively remove
residues; (2) determining how the treatments depend on array density; and (3)
fabricating and testing wireless communications transistors. The project will
provide a database of impurity removal rates for a library of treatments, a
demonstration of transistors free of performance loss from residues; and a
demonstration of nanotube-based transistors integrated on silicon.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.