* 2322934
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Retro-fix? Urban Climate Finance and Digital Decarbonization in Multi-family Housing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* James McCarthy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 27,182.00

This project examines how private property management influences decarbonization
finance, technology development, and the negotiation of just and equitable low-
carbon transitions. The examination analyzes government programs for
incentivizing energy upgrades and investigates why owners pursue digital energy
upgrades in multi-family buildings. The project tests public climate finance
theories and provides insight into building infrastructure change. Increasingly,
cities are legislating mandatory building energy performance standards to curb
carbon emissions, and understanding the broader social processes of energy
upgrade decision-making across various multi-family property tenures contributes
knowledge toward climate mitigation efforts.

This research investigates how government, private, and civic actors negotiate
public, profit, and ethical property interests as they comply with mandatory
building performance legislation, Local Law 97, in New York City. The aim is to
understand why multi-family building owners choose to install digital energy
upgrades and how digital energy systems impact the interests of owners,
residents, staff, and government actors. The research asks: 1) How do
governments use policy and financing mechanisms to operationalize infrastructure
change in privately-owned residential buildings?; 2) Why have digital
technologies emerged as a common means to deliver energy upgrades? How do they
impact property interests in multi-family buildings?; and 3) How do energy
decision-making differ across private land tenure arrangements? The study uses
qualitative methods, including participant observation, archival analysis, and
semi-structured interviews with professionals in the low-carbon buildings
sector, building owners, residents, and staff, to assess energy upgrade projects
in several NYC multi-family residential buildings - each with a distinct but
common bundle of property interests. Through systematic syntheses of the
findings, the research summarizes decision-making structures of energy upgrades
in private multi-family housing and identifies recurrent claims to equity and
justice regarding decarbonization policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.