* 2322416
* Mentored Excellence Toward Research and Industry Careers 2
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Jen-Mei Chang, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2029
* USD 2,495,087.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at California State University, Long Beach (CSULB), a four-year
comprehensive Minority-Serving, Hispanic-Serving, and Asian American and Native
American Pacific Islander-Serving Institution. Over its five-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 67 unique undergraduates who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in mathematics/statistics, chemistry, geology, physics,
computer science, and computer engineering. The project will support students
from admission through to graduation. The aim to increase persistence in STEM
will be accomplished by combining scholarships with effective supporting
activities, including mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, social
activities, outreach projects, graduate school preparation, participation in
discipline-specific conferences, and family support development. Moreover, this
project will establish an institutional pathway to connect students with basic
needs and mental wellness training, identify and create a collection of online
modules to improve scholars’ mental resilience to everyday challenges,
confidence, and efficacy, and increase scholars’ sense of belonging by
increasing the number of social activities and campus resource trainings.
Ultimately, this project has the potential to broaden participation in STEM
fields and provide STEM educators with activities adapted to the needs of all
students at critical transitions in their STEM educational career.

The overall goal of the project is to increase degree completion of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields. Current data indicates that the
national demand for STEM jobs greatly exceeds the number of graduates in the
respective STEM disciplines. Through scholarships, faculty mentorship, community
building activities, academic workshops, workforce preparation, and integrated
mental wellness education, this project will support STEM students to develop
cognitive and noncognitive skills designed to prepare scholars for a STEM
career. The project aims to achieve four specific objectives. First is to
recruit low-income and academically talented students through an inclusive and
progressively tiered process. Second is to retain 100% of the students in their
intended STEM majors and decrease their time to graduation. Third is to inrease
the percentage of the scholars entering a STEM-related graduate program or a
STEM-related workforce within two years of graduation. Fourth, and finally, is
to study the impact the organized activities have on students’ confidence,
skills, efficacy, leadership qualities, academic outcomes, and STEM career
trajectory. Annual evaluation will involve a mixed methods approach that
includes quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis. Results will
be shared with the broader community through conference presentations and paper
publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students. This project has the potential to advance understanding of activities
that can support the needs of low income and underrepresented students at
critical transitions in their STEM educational career.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.