* 2322080
* MCA PILOT PUI: ECOLOGICAL OPPORTUNITY IN PHANEROZOIC MARINE ANIMALS: THE FIRST STATISTICAL COMPARISON
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Philip Novack-Gottshall, Benedictine University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2026
* USD 244,307.00

The ecological breadth of the animal kingdom is remarkable, with some groups
displaying a wide range of strategies whereas others pursue few. The causes of
this variation are of great interest to those studying the nature of innovation.
However, the lack of an objective way to measure this variation has hindered
progress. This project leverages a new quantitative database of life habits that
encompasses all known marine animal genera. A partnership between two mid-career
faculty at predominantly undergraduate institutions, the project tests four
hypotheses that will result in the first-ever statistical description of how
ecological diversity across all major animal groups has changed through time. In
addition to providing novel statistical and visualization methods for studying
biological history, the results will promote the progress of science by
advancing knowledge of the limits and opportunities for innovation. Societal and
educational impacts include supporting diverse undergraduate students of
underrepresented minorities in research experiences, production of free museum
learning modules, and public presentations.

Statistical documentation of how different animal clades (phyla and classes)
have varied ecologically—among clades, through geological time, and in relation
to convergence on similar adaptive strategies—can transform investigations into
how evolutionary and ecological opportunities have impacted the history of life
on Earth. This project integrates novel and existing big-data platforms and
recent analytical advances to build the largest-ever, open-source database of
fossil marine ecology, body sizes, and stratigraphic ranges. Collaboration
between the PI and a statistician at Swarthmore College will provide new
statistical and visualization methods to allow next-generation analyses of
ecospaces and morphospaces. Public presentations and creation of educational
modules for the Jurica-Suchy Nature Museum will increase public awareness of how
fossils can help answer pressing ecological and evolutionary questions. Support
for summer REU and semester-long research experiences will expand participation
and mentoring of underrepresented minorities in STEM science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.