* 2322173
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO:Hidden costs of infection: mechanisms by which parasites disrupt host-microbe symbioses and alter development
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kimberly Gallagher, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2026
* USD 467,964.00

Plants are colonized by thousands of microscopic organisms, from bacteria to
tiny animals like nematode worms. These microorganisms affect each other’s
interactions with their shared host plant. Some make it easier for other
microorganism to infect the host, while others prevent other microorganisms from
successfully infecting. This research will investigate whether these
interactions between microorganisms on the same host plant are due to resource
competition or driven by the host’s immune response. The researchers will test
these questions in a plant that is closely related to alfalfa. Like alfalfa,
this plant relies on symbiotic bacteria that live within cells in the root for
nitrogen - an important nutrient and a main ingredient in fertilizers. While
these symbiotic bacteria provide an essential nutrient to the plant, they also
make their host more vulnerable to infection by parasitic nematode worms. While
this research focuses on a single species of plant, nearly all crop plants rely
on symbiotic microbes for nutrients, so understanding how beneficial microbes
influence the disease risk of their host is agriculturally relevant and
ecologically significant. The broader impacts of this project include providing
interdisciplinary training for the next generation of leaders in plant science;
engaging undergraduate and high-school students from under-represented
backgrounds in hands-on research; and developing a board game based on microbial
colonization of plant roots.

Microorganisms that share the same host affect each other’s colonization
success. Cross-talk between co-colonizing microorganisms often manifests as a
priority effect, in which an early encounter with one microorganism impacts the
host’s response to later colonizers. This research will test two competing
hypotheses to explain pervasive priority effects in host-associated communities:
a defense-centered model, in which the host’s defense response to one invader
has off-target effects on infection by another organism, and a resource-centered
model, in which co-colonizers compete for host resources. This project will test
these hypotheses in the model legume Medicago truncatula by experimentally
infecting plants with a parasitic nematode that disrupts the symbiosis with
nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Nematodes inhibit rhizobia colonization, while the
rhizobia increase susceptibility to nematodes. The proposed research has five
objectives: (1) determine the spatio-temporal scale of priority effects between
rhizobia and nematodes and develop new tools to manipulate them; interrogate the
relative roles of (2) defense and (3) carbon allocation in generating priority
effects between these two microorganisms; (4) identify genes and pathways that
underlie these priority effects; (5) train the next generation of plant
researcher in essential concepts ecological theory, cell and molecular biology.

This award is funded as part of a cooperative program with the UKRI/BBSRC in the
UK.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.