* 2322246
* CC* Data Storage: Tiger Den: sustainable campus-wide data system to support CI-enabled research and education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Brant Faircloth, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,317.00

The Tiger Den project at Louisiana State University will benefit collaborators
in the EPSCoR state of Louisiana and support a research storage solution
available to all LSU researchers. The core science drivers for Tiger Den include
the biological sciences, hydrological and ocean modeling, astrophysics, material
science, climate change study, and biomedical engineering. Tiger Den is coupled
with a series of activities on the LSU campus and other Louisiana institutions
to focus on building research data community, raise awareness about the
importance of the research data life cycle, and teach research data management
skills. The target audience includes university administrators, undergraduate
students, and researchers. Activities help promote and bring about a culture
change on campus surrounding research data stewardship and sharing. One third of
the capacity is to the Louisiana Optical Network Initiative (LONI) and its
members, many of which are under-resourced and minority-serving institutions.

Tiger Den is a Qumulo-based 1.5 PB (usable) data storage system resource,
running NFS and CIFS. The project supports numerous independent systems and
compartments within the campus. Data lifecycle training to research groups is
offered by the ITS and Library staff. Lessons learned from the Tiger Den
deployment provide storage resource models for LSU and other LONI member
campuses. Various education, outreach, and training programs are significantly
enhanced, generating significant positive impact on workforce development among
K-12 and undergraduate students.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.