* 2322891
* Collaborative Research: CQIS: On-Chip Nanoscale Trap and Enhance Device (NOTED) for Quantum Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nathaniel Kinsey, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Quantum technologies are poised to usher in new capabilities for secure data
communication, advanced computing, and improved sensing. In these applications,
photons play a crucial role in transferring quantum information. Thus,
developing sources of quantum light, single and entangled photons, is essential
for advancing these applications and generating societal impact through new
technologies/capabilities. Yet many of the existing techniques for producing
quantum light are limited by their random production of photons in time or poor
rate of photon production, and, they largely operate in free space. This work
seeks to realize a device that is able to rapidly assemble and improve the rate
of single photon production on-chip. It will provide new information into the
manipulation and enhancement of quantum optical emitters across multiple length
scales, realize a prototype device for single photon production on-chip, and
develop resources for training a new generation of quantum optical scientists
through the creation of virtual laboratory exercises and simulations.

This project intends to realize ‘nanoscale emitter dock’ to simultaneously
overcome two outstanding challenges for quasi-atom non-classical light sources -
rapid and precise integration of an emitter alongside emission enhancement (trap
and enhance) at room temperature. We accomplish this by engineering thermal and
optical spatial distributions through non-resonant plasmonic structures paired
with a standard low-loss photonic backbone (Si/SiN) for excitation and routing.
Doing so enables a ‘multi-scale funnel’, synergistically combining
electrothermoplasmonic (mm), negative thermophoretic (μm), and optical gradient
forces (nm), to dock a single emitter with an electromagnetic hot-spot where
strong enhancement to emission (Purcell effect) improves both the emission rate
and stability. Through this we (A) deterministically route, capture, and
ultimately print single quantum emitters (~20 nm) to a nanoscale hot-spot within
seconds with sub-10 nm precision, (B) enhance the emission rate up to 1000× to
achieve GHz-rates, (C) excite, capture, and guide light on-chip with dB/mm-scale
loss.

The proposed effort will culminate in the demonstration of a scalable and
versatile platform for integrated on-demand GHz-rate single photon sources at
room temperature, that will accelerate the expansion of compact quantum key
distribution systems and quantum simulators. Moreover, the synergistic
integration of optical gradient force, attractive negative thermophoretic force,
and long-range electrothermoplasmonic flow for emitter transport and placement
at plasmonic cavity hotspots have not been explored, and would provide a
powerful means for long-range, precise, and strong optical manipulation on-chip.
This manipulation (and the overall proposed device structure) is also general,
and not dependent upon the properties of any emitter, solving existing
heterogeneous integration challenges. It can also be completed in parallel,
allowing an entire wafer to be loaded simultaneously, opening a route to scale
source construction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.