* 2322122
* MCA: Advancing Student Success and Career Horizon through Learning Analytics Research (Advancing SCHOLAR)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kingsley Reeves, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,670.00

The goal of the Mid-Career Advancement program is to substantively enhance and
advance the research program of mid-career scientists and engineers through
synergistic and mutually beneficial partnerships, typically at an institution
other than their home institution. The resources provided by the collaborator of
this project will provide the principal investigator (PI) with both the
opportunity to work with a team of individuals actively engaged in learning
analytics research as well as access to a large complex data set suitable for
such research. The PI, in turn, will provide additional research capacity for
the existing learning analytics research team and bring an engineering
perspective to the work that is not currently present. Moreover, the PI will
conduct complementary work focused on the College of Engineering at the host
institution and will later explore the application of vertical federated
learning to address similar research questions in a different institutional
context characterized by the lack of a consolidated data lake housing student
data and the lack of resources available to create such a data lake.

While Black and Hispanic people currently comprise approximately 33% of the U.S.
population, this portion of the U.S. citizenry comprised only 26% of all
bachelor’s degrees, 22% of all master’s degrees, and 17% of all doctor’s degrees
conferred in 2020. By 2060, the percentage of the U.S. population comprised of
people who identify as Black or Hispanic is expected to grow to 43%. Despite
this growth, if the dearth of Black and Hispanic Americans earning postsecondary
degrees persists, the U.S. will not fully benefit from the additional innovation
capacity represented by this untapped portion of its citizenry, nor will it keep
pace with the number of professionals needed to maintain economic
competitiveness worldwide. To redress this issue, the aim of this research
program is to identify and understand the drivers underlying students’ time-to-
degree completion and to understand the impacts of these drivers on the total
cost of degree attainment – including any differential impacts based on
students’ race, ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic status, or first-generation
status. The discovered knowledge in this study will provide insights into the
underlying drivers of inequities in 4- and 6-year graduation rates and learning
analytics research approaches will be used to produce data-driven
recommendations to reduce such inequities. The project is a step towards
transforming the postsecondary system that students are entering by identifying
and reducing the unique barriers encountered by specific student subpopulations
in support of improved and equitable time-to-degree completion for all
baccalaureate students, including Blacks and Hispanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.