* 2322255
* CIVIC-FA Track B: Bridging the Gap between Essential Emergency Resources and Services and the Deaf and Hard of Hearing Community in Monroe County NY: A Geospatial-Visual Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Brian Tomaszewski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Civic Innovation Challenge (CIVIC) funded project will identify and
bridge specific gaps in essential emergency resources and services for the Deaf
and Hard-of-Hearing (DHH) community in Monroe County, New York, where Rochester
is home to the largest per capita population of DHH people in the country.
Project goals include assessing emergency service gaps for the DHH, creating,
and evaluating emergency communication tools, developing educational materials
for public safety professionals, and building pathways for the DHH to enter the
emergency management STEM workforce and volunteer efforts. All project goal
outcomes have been designed to be scaled nationally and sustained. Results will
be generalizable to other community contexts with special needs populations such
as such as deaf refugees and non-English speakers beyond Monroe County for
broader project national impact and legacy, as one in eight people in the U.S.
experience hearing loss. The focus on using geospatial technology will enhance
STEM education for persons with disabilities, and overall national security will
benefit from enhancing the disaster resilience of persons with disabilities.
Scientific outcomes spanning multiple disciplines will inform and contribute
knowledge to fields such as geographic information science, disaster management
studies, disability studies, human-computer interaction and user experience, and
emergency management pedagogy. Products such as geospatial mapping tools,
communication booklets, and educational modules for emergency management
professionals will become part of the broader ecosystem of national security and
defense within the United States. The project represents a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to transform emergency management for the DHH through the
incorporation of relevant DHH community groups, deaf academic researchers, and
local, state, and national PSPublic Service organizations ranging from local
emergency management to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Issues related to the DHH and emergency management cycle have received little
attention from emergency management researchers and limited discussion in
academic literature. The main research questions for this project include the
following: R1: What are the spatial relationships between the DHH community and
hazards that may reveal specific gaps in emergency services for the DHH? R2:
What are the messaging and communication needs of the DHH community during all
phases of the emergency management cycle? R3: What pedagogical practice is
needed for education and workforce development of emergency management
practitioners on the needs of the DHH community and the inclusion of DHH
community members in emergency management training? For R1, the research team
intends to create and evaluate the nation's first deaf community hazard mapping
geospatial toolkit called ‘Deaf Map’ to empower DHH communities to identify,
characterize, map, and communicate community hazards with PS agencies. For R2,
the team intends to create and evaluate a communication booklet for PS officials
to communicate with DHH. In addition, a prototype device allowing DHH persons to
receive emergency notifications in non-sound formats (visual/haptic) will be
beta tested. For R3, the team intends to create and evaluate an education module
designed for hearing PS professionals to understand DHH culture and challenges
emergencies, develop an educational framework to enable DHH students to enter
the STEM workforce, and create the nation's first ever Deaf Community Emergency
Response Team (D-CERT).

This project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program—Track B.
Bridging the gap between essential resources and services & community needs—and
is a collaboration with Department of Energy, Department of Homeland Security,
and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.