* 2322115
* SBIR Phase I: Innovative Solid-State Phase Change Cooling to Supercharge Central Processing Unit (CPU) Performance
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Asher Leff, TAUMAT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Mara E. Schindelholz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project aims to establish a new approach to high-performance
central processing unit (CPU) thermal management that focuses on the development
and application of innovative solid-solid thermal energy storage (TES) materials
and hardware. Increasingly, steady-state cooling solutions are unable to keep up
with the required operating frequencies and resulting thermal loads of
temperature-sensitive computing and electronic components. As a result, these
components are throttled down to reduce heating. This results in the desired
temperature reduction but inevitably leads to clock speed and performance
reductions as well. The proposed project aims to challenge this existing
tradeoff and produce CPU heat sinks that can maintain 3X computational
performance ‘sprints’ with no added weight/volume nor electrical energy
expenditure, in a scalable and easily deployable, drop-in form factor. Fueled by
a global demand for high-performance computing, internet-of-things, and handheld
electronics, the market for high-performance CPU coolers is rising with a market
size of about $2.04 billion and a compound annual growth rate of 3.73-4.64% over
the next decade. The target solid-solid TES heatsink is transferable to battery
fast charging, system-on-chip devices, and the power electronic market.

The intellectual merit of this project resides in newly-identified thermal
energy storage materials to shift the paradigm in CPU cooler design away from
simply maximizing steady-state heat dissipation towards an optimized approach
that combines high steady-state dissipation with high-capacity thermal storage.
This Phase I project has three primary research objectives: i) develop
analytical and numerical topology optimization approaches to identify ideal
thermal energy storage material properties and composite heat transfer/capacity
structures for CPU applications: ii) leverage data-driven shape memory alloy
discovery using an artificial intelligence framework to identify and ultimately
arc-melt new thermal energy storage materials that exhibit high-latent heat,
high-conductivity, low hysteresis, and/or the ideal combination of material
properties based on CPU requirements: and iii) design, fabricate, and test
prototypes for model validation and concept demonstration. These technical
efforts, combined with risk reduction and mitigation steps, and techno-economic
and manufacturing analysis will enable leap-ahead improvements in an ever-
expanding array of high-power, thermally limited applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.