* 2322495
* Community, Identity, and Competence: Supporting Low-Income Students in Computing and the Data Sciences at the University of Connecticut
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Daniel Burkey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 12/31/2029
* USD 2,499,411.00

This project will contribute to the regional and national need for graduates in
computing and data science and will increase both the retention and graduation
rates for low-income and first-generation students in these majors at the
University of Connecticut (UConn). Over the 6-year duration of the grant, three
cohorts of students will be served, for a total of 28 S-STEM scholars over the
project lifetime. Students in the project will participate in an introductory
support course as first-year students. With the help of faculty and peer
mentors, scholars will improve their research experiences, career readiness, and
entrepreneurship; all of which will lead to positive post-graduation outcomes,
including full-time employment or post-graduate studies. This project has the
potential to expand access to higher education to a broad group of students and
will also generate knowledge and best practices in supporting STEM majors in
their programs of study. By partnering with local and regional companies that
hire computing and data science majors, this project also fosters partnerships
between academia and industry and supports the local and national workforce
development efforts in computing and data sciences, areas critical to the
national interest.

This project will recruit eligible students from eight majors across two schools
at UConn and engage them in high-quality programming designed to improve
retention and graduation rates, build community, promote STEM identity, and
develop students’ competence through experiential learning opportunities.
Students selected as S-STEM Scholars will engage with a variety of programming
developed by the PIs. Working together and with a strong foundation in the
literature, the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences (CLAS), the School of
Engineering (SOE), and the Institute for Student Success (ISS) will focus on
three foundational activities: Cohort Formation, Discipline-Based Exploration
and Academic Support, and Mentoring. These activities in turn support the three
core values the project aims to instill in its S-STEM Scholars: Community,
Identity, and Competence. At the heart of cohort formation is the S-STEM Student
Success course that forms the framework of early engagement with S-STEM
Scholars. This course will establish the S-STEM Scholars as a cohort and support
students’ development of community and identity. The scholars will explore
different pathways and skills development through research opportunities,
internships or co-ops, and post-graduation preparation, all of which develop
students’ competencies as STEM practitioners. All of these activities are
documented via an e-portfolio that supports students’ construction of their
knowledge and identity, while providing a robust tool for program evaluation and
knowledge generation. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.