* 2322850
* Development of Attention in Preschool Children
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* David Lewkowicz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,535.00

Children develop in a world cluttered with people’s talking faces and
accompanying voices. To avoid confusion, and to communicate properly with any
particular person, children must be able to perceptually segregate multiple
talking faces and voices. To do so, they must identify and select corresponding
face-voice pairs and then bind them into unitary and integrated audiovisual
entities. Selective/sustained attention plays a critical role in the perceptual
segregation process because it helps us identify and select corresponding faces
and voices prior to binding them. This project investigates the development of
selective/sustained attention to socially relevant audiovisual information and
its impact on perception, learning, and memory in typically developing 4-, 5-,
and 6-year-old children. The results from this project will provide critical
insights into perception, attention, learning, and memory in typically
developing young children and will suggest new ways to maximize their
acquisition of critical cognitive skills essential for subsequent success in
school and beyond. In addition, the results will provide new insights into the
root causes of some learning disabilities that are known to involve impaired
attention to and binding of auditory and visual information and will provide an
evidence-based approach for detecting such disabilities and improving affected
children’s cognitive and social development.

Selective/sustained attention emerges gradually during infancy and early
childhood and it is the critical gateway to perception, learning, memory, and
social responsiveness. This project investigates the development of
selective/sustained attention in 4-, 5-, and 6-year-old children to talking
faces and their accompanying voices in the service of perceptual segregation.
The project seeks to answer three principal questions. First, how well do young
children rely on selective/sustained attention to identify and bind
audiovisually related information normally available in their typically
cluttered multisensory environment and does this ability improve with
development? Second, what underlying perceptual mechanisms make the
developmental improvement in selective/sustained attention to multisensory
information possible? Third, how does specific early experience (e.g., exposure
to multiple languages or to different-race faces) affect the growth of
selective/sustained attention? To investigate selective/sustained attention, we
will rely on eye tracking to measure eye gaze while children perform various
experimental tasks that require them to perceptually search a cluttered
audiovisual scene, to perform audio-visual transfer, to exercise their executive
control skills, and to learn and remember specific audiovisually integrated
events. The findings from this project will provide novel insights into the
emergence of attention and learning in early childhood, suggest empirically-
based ways to maximize attention and learning in typically developing children,
and will provide an evidence-based method for improving attention and learning
in children at risk for early learning disabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.