* 2322305
* SBIR Phase II:  Gaze-independent contactless autorefractor for self-serve eye exam kiosk.
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Matthias Hofmann, 123 SEE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve access to vision care and
eyeglasses for all Americans through a self-serve, rapid vision exam kiosk for
retail stores and public spaces. An estimated 175 million Americans suffer from
blurry vision, of which 30 million live without eyeglasses. By partnering with
retailers, pharmacies, and supermarkets, the company has the potential to reach
a large number of Americans via a network of kiosks spread across the US. With
70% of the population benefitting from eyeglasses, the development of the
company’s rapid vision exam kiosk aims to democratize vision care and eliminate
the gap in easily accessible vision exams.

This project develops a gaze-independent, contactless autorefractor technology
(GIPR) for use in a self-serve and autonomous vision exam kiosk. Gaze-camera
misalignment is a leading contributor to accuracy drift in autorefractors using
the retinal reflex method. Eliminating the gaze alignment requirement marks a
significant milestone in the company’s development. The GIPR design refracts the
inner visual field in a single capture, thus providing a measurement of
refractive error at the subject’s foveal position. Building on the success of
the Phase I feasibility project, this Phase II project will continue the
development of the GIPR module towards commercial readiness by optimizing
hardware layout and improving data processing pipeline throughput.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.