* 2322103
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Structured Population Dynamics Subject to Stoichiometric Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Rebecca Everett, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2026
* USD 59,845.00

As human activities continue to alter environmental balances and nutrient
cycles, it is becoming vital to understand how these changes can impact the
environment. Ecological processes depend on the flow and balance of essential
elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus. These essential elements can
affect juvenile consumers differently than adult consumers. Such age/stage-
specific effects affect population dynamics, suggesting age/stage-structured
mathematical models are needed to accurately capture and understand population
dynamics. The development of age/stage-structured population models over the
decades has significantly contributed to understanding energy flow and
population dynamics of ecological systems. However, current models fail when
fertility and maturation play important roles in nutrient recycling and
ecosystem function. Here, investigators will design and conduct laboratory
experiments in conjunction with developing mathematical models that incorporate
age/stage-specific nutritional constraints on growth, time to maturation, and
reproduction. This will result in the development of new theoretical
applications in ecology that investigate how varying nutrient levels help shape
ecological communities. The project is a collaboration between Texas Tech
University, Haverford College, and California State University Northridge, and
offers valuable educational, training, and outreach opportunities. Specifically,
undergraduate and graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training and
mentorship in the fields of mathematics and ecology to gain the ability to ask,
answer, and achieve broad understandings of scientific problems, that is
necessary to communicate effectively across disciplines. Investigators and
students will be involved in K-12 outreach initiatives.

This project seeks to understand the interactive effects of stoichiometric
constraints and population dynamics, particularly, how organismal stage
structures and ecosystem function influence each other. To this end, the
investigators will develop and analyze a series of empirically testable and
robust mathematical models of population dynamics structured under the framework
of Ecological Stoichiometry. The theory of Ecological Stoichiometry emphasizes
the balance of essential elements throughout ecological interactions.
Compartmental systems of ordinary differential equations and delayed integro-
differential equations will be developed to address complex questions about
stage-specific nutritional constraints, and their consequences on maturation and
reproductive output. Dynamical systems theory and tools will be used to
interpret and analyze the models including analytical, numerical, as well as
bifurcation analysis. The synthesis of the models and experiments will integrate
the field of structured population mathematical modeling with the theory of
Ecological Stoichiometry. The resulting theoretical frameworks and their
findings will help shed light on the interplay between elemental constraints and
stage-structures within ecological systems and broaden the types of ecological
questions that models can answer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.