* 2322198
* CIVIC-FA Track A: Leveraging existing fiber-optic cables to identify and manage urban environmental hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Zhen Lei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 937,211.00

Growing cities face many major challenges including aging infrastructure, a lack
of resilience against climate change, and inequities across human access to city
services and amenities. Deteriorating infrastructure, coupled with more
frequent, extreme weather, results in major urban events, such as chronic
flooding, land subsidence, and pollution-related hazards. Real-time monitoring
systems are lacking although many environmental issues are related to geological
subsurface changes. Cities need cost-effective tools to predict, prevent, and
mitigate hazards. This project aims to develop a real-time, high-resolution
monitoring framework using pre-existing fiber-optic cable in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, which has century-old or older water and sewer pipelines, and a
documented history of landslides, sinkholes, and ground subsidence. Broader
impacts include improved performance of city water and storm and/or wastewater
systems. The project can also help cities identify and prioritize locations
where conditions have most deteriorated, allowing more targeted replacement of
water-related infrastructure, especially as the selected research area includes
disadvantaged communities. The project also involves educational, workforce
training, and public outreach components. Public outreach through the Childrenâ€™s
Museum in Pittsburgh will increase awareness about new sensor technology and
civil infrastructure. Long-term community resilience will be improved,
substantially benefitting the Pittsburgh community, and other communities where
stormwater will be an increasingly important issue with global climate change.
Pennsylvania State University and Carnegie Mellon University researchers,
Pittsburgh city and infrastructure managers, telecommunication companies, local
communities, and other stakeholders will conduct the project. Civic partners
include Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority, the City of Pittsburgh, and DQE
Communications LLC.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. This
project will test and demonstrate the use of pre-existing, unused, fiber-optic
cables to monitor multiple urban-water infrastructures and geophysical hazards
at low cost in real- to near real-time manner with high spatial and temporal
resolution. Two areas were identified to test the viability of fiber-optic
cables for use as urban-infrastructure environmental sensors. Selected areas are
routes where other sensors can be located temporarily to collect data for
calibration. The collected data combined with geo-environmental hazard
information from civic partners (e.g., flooding reports, landslide proneness)
will be used to validate and calibrate signals received from the system
installation. Project outcomes include development of best practices for using
fiber-optic technology to provide cost-effective, scalable, high-resolution,
real-time sensing of water infrastructure and geophysical hazards in an urban
environment. Sensor and infrastructure calibration procedures will be developed
for future applications in other cities. This research and implementation, if
successful, is transformative because the technology is repeatable and scalable
and has the potential to be adopted widely by other cities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.