* 2322792
* Empowering Students to Succeed in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2029
* Brianne Gutmann, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2029
* USD 2,499,411.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled engineers and
scientists by supporting the attraction, retention, and graduation of low-
income, academically talented, undergraduate students in software engineering,
computer engineering, and computer science at San José State University (SJSU).
Led by a collaborative team of faculty in engineering, the sciences, and
sociology, the project will provide two consecutive summer enrichment programs
starting when students are high school seniors, and continues with academic
support, engagement activities, paid research opportunities, and scholarships
throughout the students’ undergraduate careers. The elements of the project are
designed to increase students’ sense of belonging, facilitate community
engagement via a robust network of faculty, staff, peers, and Silicon Valley
technology professionals, and strengthen students’ mathematics, physics, and
programming skill sets by employing active learning, culturally relevant, and
inclusive pedagogical approaches.

The project will be designed to increase student belonging in technology via
conversations about growth mindset and other metacognitive tools. This approach
will be underpinned by a focus on community engagement, technical skills, and
academic environment support via scaffolding and informational sessions about
higher education processes aimed at building familiarity and comfort in the
college environment. Research will generate knowledge about academic success and
career pathways for low-income, academically talented, students and serve as a
template for the California State University System, and for postsecondary
institutions nationwide. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.