* 2322260
* CC* Regional Computing: Enhancing Computing At Regional Schools in the Rocky Mountain Advanced Computing Consortium (RMACC)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Shelley Knuth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 986,140.00

This project to the University of Colorado and partners in the Rocky Mountain
Advanced Computing Consortium (RMACC) expands the capacity of the Alpine
Computing Cluster, a regional resource for RMACC. The project expands capacity
by more than 15% and triples the number of high-memory nodes. A wide range of
research is supported, including physics, astronomy, engineering, biology, and
atmospheric science. The project supports diverse workloads for the
approximately 30 member institutions of RMACC. Student engagement is strong, as
ten students from across the RMACC region are part of a cohort working closely
with the system administration team to learn how to navigate the design,
procurement, deployment, and administration of the system. The project supports
researchers in EPSCoR jurisdictions, at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions,
Hispanic Serving Institutions, and institutions primarily serving rural
communities within RMACC.

As of February 2023, the Alpine cluster comprises 18,080 AMD Milan CPU cores as
well as 60 GPU accelerators (36xNVIDIA A100’s, 24xAMD MI100’s). The 317 nodes
are interconnected through 25Gb Ethernet, with standard compute nodes
additionally featuring HDR100 InfiniBand links. Alpine is also equipped with a
1.9PB GPFS scratch filesystem. The expansion includes 32 nodes of 64C AMD Milan
CPUs and 256GB of memory as well as eight nodes with 64C AMD Milan CPUs and 1TB
of memory. It also includes two InfiniBand switches and associated HDR cables
for high-throughput, low-latency networking. The expansion will provide an
additional 1.3PB to Alpine’s high-speed scratch filesystem to meet the growing
demand for data intensive computing research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.