* 2322676
* LTER: Scales of Variability in Ecosystem Dynamics and Production on the Changing Northeast U.S. Shelf (NES II)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Heidi Sosik, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,549,998.00

The Northeast U.S. Shelf (NES) is the region of the Northwest Atlantic Ocean
that overlies the continental shelf from North Carolina to Maine. The NES has a
long history of intense human utilization and provides an array of ecosystem
services including shipping, recreation, conservation, and energy development.
The NES also comprises a seasonally dynamic and productive ecosystem, supporting
renowned fisheries, whose integrity is critical to the health of the Northeast
U.S. economy. The NES ecosystem’s productivity is fueled by planktonic organisms
that interact with each other in complex food webs whose structure depends on
environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, light, and nutrient levels). These
conditions are rapidly changing because of climate-change-related warming and
human utilization. For example, the NES is seeing the largest development of
coastal wind farms in the U.S. to date. Phase II of the Northeast U.S. Shelf
Long-Term Ecological Research program (NES-LTER II) advances our ability to
predict how anthropogenic impacts will affect the dynamics of the shelf’s
planktonic food webs and their ability to support the productivity of higher
trophic levels, from fish to whales and humans. Because the NES is subject to
long-term challenges that will impact many people, the project emphasizes an
active education component for helping to train the next generation of marine
scientists and outreach activities to increase public understanding of marine
science and technology. The project team conducts education and outreach via
three main components: (1) training and mentoring for early career researchers
from undergraduates to postdoctoral researchers in LTER research; (2) an LTER
Schoolyard program that engages middle and high school teachers and students;
and (3) public outreach through targeted events, the project website, and social
media channels.

Patterns of ecosystem change over seasons to decades have been documented in the
NES, but the key mechanisms linking changes in the physical environment,
planktonic food webs, and higher trophic levels remain poorly understood. As a
result, predictive capability is limited and management strategies are largely
reactive. To address these needs, NES II is targeting a mechanistic
understanding of how food web structure and function responds to environmental
conditions, natural variability and human induced changes. NES II combines
observations that provide regional-scale context, process cruises along a high
gradient cross-shelf transect, high-frequency time series at an inner-shelf
location, coupled biological-physical food web models, and targeted population
models. In addition, the research team is investigating how community structure
and trophic transfer are impacted by disturbances including (i) the increasing
prevalence of heat waves, (ii) intrusions of offshore water associated with
increasing instability in the Gulf Stream, and (iii) offshore wind farms now
under construction on the NES. The long-term research plan is guided by the
overarching science question: “How is climate change impacting the pelagic NES
ecosystem and, in particular, affecting the relationship between compositional
(e.g., species diversity and size structure) and aggregate (e.g., rates of
primary production, and transfer of energy to higher trophic levels)
variability?” The investigators are assessing the extent to which the NES
ecosystem possesses a biodiversity reservoir that is resilient to dramatic
changes in the environment and that will allow the ecosystem to maintain overall
productivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.