* 2322813
* DETERMINATION OF THE N-DEGRON PATHWAY AND ITS SUBSTRATES IN PLANT CHLOROPLASTS
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Klaas van Wijk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2026
* USD 950,000.00

Protein amino (N) termini (i.e., the start of the linear sequence of amino acids
in a protein) are major determinants of protein stability. This is
conceptualized in the N-degron pathway which states that certain amino acids,
when exposed abnormally at the N-terminus of a protein, act as triggers
(degrons) for protein degradation. Plant chloroplasts have an ancient
relationship with prokaryotes and their N-degron pathway involves the bacterial-
like Clp chaperone-protease system, with the N-recognin ClpS1 playing a central
role in recognition, binding, and delivery of N-degron substrates to Clp
chaperones. This research will determine the mechanistic features of this
important pathway. The Broader impacts of this research include its intrinsic
merit as plant chloroplasts play a central role in energy transduction on the
planet and the work may facilitate the rational design of stable transgenic
proteins targeted to chloroplasts with applications in pharmaceutical and
biofortification products. Additional activities include interdisciplinary
training, bridging cell biology, molecular genetics, quantitative imaging,
bioinformatics, and biochemistry. Summer internships will be offered through our
NSF-sponsored REU programs.

A main impediment for determining the molecular details of a chloroplast
N-degron pathway is an in planta quantitative reporter system that can test
specific N-termini of interest. The research will employ our newly developed in
vivo reporter system to determine N-degrons in chloroplasts and the involvement
of chloroplast ClpS1 and the Clp chaperone-protease system. Independently, our
in vivo ClpC1 chaperone trapping approach will determine the impact of ClpS1 and
ClpF on substrate selection and delivery to the Clp chaperone-protease system.
Identified ClpS1/ClpF dependent substrates will be investigated for their
degrons. We will also determine how the N-domain of chloroplast glutamate t-RNA
reductase is recognized as a conditional substrate by ClpS1 and ClpF in vivo
using a unique transgenic reporter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.