* 2322178
* CIVIC-FA Track A: Kickstarting A Youth-Centered Green Economy For The Environmental Justice Community Of East Boston
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kannan Thiruvengadam, EASTIE FARM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This research involves understanding how underserved communities get actively
engaged in making the transition to a vibrant green economy with improved
environmental conditions and community resilience to climate change. To
accomplish this goal, the research engages local youth in constructive and
productive activities involving urban farming, coastal restoration, and social
science-driven community engagement via a non-profit community entity (Eastie
Farm). Youth centered activities include financial support to help youth make a
living while they learn urban agricultural science and implementation via
experimenting, documenting, and examining the best means and species of plants
for local coastal wetland restoration that is designed to reduce coastal
flooding and remobilization of industrial pollutants in wetland soils at the
verge of their community. Youth-driven community surveys, overseen by university
social science teams, and data collection and its analysis help youth learn how
they can make positive and major differences in their community. University
researchers, community members, and the community-based Eastie Farm are working
together on this pilot to understand how low income and environmentally impacted
communities can meet the challenges of climate change through nature-based
solutions. Broader impacts of the project include youth empowerment and
mentoring, focused on developing a robust understanding of how to make
communities resilient to climate change and improve resident's quality of life.
It creates a model that can be scaled and translated to other low-income,
environmentally compromised, urban, coastal communities. The project also
provides youth in low-income, traditionally underserved, urban communities with
expertise and training in green careers as well as learning and realization of
the power of youth-driven actions that have the potential to change a community
and improve the lives of its residents.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. Through
the Eastie's Farm pilot program, youth are actively engaged in and learn social,
climate, and biological science. In this project, 40 youth in a low income
community in East Boston will be engaged in a program focused on building a
green future for themselves and their community by learning green job skills;
proper plant identification, selection, propagation, and installation; the
amending and monitoring of environmental conditions to minimize and mitigate
coastal flooding and the transport of industrial pollutants in marine wetlands
while working closely with scientists and experts in bioscience and social
science. They will also collect and analyze data on the barriers that keep
families in their community from adopting approaches that help mitigate and
provide resilience to climate change impacts and that are beneficial, both
ecologically and economically, to themselves and their communities. In addition,
the program exposes youth to experiential activities that help them understand
the power of the scientific process and how to develop an entrepreneurial mind-
set by involving them in experimentation and installation trials. The program
includes field trips to talk to and interact with experts in the green energy
and economy. Additional program impacts include connection of involved youth
with providers of green jobs, from agriculture to solar and energy audits to
jobs in education and green finance; all of which can help them kickstart a
green economy in their own community, laying a pathway for a better sustainable
future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.