* 2322875
* Conference: Catalyzing the Future of Spectrum Coexistence Through a National Radio Dynamic Zone Workshop
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Mariya Zheleva, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 88,856.00

The wireless spectrum is a natural resource upon which we all depend in more
ways than we realize. While our personal and professional lives thrive on mobile
broadband, a plethora of other applications, such as weather forecasting,
climate science, astronomy, space exploration, and civil/military navigation
also critically depend on the radio spectrum. The ever-growing demand for
spectrum has led to a corresponding increase in congestion as these vastly
different services converge to the same bands. As a result, spectrum conflicts
have arisen between services utilizing adjacent or overlapping bands, resulting
in an increase of harmful interference. Unlocking the potential of the next-
generation wireless systems while protecting the spectrum necessary for
advancing our understanding of Earth and the universe will require the
adaptability, flexibility, and performance benefits made possible by effectively
and efficiently sharing spectrum. Authorizing and operating spectrum-sharing
systems will require innovative spectrum management techniques that can provide
real-time coordination, control, and enforcement in highly dynamic environments
with stringent interference limitations.

Recognizing these needs, federal agencies and spectrum regulators have been
advocating for the establishment of a National Radio Dynamic Zone (NRDZ) as a
regional-scale experimental test bed that can enable spectrum research. Such a
zone will provide real-world validation of the coexistence of disparate active
and passive technologies. The purposes of this project are (1) to hold an in-
person workshop and a series of virtual meetings to review the current state-of-
the-art in NRDZ research, (2) to consolidate lessons learned from independent
efforts, (3) to explore key challenges related to the implementation of a NRDZ,
(4) to foster future collaborative research, and (5) to serve as a catalyst for
spectrum innovation. The workshop will build on a two-year initiative co-led by
the PIs, which has shaped a community of researchers and a vision for NRDZ. The
planned activities will promote a multi-disciplinary approach to collaborative
research that will foster the development and implementation of the NRDZ. They
will also identify priority research areas for investment, key challenges that
need to be addressed, and highlight the needs of industry, government, active,
and passive users. At a higher level, the NRDZ will change the way future
wireless communication systems are designed and built, leading to significant
opportunities to develop educational initiatives for training the next
generation of spectrum engineers. Several NSF-funded NRDZ groups around the
country have highly effective Broader Impact programs that will be highlighted
during the workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.