* 2322741
* Pivots: Energy Leadership Accelerator
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jason Meyer, Rocky Mountain Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2025
* USD 492,385.00

The Energy Leadership Accelerator (ELA) will advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare of remote, islanded, and underserved communities at the
front line of climate impacts by convening and empowering rural energy
practitioners to integrate emerging clean energy technologies into their
microgrids. Remote and islanded (non-grid-connected) regions rely on delivered
diesel fuel for power generation, leaving them vulnerable to expensive market
fluctuations and supply chain disruptions. Furthermore, these regions also face
the most pressing scientific and societal challenges in adapting their energy
infrastructure for climate resilience. While the technology exists for
transitions away from fossil fuels, there is a disparity between the application
and adoption of these technologies for remote, islanded communities on
microgrids, and other high-income, grid-connected areas of the United States.
ELA provides the means, structure and opportunity to convene rural energy
champions within a remote context to learn from and with one another in order to
spearhead culturally and regionally appropriate solutions for energy
infrastructure and workforce resiliency.

ELA will invest in local energy leaders in the design and implementation of
community energy projects that adopt emerging renewable energy technologies such
as solar and wind microgrids and battery energy storage systems, and build
sustainable opportunities for the local workforce. Leveraging the successful
knowledge sharing programs of the Alaska Center for Energy and Power and Rocky
Mountain Institute, ELA provides cross-regional networking and leadership
development for remote energy champions. The project will focus on expanding the
knowledge-sharing pedagogy beyond traditional technical and leadership training
to incorporate Indigenous Ways of Knowing. A cohort of 24 trainees will be
composed of junior participants with minimal project experience and senior
participants with at least one successful community energy project implemented.
In year one, the project will launch with virtual community building and 10
synchronous sessions delivering tailored content on project development,
management, and renewable energy integration technology. In year two, the cohort
will convene for a two-week Alaska Leadership Lab to visit successful renewable
energy projects in Fairbanks, Cordova, Kotzebue and other villages of the
northwest Arctic, and learn from the innovative Alaskan energy champions who
built them. The cohort will engage with community voices as well as speakers and
facilitators from a diverse cross section of the energy sector. Upon returning
home, the project will conclude with executive coaching support to advance their
regional energy project. ELA will target participants from Alaska and US states
and territories in the Caribbean (Puerto Rico) and the Pacific (Hawaii, Guam,
and American Samoa), and will focus on technical training, peer collaboration,
and mentorship to advance projects and workforce readiness to implement
renewable energy microgrids. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program,
funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential
learning opportunities for individuals from diverse professional and educational
backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to, career pathways
in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.