* 2322837
* Collaborative Research: Caregiver-Child Proximity and Attachment Security
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kathryn Humphreys, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 237,191.00

The quality of the attachment relationship between children and their
parents/caregivers has a profound impact on their overall well-being and future
relationships. Previous research has emphasized the importance of caregiver
sensitivity (e.g., responsive and nurturing care) in fostering secure attachment
relationships. However, regular close contact, support of child exploration, and
welcoming the child’s return may be equally significant for the development of a
secure attachments. To explore this further, we have developed wearable devices
called TotTags that measure the physical proximity between children and their
caregivers in their everyday lives. In this project, we aim to examine how
everyday caregiver–child interactions are associated with attachment security.
By combining measures of caregiver and child physical proximity with caregiver
sensitivity, we seek to determine the factors that are most influential in
establishing secure attachment relationships. Additionally, this study offers
valuable insights into the daily lives of families with young children,
providing a deeper understanding of contact patterns within and across families.
The findings from this project have the potential to advance knowledge in
psychology and developmental science, as well as inform interventions and
support efforts for children and families. Furthermore, the foundation knowledge
can contribute to a workshop for first-time parents, providing them with
essential knowledge about child development and caregiving behaviors to promote
healthy relationships.

This research project aims to study the relationship between caregiver–child
physical proximity and attachment security in the relationships between infants
and their parents/caregivers. To achieve these goals, the research team employs
a mixed-methods approach, combining naturalistic observations with laboratory-
based assessments. Given the theorized importance of regular close contact,
support of child exploration, and welcoming the child's return, the project
utilizes wearable devices called TotTags to measure patterns of physical
proximity, on a second-by-second level, between children and their caregivers in
their everyday lives across one full week. The goals of this research project
are to examine how everyday caregiver–child interactions are associated with
attachment security and to explore the factors that characterize secure
attachment relationships. Specifically, we test whether time in close physical
proximity, compared to caregiver sensitivity, better explains attachment
security within a given parent–child dyad, as well as the potential interaction
of proximity and sensitivity. By collecting data from a diverse sample of
families with young children, the study aims to provide valuable insights into
the daily lives of these families and the patterns of contact within and across
families. The outcomes of this research project have the potential to inform
interventions and support efforts for children and families, contributing to the
development of effective prevention and intervention strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.