* 2322402
* SBIR Phase I:  Trajectory Optimizations and Learned Foliage Manipulation to Accelerate Throughput in Automated Strawberry Harvesting
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Alexander Gutierrez, L5 AUTOMATION INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to make automated harvesting of strawberries more efficient
and effective and hence, more financially viable for growers to adopt. Automated
harvesters currently deployed in conventional strawberry farms cannot reliably
handle peak-season conditions when strawberries are hidden below a thick plant
canopy and where plants must be displaced to view and pick the fruit. This
project will develop software to expand the set of conditions whereby automation
can increase productivity. Strawberries, the second most popular fruit in the
United States, have the highest cost per acre to harvest because of their high
touch harvesting process. Automating the harvesting process reduces labor needs,
with the potential to either decrease costs and / or increase the quality of the
fruit. Further, the project is expected to create high-skill jobs for American
workers.

This project’s main technical objective is to improve the quality and coverage
of the map representation of strawberries and plants which will increase the
number of harvested strawberries and the rate at which they are picked. The
scope of the Phase I activity is to implement two software capabilities and to
test them in simulation, laboratory and field environments. The first capability
is a trajectory optimization module for a camera mounted to a robot manipulator.
This technology will be designed to maximize information gain and to reduce
localization uncertainty for strawberries while respecting kinematic and
collision constraints for the motion of the robot arm. Success is to be measured
by the rate of information gain relative to a naïve precomputed scan. The second
is a trained neural network which estimates the parameters that best define a
manipulation task plan for displacing foliage to maximize strawberry visibility
and access for subsequent picking. Training and inference will be done in an
end-to-end fashion, allowing an estimate of the value of a given task plan from
color and depth camera observations of the scene. This contrasts with a
conventional pipeline which doesn’t make the most of the rich latent
representations possible with neural networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.