* 2322221
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: BLUES: Boundary Layer Under-ice Environmental Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alexander Michaud, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 148,002.00

Global climate change is driving all forms of ice to melt from the Earth’s
surface and contribute to global sea-level rise. While evidence of ice melt is
worldwide, such as decreasing sea-ice extent, loss of ice shelves in polar
regions and a reduction in annual lake-ice coverage, ice melt rates are poorly
quantified, resulting from limited field data and relatively coarse measurements
of ice thickness. Ice thickness measurements, made by propagating acoustic
signals through the ice, decrease in resolution as a function of the attenuation
properties and overall ice thickness. Novel acoustic metamaterials will be used
in this Ideas Lab: Engineering Technologies to Advance Underwater
Sciences (ETAUS) project to develop a transformative technology tool that can
provide long-range, high-resolution measurements of ice thickness and provide a
new mechanism to image the internal structure of the ice. These high-resolution
observations will be used to refine global estimates of ice melt by looking at
changes through time. Initial testing and development will be conducted in a
laboratory setting before validation on natural lake ice that is variable in its
acoustic signal attenuation properties. In every phase, the development and
experimental demonstration will be guided by numerical modeling. This developed
instrument will be transformative in terms of scientific understanding of all
forms of ice within the cryosphere from the Arctic to the Antarctic. While polar
regions are at the forefront of climate change, they are also some of the least
accessible areas of the planet and make it difficult for the public to engage.
To this end, new educational materials will be developed with the help of the
education and outreach team at the Tahoe Environmental Research Center, which
will be used to help broaden public participation in lake science and
engineering.

To effectively monitor and predict climate-related changes, a key scientific
need in all disciplines of the under-ice scientific community is to accurately
measure ice accretion and melt rates at the ice/water interface, then use that
information to generate better models of under-ice water circulation and mixing.
However, existing technologies are limited by their imaging capabilities,
measurement resolutions, and bulky sizes, which hinder their applications for
scientific discovery. To address these limitations, this project will develop a
new metamaterial-enhanced acoustic phased array (MEAPA) system and to explore
the application of this system for high-resolution estimations of ice melt.
Graded index acoustic metamaterials will be investigated to provide improved
focusing, beam steering, and collimation properties to achieve high-resolution
imaging (subwavelength resolution) in thinner ice and to further enhance the
detection range of the MEAPA system in thicker ice. The developed MEAPA system
will be characterized and validated in laboratory and field settings. Then, it
will be used to better parameterize bottom roughness, and the data will be
coupled to boundary layer dynamics observations of lake ice in three-dimensional
hydrodynamic models. Coupling the engineering development of this instrument
with the scientific need of the polar ice community will inform subgrid
processes of General Circulation Models (GCM) for polar regions. Ultimately,
this system will enable us to better predict ice growth and melt with accurate
models and to better quantify mass gain and loss from lake ice to ice shelves in
Antarctica.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.