* 2322322
* PFI-TT: Ultrafast Thermal Simulation of Metal Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Prahalada Rao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 257,980.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is fast and accurate computer simulation
software to predict when and why flaws are formed in metal parts made using
additive manufacturing (3D printing). Given its singular design and material
flexibility, metal additive manufacturing (metal AM) has the potential to
revolutionize U.S. manufacturing by improving part performance and reducing
waste and processing costs. However, safety-conscious industries, such as
aerospace and biomedical, are hesitant to adopt AM processes due to the frequent
occurrence of parts with hidden flaws. Traditional approaches for detecting and
correcting flaws involve determining and adjusting the process parameters that
lead to defects using a trial-and-error approach, which is expensive and time-
consuming. This innovative project utilizes a computational simulation software
to identify and correct design and processing problems before a part is printed.
Importantly, this approach will provide scientific insights into why certain
process parameters and part design features result in defect formation. This
efficient and cost-effective method for detecting and correcting flaws in AM
parts will enable their wide-spread commercialization and adoption. Ultimately,
using AM processes rather than traditional manufacturing may save businesses
time and resources while increasing part efficiency and reducing negative
environmental impacts.

This project will verify, validate, and commercialize a computational heat
transfer modeling approach to simulate the temperature distribution in parts
made using metal AM. This technology, which is based on the novel concept of
heat diffusion on graphs (graph theory), aims to predict and correct design and
processing problems before a part is printed. This capability would ultimately
lead to improved AM part quality and increased use of AM processes in precision-
critical industries. Existing simulation packages are expensive and incorporate
proprietary assumptions. Non-proprietary approaches, in turn, take hours, if not
days, to simulate the thermal history for a simple part. Prior work by the
research team has demonstrated that the graph theory approach is approximately
twenty times faster than non-proprietary methods and so computationally
lightweight that it could be deployed on a laptop or smartphone. In moving
toward commercializing the technology, the project team will employ practical
use case samples produced by their industrial partners. The work will address
two fundamental research questions: (1) What process conditions and part design
features are linked to specific temperature patterns and why? (2) What is the
influence of thermal history on flaw formation? The technical results from this
project may include a rigorous, experimentally validated, computationally
efficient, user-friendly, and industrially corroborated thermal simulation
approach that can be used for rapid physics-based optimization of part design
and process settings in metal AM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.