* 2322067
* EAGER: Transient Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) Flow in Brain Concussion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Liyun Wang, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 297,942.00

Impacts to the head are identiﬁed as the common cause of concussion injury. An
estimated 2.8 million people in the US sustain a traumatic brain injury (TBI)
annually which contributes 30.5% of all injury-related deaths and costs an
estimated $60 billion annually. To develop effective prevention and intervention
strategies, it is critical to understand how the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF)-bathed brain responds to sudden external impacts and what mechanical and
cellular mechanisms drive the pathological development of concussive brain
injury. However, due to the brain’s forbidding complexity, the small confines of
the subarachnoid space (SAS) between the skull and the brain, the extremely
transient feature, and the skull’s opacity preventing direct visualization of
any complex physical interactions between the CSF flow and the compliant brain,
the mechanism of brain concussion remains unclear. The proposal is aimed to
tackle this challenging problem by integrating innovative analytical, numerical,
and biomimetic approaches with concussion animal models to reveal, for the first
time, the crucial roles of transient CSF flow during brain concussion. The
project will fill a glaring knowledge gap, with high-payoff feature ensuing from
its potentials to guide the creation of effective head protection, reduce the
incidence of concussion, lead to significant cost savings, and benefit the
society by saving lives. The project will also encompass significant educational
activities, including curriculum reform, multi-year undergraduate research
program, and outreach programs for Annual Girl Scouts day and High School
Academy for Underrepresented Minorities at Villanova University (VU), the VU
Athletic Department and the local public libraries.

The goal of the project is to examine the transient cerebrospinal fluid flow in
the porous subarachnoid space (SAS) filled with arachnoid trabeculae (AT), as
the head is exposed to rapid external impacts, and hence to elucidate the
critical role of the CSF flow in transmitting and mitigating external impacts.
The proposal integrates analytical, numerical, experimental (biomimetic and
biomechanical) investigations, built upon solid and encouraging preliminary
study results. Analytical and numerical models, capturing the key CSF flow
physics that have been neglected to date, will be tested using a novel
biomimetic experimental platform, and further evaluated by in vivo biomechanical
study. The proposal is the first, and so far, the only study of its kind to
attempt to uncover a long-standing mystery in brain biomechanics. It is expected
to yield highly transformative results and provide the platform for future study
in this research area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.