* 2322665
* Creating a Path to Achieving Success and Sense of Belonging in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Rodica Neamtu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2029
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its six-year duration, this project will award a total of 112
scholarships to 28 talented undergraduate students, with a demonstrated
financial need, who are pursuing degrees in computer science at Worcester
Polytechnic Institute (WPI) in Worcester, Massachusetts. The project will
provide academic preparation for incoming students and create student-centered
support for cohort academic experiences based on previous studies of the
experiences of disadvantaged and marginalized students. This project will help
to close the gap between Pell-eligible and non-Pell-eligible students in their
retention and graduation rates in computer science, and prepare students for
success in graduate school and ultimately their professional careers.

The goals of this project include 1) closing the retention and graduation rate
gap between the low-income (Pell) scholars and non-Pell computing students, and
2) providing interconnected support opportunities to enhance the academic
performance and sense of belonging for students earning a B.S. degree in
computer science. To meet these goals the project will study, develop, and
implement an evidence-based network model where cohort peers connect, study
together, and build their computer science identity throughout their college
education. These activities will be evaluated based on the success, retention,
and graduation of low-income students in computing. This project will advance
our understanding of best practices and lessons that will assist other educators
to improve STEM education. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.