* 2322613
* Civil and Mechanical Engineering Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2024,01/31/2030
* Sean Tolman, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 01/31/2030
* USD 1,727,422.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Utah Valley University (UVU). UVU is a public institution of higher
education with a dual mission – that of a comprehensive university and that of
an open-admissions community college. Over its 6-year duration, the project will
fund scholarships to at least 36 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Civil Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. First-year
students may receive up to five years and transfer students up to three years of
scholarship support. The project will implement evidence-based practices to
support scholars as they progress through their programs of study. For example,
UVU’s accredited and well-designed baccalaureate programs in civil and
mechanical engineering will be enhanced by supports for tutoring, collaborative
projects, capstone projects, and internships. Faculty mentors will also help
scholars create an Individual Education and Development Plan (IEDP) that will
guide mentoring efforts, foster student growth, and increase student outcomes
for persistence, completion, and career preparation. The introduction of
e-portfolios will allow students to reflect on and synthesize their work in
various courses and activities, help build connections between classroom and
professional learning competencies, and prepare for graduate school application
and job interviews. Collaboration from industry partners in the form of mentors,
guest speakers, internships, and capstone projects will enrich the project. This
scholarship project will give low-income students an opportunity to benefit from
and contribute to the dynamic growth and catalytic impact of the mechanical and
civil engineering professions in this region and beyond.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
project aims to advance understanding about evidence-based, context-specific
interventions for STEM programs at an open-admissions university with a markedly
different student population from those at research-focused institutions. The
project addresses several institutionally identified attrition points in the
engineering educational pipeline at UVU, including high attrition of first- and
second-year students, slow pace of students to matriculation into the
professional program, and low participation and completion rates of women,
underrepresented minorities, and first-generation students. Based on data from
UVU’s prior Track 1 project and on research documenting the success of the
evidence-based practices to be employed, we anticipate that this project will
make a substantial difference in keeping participants in school, helping them
complete their degrees in a timely manner, and preparing a talented workforce
with the technical and soft skills to meet regional and national needs. We feel
this project has potential to inform other institutions with similar populations
and concerns. An external evaluator will help determine which interventions and
combinations of interventions are most impactful to students and most valued by
them. The successful outcomes of this scholarship project and noteworthy lessons
learned will be disseminated by the project team through publications and
presentations at engineering education conferences. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.