* 2322496
* Beginnings: Introducing Molecular Modeling Experiences to Underrepresented Students
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Armando Solis, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2026
* USD 998,665.00

Molecular modeling plays a pivotal role in biotechnology and drug discovery. To
foster innovation in this field, it is crucial for biotechnology companies to
have a diverse and well-trained workforce. One way to expand access to this
field is by equipping undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds
with industry-level knowledge. Experiential learning opportunities, in which
students learn-by-doing, is a particularly effective way to broaden
participation of these groups because it provides technical skills needed by
industry. A partnership between local public academia and industry will promote
the progress of science by providing better training to future scientists and
advance national health by broadening the pool of well-qualified biotechnology
workforce members. This project aims to empower underrepresented minority
students to actively participate in the biotechnology field and bring their
unique perspectives to the table. By diversifying the STEM workforce, the goals
are to enhance innovation, foster creativity, and develop more inclusive
solutions to global problems.

The initiative Introducing Molecular Modeling Experiences to underRepresented
StudEnts (IMMERSE) aims to promote a cross-sector partnership between LaGuardia
Community College and the New York City College of Technology, both of the City
University of New York (CUNY) system; and Schrödinger, a biotechnology industry
leader in molecular modeling software, headquartered in New York City. The goal
is to prepare undergraduate students for molecular modeling careers by
incorporating industry-driven problems to the classroom, and subsequent
participation in a Schrödinger internship program, that then leads to
specialized careers. To achieve this goal, the project team will provide
experiential learning in a multistage approach. First, in the classroom,
students will be taught molecular modeling concepts relevant to biotechnology.
Second, hands-on training will be provided to illustrate how to use the
molecular modeling tools in a step-by-step format. Third, paid internship
opportunities at Schrödinger will be provided, where students will learn-by-
doing, while also working on industry-relevant problems that will make them more
competitive in the job market. The expected outcome is highly trained and
diverse students who are well-equipped for a career in computational
biotechnology. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the
NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning
opportunities for individuals from diverse professional and educational
backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to, career pathways
in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.