* 2322069
* Ensemble-function Studies of Enzyme Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Todd Martinez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

Enzymes are the catalysts underlying all of biology, allowing reactions—that
otherwise would take decades, millennia or longer—to occur in less than a second
and providing catalysis for just the right reactions needed for biology. Given
their remarkable capabilities and their centrality to biology, enzymes have been
an intense subject of research for nearly a century. Resulting from this
research are many drugs and enzymes engineered to have practical value.
Nevertheless, understanding how enzymes achieve their extraordinary abilities
has remained elusive. Such an understanding should be quantitative, as
quantitative models are more complete, more readily tested, and more powerfully
used in practical applications. This proposal integrates a well-recognized
concept in physics into the study of enzymes, conformational ensembles. In
particular, there has been enormous progress at obtaining and now predicting
“the” structure of proteins. Yet, proteins do not exist as a single structure
but rather a complex “ensemble” of conformational states. These multiple states
are often involved in function, such as motor proteins that allow our heart and
other muscles to work, and, even when not directly involved, ensemble properties
are the missing linking in relating molecules to free energies, the energy
values that determine the probabilities of molecular events such as binding and
catalysis. This proposal links enzyme conformational properties to the ability
of the enzyme to catalyze (or speed) reactions, and, in the course of these
analysis, the molecular features that are responsible for catalysis will be
identified. Most broadly, this information will yield fundamental understanding
and provide hints and guidelines that may aid in the design of new enzymes for
practical use. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students.
Special efforts will be spent to mentor underrepresented minority students.

The overarching goal of this proposal is to develop quantitative models for
enzyme catalysis that are rooted in fundamental physics and chemistry.
Ensemble–function analysis provides the paradigm needed to achieve this goal.
Critically, ensembles, rather than static structures, are needed to obtain free
energies and thus reaction probabilities, based on the laws of statistical
mechanics. Ensembles are also needed to evaluate whether conformational states
and interactions observed in static structures are representative of the
population of molecules. This research will leverage existing structural data
and recent advances in obtaining crystallographic data at physiological
temperatures to obtain ensemble information using pseudo- ensembles and multi-
temperature (MT) X-ray crystallography. EnsemblePDB will be developed to rapidly
build pseudo-ensembles from the vast trove of existing Protein Data Bank
structures and to assess two fundamental aspects of catalysis: (1) What changes
occur across the reaction states? –thereby providing a minimal model for the
enzymatic reaction path; and (2) What are the energetic consequences of these
changes? –thereby providing quantitative models for the enzyme features
responsible for catalysis. To account for catalytic contributions from enzyme
features, the enzyme reaction is compared to the corresponding solution
reaction, using solution reaction paths obtained from quantum mechanical
calculations and the energetics of enzyme and solution interactions obtained
from energy functions derived from crystallographic data and from molecular
dynamics. This proposal will first apply this approach to serine proteases, the
near-universal textbook example for enzyme catalysis. Deliverables of the
proposal include: (1) A quantitative, atomic-level model of serine protease
catalysis; (2) Determination of catalytic features shared among evolutionarily-
related and evolutionarily-distinct enzymes and across enzymes carrying out
reactions with different chemical constraints; (3) Tests of evolutionary
mechanisms of enzyme cold-adaptation; and (4) In-depth determination of
temperature-dependent changes in enzyme conformational ensembles, information
that may be foundational for studying allostery and designing new enzymes. Most
broadly, the scientific achievements from this proposal have the potential to
catalyze a paradigm shift—from the currently dominant structure–function
approaches to ensemble–function studies that link structure to the energetics
that underlie function. They also have the potential to revolutionize the
teaching of enzyme mechanisms and unify teaching across scientific disciplines,
changing textbook descriptions from general and descriptive to specific models
based on fundamental chemistry and physics principles that are taught in
chemistry classes. This project was funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.