* 2322988
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Tamara Lehman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), renowned as the
premier forum for cutting-edge advancements in computer architecture, offers an
exceptional platform for exchange of state-of-the art research. This award
provides travel support for up to 75 students attending this flagship conference
on June 17-21, 2023, in Orlando, FL. Over the past five decades, ISCA has played
a pivotal role in fostering remarkable progress within the computing industry.
Distinguished attendees, representing both academia and industry from all over
the world, contribute to the conference’s diverse and vibrant atmosphere. Within
a wide array of sessions, the conference encompasses the latest developments
across many categories, including core microarchitecture topics, machine
learning, security, and much more. The keynotes delve into the historical
technological advancements of the past 50 years as chronicled through ISCA
publications. Through engaging social events, students have the invaluable
opportunity to interact with esteemed leaders in computing, both seasoned
professionals and rising stars. In 2023, ISCA proudly commemorates its 50th
anniversary, coinciding with the Federated Computing Research Conference (FCRC),
a collection of high-quality conferences and workshops in the broader field of
Computer Science, held once every four years.

The benefits of this award are threefold. Firstly, by promoting increased
student participation, it amplifies the visibility of the groundbreaking
research being presented while honoring the 50-year legacy of this premier
conference. Secondly, undergraduate and junior graduate students gain access to
exclusive programs such as “Meet a Senior Architect” and “Meet a Senior
Student,” which foster meaningful communication and interactions with
experienced professionals. These initiatives enhance the conference experience
by providing valuable mentorship opportunities. Lastly, the travel award places
a particular emphasis on supporting students from traditionally underrepresented
groups, aligning with ISCA’s commitment to diversity and inclusion. By
addressing financial barriers, the award strives to create a more inclusive
environment that reflects the broad spectrum of talent in the field of computer
Architecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.