* 2322411
* SBIR Phase I:  Design and Development of Minimally-Invasive Orthopedic Fracture Fixation Using Intramedullary Sleeve and Injectable, Light-Triggered Bone Cement
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Krishna Kolan, MEDICARBONE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2024
* USD 273,563.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the current challenges associated with
an increase in the incidence of orthopedic injuries and surgeries. The
technology will stabilize and repair broken bones in the US and globally.
Trauma, degenerative bone diseases, and bone tumors often result in broken bones
that require a procedure called intramedullary nailing. Intramedullary nailing
involves nailing metallic implants to bones stabilize bone fractures. This
procedure often results in complications such as infection, rotated limbs, and
failure to achieve complete rigidity, which may eventually lead to patient
discomfort and significantly increased costs due to revision surgeries.
Consequently, there is an urgent need for an intramedullary nail technology that
is less invasive, cost effective, and customizable to the patient’s anatomical
requirements to enable improved bone fracture healing and avoid burdensome
revision surgeries. When additional corrective surgery is required to treat any
post-operative infections or surgical placement mistakes, the implant removal
should be less invasive and not cause any additional morbidity. There are
currently no such proven technologies available that meet the above criteria.
This project will primarily focus on the development of an intramedullary (IM)
sleeve system with an in situ, photocurable, and removable polymeric resin
system. There are four main objectives: 1) design and development of a multi-
layered IM sleeve prototype, 2) synthesis and optimization of am in situ
photopolymerizable polymeric resin system in the IM sleeve, 3) removal of the
cured polymeric resin system from the IM sleeve using minimally invasive tools
and methods, and 4) in vitro, in vivo biocompatibility, and demonstration of the
customized IM prototype device in a sheep cadaveric tibia bone. The research
will generate new knowledge in designing and synthesizing a novel polymer
formulation with additives that helps in fast setting with improved mechanical
properties. The project will also enable extraction of photocured polymers using
existing removal technologies. For physicians, this research could result in
novel, minimally invasive treatments that could drastically reduce the surgical
time and improve the patient recovery times.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.