* 2322029
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Community Informed AI-Based Vehicle Technology Simulator with Behavioral Strategies to Advance Neurodiverse Independence and Employment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

One in 36 individuals in the US has autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Each year in
the US, approximately 70,000 autistic children become autistic adults and face a
litany of disheartening statistics regarding independent living, community
participation, and employment. The estimated cost of supporting Americans with
autism having limited employment prospects will grow to $461 billion per year by
2025. One key to addressing this civic challenge is employment; some 85 percent
of autistic adults are un/under-employed, and adults with autism rate employment
as their top concern for improved quality of life. However, a major impediment
for autistic individuals to access work opportunities and a life of
independence, is lack of independence with transportation; fewer than 30 percent
of driving-age autistic individuals are licensed to drive. The CIVIC Stage 2
award to Vanderbilt University will support the rapid pilot deployment of the
team’s AI-based Vehicle Technology Simulator with Behavioral Strategies (AI-
VTSBS) system, specifically designed for the ASD population – comprising a
virtual-reality driving simulator with artificial intelligence-based analysis
and feedback, together with a curriculum built on a cognitive behavioral
intervention for driving – to address this critical civic need. The project will
perform community-based participatory research including multiple stakeholders
to make the AI-VTSBS system adaptable to use within multiple employment contexts
and multiple employment outcomes of relevance to stakeholder communities.

The team led by Vanderbilt University and partner San Diego State University
will build on its work on Stage 1 and will conduct a full Stage 2 pilot
deployment with multiple types of civic partners and support providers –
including community-based vocational training centers, behavioral health
clinics, and secondary schools – toward an effective, low-cost,
commercializable, integrated driving-instruction platform and curriculum, with a
value proposition that offers increased independence and expanded career options
for autistic people. The Stage 2 research pilot project will use an
implementation science framework involving Exploration, Preparation,
Implementation and Sustainment (EPIS) to specifically assess and pilot-test
deployment factors with both qualitative and quantitative methods. Additionally,
the AI-VTSBS technology may also be generalizable beyond adults with autism;
some 1 in 6 people have a related neurodevelopmental disability (e.g., ADHD) or
temporary cognitive impairment (e.g., traumatic brain injury) that manifest
similar challenges for transportation independence. The CIVIC Stage 2 work will
be integrated with the NSF NRT program in Neurodiversity Inspired Science &
Engineering (NISE) through Vanderbilt University’s Frist Center for Autism &
Innovation, thus providing advanced training for students in interdisciplinary
research and translation.

CIVIC is a joint collaboration with Department of Energy, Department of Homeland
Security, and the National Science Foundation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.