* 2322713
* SHF: Small: Explainable Machine Learning for Better Design of Very Large Scale Integrated Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Azadeh Davoodi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,756.00

With the advance of chip technology, Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits (IC-CAD) becomes more complex, challenging, and time-consuming. Recent
years have seen a rising trend of artificial intelligence (AI) applied to
different stages of chip design and manufacturing. The incorporation of AI has
been shown to make the chip design process more efficient and reliable by
providing early feedback to predict potential failures within the design cycle.
The goal of this project is to utilize the emerging field of Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI) to transform the utility of AI within the chip
design process. This project is immediately relevant to AI-assisted chip design
by providing an important explainability dimension. Explainability provides an
understanding of why a design is predicted to be failing and root-causing it. It
also allows the designer to identify the best strategy to avoid the failure from
occurring later in the design cycle. Explanations made with XAI have the
potential to transform the traditional chip design process by providing
effective and early feedback about AI-predicted failures, enhancing
trustworthiness to AI predictions, and overall developing a novel paradigm for
designers to collaborate with the IC-CAD tools. Research findings from this
project will be of immediate interest to IC-CAD and chip design companies
because of their promise to reduce time-to-market of electronic products and
align well with the 2022 Semiconductor CHIPS Act. The project will provide
research opportunities for top undergraduate students, primarily targeting women
and minorities. The investigator will present research findings of this project
to domestic semiconductor and IC-CAD companies to provide opportunities for
internship, employment, and collaboration which directly contribute to workforce
development and enhance competitiveness of the United States in the global
semiconductor market.

The tasks in the project cover a wide range of cases within the chip design flow
including: (1) investigating how XAI can be used to avoid design rule violations
on the chip layout early-on in the design cycle; (2) investigating how XAI can
better guide optimizations related to synthesis of machine learning applications
in hardware; (3) investigating the benefits of XAI for chip layout obfuscation
against AI-based security attacks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.