* 2322502
* Collaborative Research: Interfacial Phenomena of Functional Solutes Impregnated into Cellulose Packaging Substrates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James Sheehan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2026
* USD 252,645.00

Packaging is essential to everyday life. It protects our food and medicine and
facilitates the safe transport of goods across the country and around the world.
Plastics-based packaging has become popular because it offers better barrier
properties than traditional paper-based packaging, which helps preserve the
quality and safety of packaged products. Despite the benefits of plastic
packaging, the poor end-of-life characteristics and recycling challenges often
lead to environmental pollution. This research project seeks to develop a
sustainable and functional paper-based alternative to plastic packaging that can
be manufactured using renewable feedstocks and green chemistry technologies.
Bio-based compounds extracted from agricultural waste will be impregnated into
paper to improve the material’s functionality and barrier properties. The
molecular-level interactions between paper and bio-based compounds will be
examined to develop a competitive and sustainable alternative to plastic
packaging. To increase diversity in STEM fields and promote economic prosperity,
this project will engage high school, undergraduate, and graduate students from
backgrounds and groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.
Additionally, outreach events will enhance public awareness of sustainable
packaging practices.

This project is jointly funded by the Interfacial Engineering program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The research
aims to develop next-generation sustainable packaging materials, with favorable
performance and end-of-life characteristics, by engineering cellulosic
substrates with improved barrier properties. This will be accomplished using the
supercritical impregnation (SCI) methodology, where supercritical carbon dioxide
(ssCO2) is used to impregnate bioderived solutes into cellulose matrices. The
fundamental interfacial phenomena governing solute adsorption onto the
cellulosic fibers will be determined. Two model solute systems – aliphatic and
aromatic - and cosolvents have been chosen to represent the chemical species
derived from agricultural residues. The aliphatic solute system is expected to
yield desirable hydrophobic properties for the packaging material, and the
aromatic solute system is expected to impart UV-absorbent properties. The
initial adsorption kinetics of the solutes onto the cellulosic fibers will be
measured using state-of-the-art quartz crystal microbalance (QCM-D)
instrumentation and modeled to quantify the impact of the process conditions
influencing rate constants. In operando near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopic
studies will elucidate fundamental bonding and partitioning processes that
facilitate SCI of paper substrates, including the hydrogen-bonding of
interfacing cellulosic fibers, the influence of scCO2-cosolvent interactions on
hydrogen-bonding, and the impact of scCO2-cosolvent-cellulose interactions on
solute partitioning into cellulose. Lastly, relationships between solute
diffusion mechanisms and the resultant distribution of solutes throughout
cellulosic matrices will be evaluated via digital imaging analyses, with
functional improvements assessed via contact angle and light transmittance
measurements for the two systems, respectively. This research contributes to
society in multiple ways, including developing sustainable packaging materials,
advancing the potential of bioderived solutes as packaging additives, providing
research opportunities for underrepresented students, and educating the
community on sustainable packaging benefits through outreach events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.