* 2322023
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Participatory Action Research to Enhance Equity and Prevent Moral Injury in Community Paramedicine
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Soma de Bourbon, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Community paramedicine (CP) has emerged as a vital component of emergency
medical services, providing non-police responses to mental health crises.
Community paramedics are exposed to challenging circumstances, which may lead to
moral distress and injury. This scope of work requires equity-oriented practices
to improve the delivery of critical services to vulnerable community members
experiencing homelessness, mental health crises, and addiction. This project
uses a participatory action research approach to prevent moral injury among CP
first responders and improve their equity-based understanding and practices in
working with vulnerable populations. This collaborative effort led by civic
partner San Francisco Fire Department, research partners from San José State
University and the Veterans Health Administration, and with collaboration from
Richmond Area Multi-Services Inc., seeks to enhance the well-being of CP first
responders while improving the equitable delivery of critical services to
vulnerable community members. The project’s overarching goal is to strengthen CP
work to improve the wellbeing of residents of San Francisco, ultimately creating
sustainable outcomes scalable across the U.S. This study aims to address two
interrelated gaps in research and innovation: moral injury and equity. While
each is independently important, we theorize that they operate in a self-
amplifying feedback loop, whereby witnessing inequities causes moral distress
and sets the stage for moral injury. In turn, CP members who are emotionally
numb and disengaged as a result of moral injury and burnout are more likely to
engage in practices that, while likely unintentional, reinforce inequities by
causing harm to clients, rather than intervening to reduce disparities. Although
extensive research exists on the evaluation and treatment of moral injury in
military veterans and moral distress among nurses, there has been no prior
research evaluating, preventing or treating moral distress or injury among
Emergency Medical Technicians (EMTs) or paramedics. There is also no prior
research examining the effectiveness of training for EMTs or paramedics on
equity. This intervention study fills a critical gap by evaluating moral
distress and injury using validated scales and identifying indicators of
workplace functioning for first responders that are meaningful to clients and
agencies. The targeted interventions include equity and ethics conversations,
individual skills training, and public education campaigns to create a
supportive and trauma-informed environment within the SFFD CP Division and
strengthen equity capacity. We will pilot a novel data integration strategy to
improve completeness and accuracy of CP data to evaluate disparities in CP key
performance indicators.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.