* 2322308
* CC* Storage: EnviStor: A Repository for Supporting Collaborative Interdisciplinary Research on South Florida's Built and Natural Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The South Florida region is home to nearly 10 million people, and the population
is growing. The region faces several challenges, such as rising sea levels and
flooding, harmful algae blooms, water contamination, and wildlife habit loss,
which affects the economy and the welfare of its population. Florida
International University (FIU) will build EnviStor, which aims to be a centrally
managed Petabyte scale storage system that is also a clearing house for
supporting interdisciplinary research and modeling involving both built and
natural environments in South Florida. EnviStor provides opportunities for
students (75% of whom coming from underrepresented groups in STEM) and faculty
to enhance their knowledge of database management, focusing on interoperability.
EnviStor facilitates inter and intra-campus capabilities, augmenting the current
FIU storage capabilities from the Terabyte to the Petabyte scale through a low-
latency, high-performance, and cost-effective architecture to facilitate the
creation of science data products. Data backups will be sent to the cloud,
ensuring data preservation. In addition, the architecture will include
interfaces that facilitate the sharing of datasets at intra- and inter-campus
levels. EnviStor will share 20% of its storage resources by federating with the
OSDF (Open Science Data Federation) and leveraging FIU’s Dataverse repository.
This effort is also supported by National Discovery Cloud for Climate (NDC-C)
resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.