* 2322297
* SBIR Phase I:  Simultaneous Transmit-Receive and Full-Duplex Millimeter-Wave Massive Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Jeyanandh Paramesh, TERASPATIAL INC
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,959.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the demand for high-speed, secure, reliable,
ubiquitous wireless connectivity, driven by digital transformation in the
commercial and defense sectors. The widespread use of the millimeter-wave
(mmWave) spectrum is essential to meet this demand, despite the release of new
spectrum below 10 GHz (which will help in the short term, but not by itself be
able to satisfy overall demand). The last few years have seen first-generation
deployments of mmWave systems mainly for mobile access applications to
smartphones. However, mmWave networks have not become widespread, due to
significant pain points and challenges that remain in terms of coverage,
capacity, reliability, ease of deployment, and total cost of ownership.
Moreover, the high energy consumption of current 5G systems is estimated to have
a significant impact on global carbon emissions and network operators’ energy
costs. This project comprises three elements: enabling high-speed broadband
access for all Americans; deploying a reliable, high-speed, low-latency wireless
connectivity in the manufacturing, industrial and energy infrastructure sectors,
and building partnerships with academia to enhance the American STEM workforce.
Optimized solutions have an annual market estimate of $10 billion.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
technologies for efficient, practical and low-cost Multiple-Input and Multiple-
Output (MIMO) full-duplex radios operating in high frequency spectral bands and
will pave the way for their eventual commercial implementation in future
wireless networks. This project will adopt a holistic, inter-disciplinary
approach to develop hardware-software system solutions encompassing novel
silicon and novel algorithms to enable better use of spatial, temporal and
frequency resources. If successful, the developed solutions can eventually lead
to greater coverage, higher reliability, lower latency, more efficient spectrum
usage, and also higher performance, lower power and cost. The team is building
mmWave system (software + silicon) solutions that efficiently form and
intelligently steer beams to enable better use of the spatial domain. The
solutions can lead to greater coverage, higher reliability, lower latency, more
efficient spectrum usage, and also higher performance, lower power and cost. To
this end, the mmWave MIMO radios are based on two core principles: “digitalized”
hardware created by designing advanced digital/hybrid MIMO radios and integrated
artificial intelligence (AI)/ machine learning (ML)-based algorithms tightly
into the radio/physical layer. While the above goals are by themselves a
significant advance over the state-of-the-art, the aim in Phase I is to
specifically focus on solving technical challenges to implement mmWave full-
duplex MIMO communication in wireless networks of the future, and to eventually
drive this technology towards commercial adoption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.