* 2322853
* Discrete Structural Optimization through a Sequential Decision Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gordon Warn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 364,032.00

The aim of this award is to derive a rigorous and highly effective discrete
structural optimization framework by converging structural optimization
principles and sequential decision-making algorithms. Structural optimization is
a design technique that is used to identify material-efficient design solutions
and is widely used in many disciplines, including civil, aerospace, and
mechanical engineering. Hence, new design frameworks that are capable of
identifying novel and efficient solutions can improve design outcomes and be
broadly beneficial by, for example, reducing the consumption of natural
resources, reducing embodied carbon, improving safety and serviceability, and
enhancing aesthetics. Civil structures, for example those made from steel or
timber, are often constructed with standardized elements. Optimizing such
structures using conventional approaches can be computationally inefficient,
limited in application, or introduce approximation into the solution. By framing
discrete structural optimization as a sequential decision process, that can be
adeptly solved with contemporary artificial intelligence techniques, the derived
framework will be particularly well suited for optimizing engineered systems
constructed from standardized elements, thus leading directly to highly
efficient discrete solutions and improving design outcomes. The research will be
complemented by the development of an educational software application, intended
for K-12 and undergraduate level students in STEM fields, that will be made
publicly available to promote broad adoption and an inclusive learning
opportunity about structural behavior, design, and optimization when presented
as a game. The research will also provide opportunities to teach, train, and
mentor students from underrepresented groups in an emerging area through
outreach to various diversity programs and student organizations.

The specific goal of this research is to discover the knowledge necessary to
frame discrete structural optimization as a Markov Decision Process that can be
adaptly solved with deep reinforcement learning techniques so as to derive a
rigorous and highly effective discrete structural optimization framework. Thus,
the specific research objectives of this project are to: (i) investigate how
best to define the actions of the Markov Decision Process to include both
topological and parametric components so as to accommodate the discrete design
variables representing standardized element cross-sectional geometries; (ii)
investigate and derive deep reinforcement learning solution architectures
tailored for the discrete structural optimization problem; (iii) extend the
frameworkâ€™s applicability to the prominent volume minimization optimization
problem; (iv) apply the framework to various design examples to validate and
benchmark the learned policies and synthesized solutions; and (v) integrate
selected design examples from the preceding objective into the development of
the educational application/software where the design of truss and frame
structures is presented as a game based upon sequential decision making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.