* 2322554
* Beginnings: Preparing Autistic Students for the AI Workforce
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Andrew Begel, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2025
* USD 779,925.00

The project aims to serve the national interest by addressing the shortage of
talent in the emerging technology of artificial intelligence (AI) through
reaching out to untapped populations, such as autistic STEM community college
students. Autistic people often demonstrate a strong affinity for STEM; however,
they suffer from an 80% unemployment rate due to social stigma and
discrimination. Carnegie-Mellon University and Pennsylvania State University at
University Park has assembled a team of experts to develop innovative
pedagogical materials and scalable tools to teach AI technical skills through a
"learning-by-doing" experience, teach crucial team collaboration and
communication skills through AI-focused project-based learning, and facilitate
autistic community college students to obtain AI-focused summer internships and
increase their access to AI careers.

The program will use a strengths-based approach to provide strategies and
supports that allow individuals with autism to engage confidently, competently,
and with a positive sense of self when navigating the complex and challenging
social environment of the workplace. The project’s pedagogical innovations
include the human factors and user interface design to support AI subject-matter
experts, mentors, and teachers learning to teach autistic students. Special
education experts in autism who specialize in teaching communication, social,
and teaming skills will support project mentors in their day-to-day learning
experiences. Online training will be employed to reach more autistic students
and also make the online course materials available to community college
teachers to offer this course at their own schools. This project will not only
address the employment gap by establishing innovative pathways for autistic
students to specialize in AI careers, but more importantly, debunk the harmful
stereotypes and change the exclusionary norms that impact their employment. This
project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU
Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for
individuals from diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase
their interest in, and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.