* 2322154
* The effects of holoparasitism on plant organellar translation and tRNA metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daniel Sloan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

The mitochondria and chloroplasts found in eukaryotes are derived from bacteria
and retain their own genomes and their own molecular machinery for protein
translation. This translation machinery is more conserved and bacterial-like in
plants than in other eukaryotes. To test the hypothesis that the intense demands
for protein production associated with photosynthesis are responsible for the
natural selection that conserves plant mitochondrial and chloroplast translation
machinery, this project will investigate the evolution of holoparasitic plants.
These organisms have entirely lost the ability to photosynthesize and instead
acquire energy by tapping into the vasculature of a host plant or consuming soil
fungi. Many genes have been lost from the organellar genomes of these plants,
and this research will help understand how bacterial-like enzymes can be
functionally replaced by their eukaryotic counterparts even after billions of
years of evolutionary divergence. In addition, it will provide insights into how
the very last remaining genes in mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes can be
lost and thereby complete the final steps of integrating these organelles into
the eukaryotic cell. The project will also provide training for researchers at
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels in bioinformatics, molecular
genetics, biochemistry, and evolutionary biology. It will also be coupled with
international collaborations, outreach workshops, and a program for first-year
undergraduates to broaden access to career opportunities in computational
biology.

Initial observations indicate that numerous components of the mitochondrial and
chloroplast translation machinery in holoparasites have been lost and
functionally replaced with corresponding machinery from the cytosol that is
typically responsible for translating proteins encoded by nuclear genes. The
perturbations to organellar translation machinery resulting from loss of
photosynthesis appear to be associated with extensive rewiring of interactions
between tRNAs and aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs). These changes will be
assessed through a combination of comparative genomics, subcellular localization
analysis (fluorescence microscopy), specialized tRNA sequencing methods, and in
vitro aminoacylation assays. These analyses will determine the extent to which
changes in subcellular targeting and aaRS substrate specificity facilitate the
process of gene loss and functional replacement. They will also determine how
the well-characterized parallel roles of chloroplast tRNA-Glu in both
translation and tetrapyrrole biosynthesis can both be functionally replaced,
leading to the loss of this gene and eventually to the loss of the entire
chloroplast genome.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.