* 2322816
* Conference: Synthetic Biology: Engineering, Evolution and Design (SEED) Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Evan Flach, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 04/30/2024
* USD 43,550.00

The 2023 Synthetic Biology, Engineering, Evolution and Design (SEED) Conference
will have an expanded range of topics and will emphasize burgeoning areas of
synthetic biology such as synthetic applications for climate change and
sustainability, and microbiome engineering for food and the environment. The
broader range of topics will allow the conference to host scientists and
engineers with diverse backgrounds. The conference will also allow students and
early career professionals to share their work and learn about new advances in a
rapidly growing field. Additionally, the conference will promote the continuous
growth of members of the synthetic biology community, encouraging discussions
among normally separated scientists and engineers and encouraging
collaborations, which are critical for the development of new synthetic
technologies and applications for biotechnology, agriculture and medicine.

Over the past decade, the field of synthetic biology has rapidly developed from
a research-based, theoretical discipline to one that is impacting society and
will continue to grow in applications into the future. Since 2014, SEED has been
the primary technical conference to gather people working in synthetic biology,
including engineers, biologists, chemists, electrical engineers, computer
scientists and more. The conference gathers an interdisciplinary audience to
share technical presentations on cutting edge research and applications, network
to develop relationships and connect people who may otherwise not have an
opportunity to interact. Attendees include leaders in the field, established
researchers, early career professionals and trainees who will lead the field in
the coming decades. SEEDâ€™s goal is to share insights into next-generation
development strategies in synthetic biology research and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.