* 2322350
* MCA Pilot PUI: Leveraging machine learning to better understand biodiversity patterns measured through passive acoustic sampling
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* John Quinn, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 11/30/2026
* USD 282,131.00

New technologies are increasing the amount of data available that measures and
monitors biological systems, helping to answer long-standing questions in
biology and opening new research directions. For example, acoustic data
collected across a range of ecosystem types can be used to address questions in
animal communication, the role of human noise in soundscapes, and population
dynamics. However, these data often require new skills to process and
understand. This mid-career advancement project will partner the principal
investigator with a leader in the bioacoustics analysis field to leverage new
machine learning tools to address these questions. Conversely, the rich acoustic
data being processed will also be used to validate and improve the machine
learning tools. Broader impacts of the research will include increasing the
number of individuals trained to use next-generation analytical tools like
machine learning for ecological research, via research-based coursework,
undergraduate research experiences, and workshops at professional conferences.
The research will be shared via traditional scholarly outputs as well as a
unique percussion production for diverse audiences. Ultimately, this project
will facilitate alignment of multiple lines of research and scholarship for the
principal investigator, shaping a clear trajectory of increasingly impactful
research.

This project will contribute to advancements in the application of passive
acoustic sampling and machine learning to address fundamental biological
questions. This research will use a rich acoustic dataset from diverse
ecosystems including forests, farmland, and urban environments. The project will
advance, with improved analyses and precise classification of sounds and noise,
three lines of inquiry: 1) how noise affects bird vocalizations and
communications, but with increased consistency in measuring bird songs as
compared to past research; 2) quantification of acoustic indices as proxies for
biodiversity, and in particular how to define and filter anthrophony; and 3) how
occupancy modeling for conservation applications can be improved by passive
acoustic sampling. This project will also train the next generation of students
and researchers in machine learning techniques for biodiversity research via
curriculum advancement and workshops.

This project is jointly funded by the Population and Community Ecology Cluster
in the Division of Environmental Biology, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.