* 2322172
* MCA: Support Engaging and Inclusive STEM Education with Extended Reality (SEISE-XR)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Wei Wu, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 345,237.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming STEM education
at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) with innovative extended reality (XR)
technologies. XR can enhance active learning, increase student engagement, and
improve learning outcomes in STEM subjects, especially in undergraduate
settings, and particularly for students with historically excluded identities.
However, the widespread use of XR in STEM education faces numerous challenges.
One critical deficiency is the lack of training and support for faculty to
effectively and confidently integrate XR into their teaching. This project
studies six STEM faculty at Fresno State who are engaged in a faculty learning
community around XR integration in undergraduate STEM classes. The project will
examine how their participation in the faculty learning community affects their
perceptions and skills around XR integration, and connect their work in the
faculty learning community with their implementation of XR in their classrooms.
Through close analysis of their development and implementation, this project
will generate new knowledge about how support faculty in using new technologies
in the classroom.

This MCA project aims to study faculty’s integration of XR to design engaging
and inclusive STEM learning experiences at HSIs, informed by the Technological,
Pedagogical, and Content Knowledge (TPACK) framework. Through an ethnographic
research study of six STEM faculty, the research team will investigate how the
TPACK framework informs and intersects with the ways in which STEM faculty grow
to use XR in their classes. This study will document, describe, analyze, and
interpret the development of faculty participants’ shared behavior patterns,
beliefs, and culture of using XR in STEM teaching. Classroom observation data
and instructional materials will be gathered to develop a snapshot of their
understanding and document evidence of the faculty’s enactment of TPACK when
using XR. Reflective journals, semi-structured interviews, and focus groups will
be used to illuminate the process of faculty’s XR integration knowledge
development and investigate how the shared culture in the community of practice,
interaction with peers and students in the classroom, and changes in beliefs
drive this process of faculty growth. As an MCA project, the principal
investigator will develop research skills in ethnographic methods through
targeted training and close collaboration with a mentor. This project is
supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of
undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of students pursuing associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.