* 2322593
* Beginnings: Creating and Sustaining a Diverse Community of Expertise in Quantum Information Science (EQUIS) Across the Southeastern United States
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lei Qian, Fisk University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2026
* USD 90,031.00

The project aims to serve the national interest by introducing Quantum
Information Science and Engineering (QISE) education to partnering institutions
in the Southeastern United States. Quantum technology, using QISE concepts, has
the potential to change the world. For this emerging field, educating the
workforce and broadening participation in QISE now are crucial to prepare future
generations for related emerging technology fields and enabling the development
of QISE practical applications. Five universities – the University of Tennessee
at Chattanooga, Middle Tennessee State University, Tennessee Tech, Fisk
University, and Auburn University – have assembled a team of experts to provide
QISE training to community colleges and universities in the Southeast, including
first-generation college students, women, and historically underrepresented
populations in STEM.

The project will focus on four main thrusts: experiential learning in QISE, QISE
workforce development, fostering regional QISE partnerships, and broadening QISE
participation. The teaching model embraces three elements: a tailored quantum
computing curriculum, experiential learning, and a strong mentorship network.
The curriculum culminates in a multi-tier online certificate program, providing
learners with the flexibility needed to master technical nuances at their own
pace. Theoretical learning is complemented by a hands-on approach via workshops,
faculty-guided research, and exposure to national labs and industry experiences.
By establishing a replicable methodology for experiential learning, the project
serves as a blueprint for similar programs where access to QISE education
remains limited. To ensure sustainability, the project will actively engage
local, regional, and national companies, labs, and organizations. This project
aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates,
as it seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from
diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in,
and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.