* 2322428
* MCA: Geosymbiotic interactions as innovation in Earth and environmental systems: Feedbacks between biological activity, chemical gradients and mineral phases at the pore scale
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jasquelin Pena, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 448,915.00

Microbe-mineral interactions govern contaminant, carbon and nutrient
transformation, and thus are critical to ecosystem function. Moreover, these
biogeochemical interactions and their products can be harnessed to provide
science-based solutions to many environmental and technological challenges. The
goal of this project is to provide explicit spatially and temporally resolved
rates and mechanisms of biogeochemical reactions in metal-microbe-mineral
systems by developing new analytical and imaging tools. This project will
provide research experiences to community college transfer students and
underrepresented undergraduate students intending to pursue graduate degrees.
The PI will leverage the creative advances facilitated by her MCA research to
develop new educational products, including materials for a new laboratory-based
course, “Microfluidics Labs”. Finally, this project will enhance research
infrastructure through the addition of optical fluorescence and infrared
microscopes to the X-ray microprobe beamline at the Stanford Synchrotron
Radiation Lightsource as well as the development of new image analysis
workflows.

This project will develop analytical and imaging capabilities that shift the
paradigm for studying biogeochemical transformations in confined spaces. The
goal is to quantify the chemical and biological feedbacks that shape metal-
microbe-mineral interactions. Using manganese biomineralization as a case study,
the PI will provide spatially- and temporally-explicit measurements of
biological activity (bioreporter gene fusions) and aqueous environmental
conditions (optode sensor films) coupled to biofilm chemistry (FTIR) and metal
speciation and mineral precipitation (X-ray fluorescence). This approach will
provide unparalleled insight into chemical transformations that occur within a
cell’s immediate environment. Determination of reaction rates and mechanisms
through measurements of average properties often fail to reproduce macroscopic
behavior or provide correct mechanisms; the focus on the chemistry occurring at
the cellular level enable the researchers to develop accurate mechanistic rates.
Additionally, the visualization of phenotypic heterogeneity within microbial
communities and chemical transformations will deepen the understanding of
geosymbiotic interactions in environmental systems.

This project is jointly funded by the Geobiology and Low Temperature
Geochemistry Program and the Division of Earth Sciences to support projects that
increase research capabilities, capacity and infrastructure at a wide variety of
institution types, as outlined in the GEO EMBRACE DCL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.