* 2322189
* A Financial, Academic, and Socio-emotional Support Ecosystem for Talented Low-income Students in Biology, Chemistry, and Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Matias Cafaro, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2028
* USD 2,499,413.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez, a Hispanic Serving Institution.
Over its 5-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to 36 unique
full-time undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, and/or Psychology. Two cohorts of first-year students will receive up
to four years of scholarship funds through this project. The project proposes an
ecosystem of three components: 1) financial, 2) academic, and 3) socio-emotional
support for increasing retention and persistence of undergraduate students in
preparation for STEM careers of national demand. It aims to increase student
persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective co-curricular
activities, including mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, graduate
school preparation, participation in discipline-specific conferences, and a
comprehensive emotional support system. Because the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez has a high population of students who are underrepresented in their
pursuit of STEM fields of study, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM disciplines and to learn how mentoring, research
experiences, socio-emotional support, and other activities support retention and
graduation of this student population.

The overall goal of the project is to increase degree completion of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields. Three specific aims guide the
execution of the project. First is to provide the financial, academic, and
socio-emotional support needed to expand personal and professional capabilities
necessary to successfully complete the students' programs of study on time.
Second is to implement an ecosystem of proven financial, academic, and socio-
emotional support strategies, and to study the effect of that ecosystem on
persistence and student success. Third, and finally, is to contribute knowledge
about the implementation and sustainability of effective evidence-based co-
curricular activities on student intent to pursue graduate education and/or
enter the STEM workforce. Psychosocial, non-cognitive factors, such as personal
crises, parental job instability, and lack of robust support systems, have
generally been demonstrated to affect student persistence in STEM. In addition,
low-income students often face additional challenges such as natural disasters,
family emergencies, income, food and housing insecurity, responsibilities
towards siblings, interruptions in education and limited social networks. An
integrated approach encompassing financial, socio-emotional, and academic
support for low-income students in this project can effectively address the
multifaceted issues faced by this population. This project will investigate the
effects of psychosocial and stress factors with a model that directly focuses on
addressing these students' socio-emotional and academic support needs beyond
financial assistance. Cohort building activities will be designed to establish a
sense of community and belonging among students. The project includes workshops,
study groups, site visits, and social events designed to support students. The
evaluation of the project’s model will employ a longitudinal observation
approach with regular collection of data such as retention rate, academic
progress, satisfaction with the program, professional interests, and students’
ability to visualize the possibilities for personal and professional
development, job opportunities, and skills required for success. In addition,
researchers will probe stress-coping behavior through student interviews and
open-ended questions, and promote growth mindset and social belonging for
college students. The collected data will be subjected to comprehensive analysis
and evaluation. The findings will provide valuable insights into the impact of
the interventions on the cohort's academic, economic, and socio-emotional well-
being. This knowledge will refine and improve the interventions and inform
future policies and practices aimed at supporting low-income talented students.
Ultimately, the goal is to foster a nurturing environment that empowers these
students to thrive academically, overcome economic barriers, and maintain
positive overall well-being. The project's findings hold significant potential
to benefit other institutions that serve low-income, highly vulnerable STEM
students, including minority-serving institutions. Results of this project will
be made available by presentations at national conferences and publications
within the education community. To make the project’s approach accessible to a
broader audience, researchers will provide online modules for faculty
professional development. These modules will cover trauma-informed advising
techniques, equipping faculty members with the necessary tools and knowledge to
support students effectively. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.