* 2322395
* Beginnings: Experiential Learning for Biomanufacturing Needs in Emerging Technologies
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Terri Quenzer, MiraCosta College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project strengthens pathways for underrepresented community college
students to access biotechnology and biomanufacturing careers. It will do so by
weaving together experiential learning activities, mentoring, and academic
supports to bolster STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
awareness and opportunity. Activities are focused in the three major bioscience
regions of California (Bay Area, Los Angeles/ Orange County, and San Diego), and
include internship, pre-apprenticeship, and apprenticeship experience in
biomanufacturing emerging technologies, creating a potentially replicable model
for other states. Students gain hands-on experience and skills needed in
emerging biotechnologies while working toward career goals. Participation in
STEM cohort activities will help students from groups underrepresented in STEM
gain confidence and see biotechnology careers as option for their futures. They
will have the opportunity to help society increase sustainability and reduce
environmental impact by contributing to new solutions for safe production of
food, medicines, and therapeutics. Industries benefit by meeting growth demands
with an inclusive, diverse, and skilled workforce aligned with regional
economies.

This biomanufacturing internship project lead by MiraCosta Community College
plans to expand interest in, knowledge of, and employability of community
college students in emerging technology biomanufacturing careers. Community
colleges are at the heart of robust pathways to successful careers in
biomanufacturing that offer individuals both lateral and upward mobility.
Community college certificate and degree programs provide students with
practical knowledge and transferable technical and professional skills in
biotechnology and biomanufacturing. This knowledge will be strengthened through
hands-on experiential learning activities conducted at partner locations that
will provide students with the skills, training, and mentoring to build
confidence and prepare them for internships and apprenticeships in emerging
biotechnologies. This project will help to create a sense of STEM identity among
students, through peer-to-peer connections, presentations, and virtual
workshops. The project taps into a network of college, industry, and workforce
development partners throughout the state of California to establish internship,
pre-apprenticeship, and apprenticeship opportunities for students. Measurable
outcomes include impact of mentorship and micro-internships on retention,
completion, and employment for diverse students. This project aligns with the
NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to
support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse
professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and
their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.