* 2322454
* The Inclusive Mathematical and Physical Sciences Student Success Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* CELIL EKICI, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2029
* USD 1,872,594.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, a Hispanic-serving institution in
south Texas. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30
full-time first-year students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in mathematics,
physics, chemistry, atmospheric science, and environmental science for up to
five years. To further support scholars, the project will implement four
important interventions. First is a summer bridge program that provides
intensive immersion activities in mathematics and science for first-year
students to help them transition smoothly into college. Second is a hierarchical
mentoring program that utilizes evidence-based, student-centered academic and
learning community support strategies to enhance students’ learning experiences
throughout the duration of the scholarship. Third is the development of
workforce-ready marketable skills that include both technical and essential
professional skills in collaboration with industry partners. Fourth, and
finally, is a research/industry shadowing program that provides opportunities
for students to engage in authentic research/industry experiences by working
closely with mentors. Ultimately, student financial support combined with this
wide range of high impact opportunities will prepare talented low-income
students from South Texas to confidently enter the workforce as well-prepared
scientists and engineers.

The overall goal of this project is to increase the participation and completion
rates of STEM degrees among low-income, high-achieving undergraduate students
with demonstrated financial need. While there is clear evidence for the lack of
diversity in much of the STEM workforce, examining the impact of various efforts
at increasing participation in STEM fields is an ongoing effort. The scope of
this project is to examine the impact of various interventions on students’ STEM
identity formation, academic achievement, graduation rates, and post-graduation
placement. Differences in these measures between scholars and other STEM
students will be compared in a multi-pronged assessment effort. The results of
this work will advance understanding of the impact of a well-resourced
scholarship program on student retention and success at a minority university.
By fostering collaborative activities among scholars, peers, faculty, and
industry mentors, the program seeks to create a thriving and inclusive STEM
community in South Texas. Ultimately, the project aims to improve the quality
and quantity of STEM professionals, addressing the demand for skilled workers in
STEM fields within the region and beyond. Project outcomes will be shared
broadly through the program website, academic publications, and conference
presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.