* 2322614
* Onboarding Rural Area Mathematics and Physical Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Amy Chambers, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2029
* USD 2,459,693.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Tennessee Technological University, a comprehensive institution drawing
students from the rural Upper Cumberland region. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 45 full-time undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, Earth sciences, mathematics,
or physics. First-year students will receive four years of scholarship support.
In addition, the project aims to promote student entrance, retention, and
success in STEM majors and careers by providing early, targeted, and continuing
academic support to Scholars. Supports include early academic support through
first-year math classes, multi-layered mentoring, regular cohort-building,
undergraduate research, and career-based projects. Supports will occur
throughout the Scholars’ tenure, starting with redesigned first-year math
courses, as success in these courses is a major factor in retaining students in
STEM. This project has potential to broaden participation of students from
groups that have been underrepresented in STEM fields, including low-income and
rural students, and to inform how planned activities aid in the retention and
graduation of more STEM majors from this student population.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion for low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need from
economically distressed rural communities. The specific aims of the project are:
1) Promote student entrance, retention, and success in STEM majors through
comprehensive financial support; 2) Provide a strong launch of first-year
Scholars through early, targeted, and continuing academic and co- curricular
support; 3) Establish a sense of belonging among Scholars through cohort-
building and mentoring; and 4) Encourage career preparation by facilitating
leadership opportunities and real-world client-based projects. Critical thinking
skills, self-efficacy, and perceptions of mathematics will be investigated to
assess the impact of an early support framework that includes a summer bridge
program, re-envisioned first-year math experiences, on-going mentorship, and co-
curricular activities. Additionally, recruitment and retention will be assessed
through comparison of applicants relative to recruitment efforts, math course
success rates, retention in STEM majors, graduation rates, and job placement
relative to peers. Annual project evaluation will be conducted using an
iterative process of formative and summative assessments. Results will be
compiled and shared with the broader community through conference presentations
and publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.