* 2322705
* Beginnings: Addressing the Talent and Diversity Gap in Biotechnology Workforce
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kumer Das, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,291.00

The AddreSSing the TalEnt and DiversiTy Gap in Biotechnology Workforce (ASSET)
project aims to fill the talent and diversity issues in the biotechnology
workforce by providing high-impact experiential education experiences of
undergraduate research, internships, and a cohort model to college students in
Louisiana. Recognizing that the degree attainment disparities among different
demographic groups impact the future emerging technology workforce, the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette and the University of Louisiana System,
seek to leverage the success of the existing UL Lewis Scholars Program to
address the talent and diversity gap in the biotechnology industry. Project
ASSET will build on and expand the components of the Lewis Scholars program by
bringing STEM-focused research and internship experiences to the existing
program to help prepare participants to become the next-generation workforce for
the biotechnology industry.

The University of Louisiana will collaborate with industry partners to teach
workplace and biotechnology job-related skills to create pathways into the
biotechnology industry. The ASSET program aims to address barriers and promote
STEM education for underrepresented students through outreach, mentorship,
collaboration, and partnerships with academic institutions, research
organizations, and community organizations. In the summers, 18 Lewis Scholars
will participate in the experiential activities of undergraduate research
experience and internships at biotechnology industry partners. Throughout the
academic year, UL System faculty, industry partners (such as CGI, a leading
information technology and business consulting services firm), and industry
researchers will interact with the participants to build biotechnology skills,
to familiarize Scholars with biotechnology industry culture, and to create
career pathways via networking opportunities. The project will evaluate the
working relationship between the leadership team and the business and corporate
partners. The project will also assess participantsâ€™ gains in biotechnology
skills, interest in, and plans for biotechnology careers. This project aligns
with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it
seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from
diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in,
and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.