* 2322617
* Ensuring STEM Student Success Through an Integrative Support Program
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2029
* Andrea Ward, Adelphi University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 10/31/2029
* USD 2,499,816.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Adelphi University (AU). As a comprehensive university in the NY
metropolitan area, Adelphi is well-situated in a geographic region with a
growing need for a highly educated STEM workforce. The Adelphi scholars will
major in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, environmental
science, mathematics, or physics and will be awarded financial support for the
four years of their undergraduate education. Over the 6 years of the project,
the project will support twenty-five (25) unique scholars with financial support
as well as academic and co-curricular support activities to increase the
retention, success, and graduation of these students. Through a holistic
approach, students will develop the necessary skills to be successful in the
workforce. The work of this project will include with an innovative recruitment
strategy including partnerships at several local high schools that have a large
proportion of students who qualify for free lunch. Once at Adelphi, students
will benefit from a multi-tiered, collaborative mentoring network model
including peer, alumni, and faculty mentors. Students will develop skills
important for the STEM workforce through cohort activities including an
interdisciplinary project to study environmental sustainability issues
established by AU. Students will also acquire key research skills through two
summer research fellowships and attendance at scientific conferences. Upon
graduation, students will be prepared to enter either graduate programs or the
local STEM workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. To
accomplish this, the project will pursue several additional goals. A first goal
is to recruit a diverse set of 25 STEM scholars in 2 cohorts and to implement a
suite of evidence-based and innovative academic and co-curricular activities to
support, retain, and graduate these scholars. Second is to contribute to the
knowledge base through project evaluation by employing mixed-methods techniques
to analyze, provide formative feedback, and gain insights into the effectiveness
of the project's individual and collective support activities for retention,
engagement, success, and graduation of students. Third is to place these
students upon graduation into the STEM workforce or STEM graduate programs. To
help achieve these goals, the project will partnerships with several local high
schools and local STEM employers including Brookhaven National Labs, ThorLabs,
and Photonix. Within the Adelphi University community, this project will partner
with University's mentoring and academic coaching programs. A fourth goal is to
develop a sustainable and replicable national model, and to disseminate results
from this model, to inform other higher-education professionals and institutions
seeking to support talented, low-income STEM students. The findings and outcomes
of this work will be disseminated regionally through a virtual conference on
supporting STEM students and nationally through presentations at conferences and
publications in peer-reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.