* 2322916
* EAGER: Initial Phase of Development of a Molecular Isomer Resolving Aerosol Collector and Analyzer (MIRACA)
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Andrey Khlystov, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2025
* USD 297,176.00

In this EAGER project, a proof-of-concept protype of the Molecular Isomer
Resolving Aerosol Collector and Analyzer (MIRACA) for measurement of the
chemical composition of ambient organic aerosols will be developed and tested.
The MIRACA will make measurements of both the particulate and gaseous components
of ambient organic aerosol with a time resolution of 10 min to 1 hour. This high
time resolution will be especially beneficial for studies of the sources and
transformations of ambient aerosol and their impact on climate and human health.

The design of the MIRACA is based on the Aerosol Collector and Extractor System
(ACES), an instrument developed with prior support from NSF. The ACES system
will be extended to the measurement of gases and integrated with a liquid
chromatography â€“ mass spectrometry (LC-MS) instrument to fully automate all
steps of collection, extraction, and analysis. The MIRACA will provide data at a
high time resolution, avoid thermal decomposition artifacts, and enable an
improved ability to resolve molecular isomers. The performance of the prototype
MIRACA will be tested by comparing it with conventional samplers during
measurements of laboratory-generated aerosols and biomass burning aerosols. The
ultimate goal for the MIRACA is for it to include a liquid chromatograph - ion
mobility high resolution mass spectrometer (LC-IMS-QTOF HRMS).

This EAGER proposal is novel and represents significant creativity and
innovation. The development of this instrument will significantly improve the
tools available for ambient high resolution chemical analysis within the
atmospheric science community. The broader impacts of this research include the
participation of early career scientists and students and will include outreach
within the community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.