* 2322026
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Everyday Respect: Measuring &amp; Improving Communication During Motor Vehicle Stops
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Morteza Dehghani, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,393.00

Traffic stops carried out by law enforcement officers include routine encounters
as well as situations that hold the potential for fatalities. This project aims
to investigate the communication dynamics during traffic stops conducted using
audio and video footage from body-worn cameras. The research builds on evidence
that officers' initial communication influences the course of the interaction
and whether it escalates or not. Additionally, the project will examine
potential disparities in the treatment of community members based on demographic
factors and other relevant variables. The project will also study the interplay
among factors such as demographic characteristics, disability status, community
context, and officer training in shaping officer and driver interactions.
Collaboration with a training academy is integral to developing and implementing
new training curricula based on the research findings.

This study takes a community-informed approach by incorporating footage from
body-worn cameras, as well as complementary data on stops, personnel, driver
behavior, and community context. The project includes input from the department
studied and other community stakeholders to define the dimensions of effective
communication that should be evaluated. Human annotators from diverse
backgrounds are employed to code the identified dimensions of officer
communication. Machine learning tools, trained on these human annotations,
enable the project team to analyze communication patterns at scale. The project
team conducts statistical analyses to investigate the causes and consequences of
officer communication, including factors that may contribute to differential
treatment of different groups within the community, and to develop new training
tools that can be tested at the training academy.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.