* 2322389
* STTR Phase I: Silicon-Integrated Epitaxial Barium Titanate (BaTiO3) Chips for Photonics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Alexander Demkov, LA LUCE CRISTALLINA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,997.00

The broader / commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project is mass production of a standardized, large-area,
silicon-based materials platform (wafer) for photonic integrated circuits.
Photonics is the next step in information processing, using light signals
instead of electrons. Such a materials platform is expected to revolutionize the
silicon photonics market much like the introduction of silicon chips did for the
microelectronics industry. The first step to successfully produce such wafers is
to manage the extreme thermal stress arising from the combination of two
materials (the optical material barium titanate (BaTiO3) and the silicon carrier
chips) with very different rates of thermal expansion. Various processing
techniques will be investigated to determine how such thermal stress can be
mitigated. If successful, this new materials platform will used by telecom and
data companies, and may enable new kinds of computing, such as photonic quantum
computing. The total of these industries is expected to exceed $100 billion in
combined market size by 2030.

This STTR Phase I project will address one of the critical issues of scaling up
barium titanate on silicon technology to thicker and larger area wafers. Barium
titanate and silicon have very different thermal expansions and since the
integration is achieved by deposition at elevated temperature, cooling causes
large stresses to develop. The resulting stress may result in cracks in the film
or even in shattering the wafer. Stress also affects the optical performance of
the material and therefore, its management is crucial for subsequent device
fabrication. The company is developing a process that mitigates this problem
(e.g., programmed cooling) which will affect wafer production throughput. In
addition, the company must control the direction of ferroelectric polarization,
an important customer requirement for making devices. Solving these two issues
is crucial to successful commercialization of this technology. Barium titanate
films of thicknesses ranging from 0.2 to 2 micrometers will be integrated on
silicon and subject to different thermal histories. Residual stress will be
measured by x-ray diffraction and corroborated with polarized Raman
spectroscopy. The resulting crystal structure, morphology, polarization
distribution, and electro-optic performance will be used as metrics for
determining if the thermal processing was successful.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.