* 2322110
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Improving Science Data Flows with Advanced Networking and Cyberinfrastructure at Manhattan College
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Zahra Shahbazi, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 639,778.00

This project re-architects the campus network at Manhattan College to drive,
enable, and advance scientific data flows and discovery across multiple
disciplines, including engineering, mathematics, chemistry, and sociology
utilizing advanced cyberinfrastructure to eliminate barriers to research and
STEM education currently encountered by faculty, researchers, and students in
respect to the flow of scientific data.

The campus network is rearchitected to optimize scientific data flows via the
construction of a campus-wide IPv6-native Science DMZ, enabling frictionless
paths for science data accessible across campus. This Science DMZ utilizes
recognized best practices for research cybersecurity, balancing network
performance and security, and establishes data transfer nodes to facilitate data
transfers between Manhattan College researchers and their collaborators via
Globus. It connects the College to external research and education (R&E)
networks statewide via NYSERNet and nationally through Internet2, and monitors
network performance using perfSONAR to tune the Science DMZ to ensure optimal
performance. The re-architected network, designed and tuned for scientific data
flows, advances and drives research, scientific discovery, and education.
Additionally, this project is the foundation for future cyberinfrastructure
improvements, including high performance computing and storage infrastructures
to further R&E capabilities of the College’s researchers and students. This
network will support and grow these activities to advance research and STEM
education programs that educate students, contribute to new scientific
discoveries, inform public policy, facilitate institutional partnerships, and
provide a better STEM education to train the next generation of scientists and
engineers to be capable of tackling complex challenges in the world ahead.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.