* 2322015
* Promoting Equity and Research Using Adaptive Testing to Support Individualized Instruction at Scale: An Incubator Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ben Van Dusen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,867.00

Research-based assessments (RBAs) have served a central role in transforming
STEM instruction by allowing instructors and researchers to measure the impact
of instruction on student outcomes. Existing RBAs, however, are primarily fixed
assessments that require instructors to administer them during the first and
last week of class, score them, and analyze the results. The time and expertise
required to do these steps prevents many instructors from using RBAs. The
independent nature of these activities also inhibits large-scale data collection
and research across diverse institution types. This Incubator project will
support the creation of more sophisticated assessments that offer advantages to
STEM instructors and education researchers. By creating and hosting assessments
across STEM disciplines and K-16 grade bands, this Incubator project will
support STEM instruction and create a large-scale database that can power novel
STEM education research.

The Incubator activities include the creation of eight working groups that will
address topics critical to ethical, large-scale data collection and the creation
of diverse research collaborations. The first three working groups will include
scholars and educators to develop reports on (1) the ethical collection and
analysis of social identity data, (2) large-scale data collection with minors,
and (3) effective large-scale partnership models. Reports from these working
groups will guide the second phase of working groups focused on the needs of (4)
K-12 administrators, (5) K-12 instructors, (6) two-year colleges, and (7)
minority-serving institutions. The eighth working group will use the findings
from the prior working groups to create a set of recommendations for expanding
the Learning About STEM Student Outcomes (LASSO) platform and its network of
users. The expanded LASSO platform will generate a large-scale, open-access
database of grade K-16 STEM students' responses on cognitive diagnostic computer
adaptive tests and a national network of community-based participatory research
projects.

This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. Funding is also
provided by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) program and the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program at NSF. The DRK-12 program
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.