* 2322062
* CIVIC-FA Track A Smart Kids and Cool Seniors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jie Gong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge Full Award (CIVIC-FA) project pilots innovative
solutions to assist low-resource urban residents as they adapt to increasing
heat stress and local air pollution, both outdoors and indoors. It also seeks to
understand what enhances or diminishes adaptive capacity. The project takes
place in an environmental justice community in the heart of a densely populated
megalopolis that endures air pollution emanating from oil refineries, major
highways, a large port, and an international airport. Residents also suffer from
increasing heat stress during the summer months. The compounded effects of
environmental hazards and poverty threaten the health and well-being of seniors
living in public housing. Moreover, young people living in these locations often
lack opportunities to learn and develop STEM skills. A community collaborative
led by a local non-profit, a public housing authority, and a nearby university
seeks to mitigate these problems with a bold project that brings together youth
and seniors to characterize indoor and outdoor air quality and thermal
conditions and to develop solutions. This project supports society’s efforts to
develop effective responses to ongoing climate change.

Understanding the realistic extent of adaptive capacity in low-resource
populations is an important question in environmental social science. The
project develops a network of fixed outdoor and indoor air pollution and
temperature sensors, provides youths living in public housing with environmental
sensor-equipped backpacks to carry along routes used by seniors to measure
personal exposures, establishes a publicly-accessible data hub, designed with
input from an array of community stakeholders, and builds a modeling platform
known as a dynamic digital twin to represent the public housing authority’s
buildings and surrounding neighborhoods. This platform will support “what-if”
explorations of household solutions (e.g., DIY air filters), enterprise
solutions (e.g., air conditioner retrofits), community solutions (e.g., shade
trees), and policy solutions (e.g., establishing a right to air conditioning). A
multi-faceted engagement and communication strategy will help community members
use this information effectively. The digital twin will help the housing
authority manage its facilities. Youths participating in the project will gain
STEM skills in a highly replicable program. The project adds to empirical and
conceptual knowledge of vulnerable residents’ behavioral choices and adaptive
capacity during heatwaves and air pollution episodes, highlighting the potential
for constructive action at multiple levels spanning individuals, organizations,
and institutions.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.