* 2322274
* CC* Regional Networking: Regional Collaboration - Precision Agriculture - Yuma AZ
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Matthew Rahr, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,135,788.00

Yuma agriculture uses 10,000 acres of irrigated farmland, water diverted from
the Colorado River, and a year-round growing season to produce over 90% of North
America’s winter vegetables. The use of information technologies in farming and
agribusiness is growing and expanding the necessary discovery to improve yields
and align production with changing environmental conditions. The use of field
data collected, monitored, and analyzed allows producers to plan and assess crop
stability and growth. The expansion of cyberinfrastructure (CI) systems and
resources enables modern farming to collect, analyze, and share soil, crop, and
environmental data. The CC* Regional Network project delivers high speed
external connectivity, expands wireless networks and internet of things (IOT)
systems to research farms in one of the most important agricultural communities
in the country.

The introduction of specialized and novel networking in new collaborations with
higher education research in the region improves the opportunity to plan and
implement broadband and networking aligned with the science of agriculture. The
use of technology to improve crop yields and minimize natural resource impacts,
or precision agriculture, is a necessary step forward that requires the
deployment of cyberinfrastructure on research farms, in rural communities, and
in an extended collaboration between higher education, the Yuma agricultural
research community with Yuma broadband providers and farmers.

The project enables participation and informs regional cyberinfrastructure
capacity building by Arizona’s research and education network, the Sun Corridor
Network (SCN), Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona as a research service
facilitator in this community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.