* 2322329
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B:Placekeeping: a Co-designed Model for Intergenerational Co-housing and Coalition Building in a University-Adjacent Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Christopher Wright, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The US housing crisis has severely impacted underserved communities of color.
Rising rents and home prices put homeownership further out of reach. In 2021,
74% of white Americans owned a home, compared with 43% of Black Americans. Due
to systemic racism, these disparities have persisted over decades. Existing
housing stock needs reinvestment to meet the demands of an aging population.
These challenges have been exacerbated due to residual impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic and surging prices of food, gas, and other necessities. This project
addresses these issues through the co-development of Second Story Collective
(2SC), a novel multi-generational co-housing model that centers the arts to
cohere diverse communities. This homesharing strategy aims to preserve
homeownership for long-term residents, create affordable opportunities for new
homebuyers, and reduce student housing costs. By utilizing a co-design process
informed by community input as well as multi-modal data, the 2SC co-housing
model will address the need for affordable housing and aging-in-place options
while increasing access to services, reducing isolation, and building social
cohesion. Findings from this project will contribute to knowledge in the fields
of comprehensive urban community development, creative placemaking/placekeeping,
and participatory research and design.

The main objective of this project is to develop, implement, and evaluate the
2SC model for intergenerational co-housing as an anti-displacement and aging-in-
place strategy. The transdisciplinary team will work with an established cross-
sector partner network to address urgent housing needs in the West Philadelphia
Promise Zone neighborhood of Mantua, a rapidly gentrifying community that is
also one of the nation’s most impoverished. The project will utilize a
community-driven participatory action research (CPAR) design, examining
community development efforts from a systems perspective while centering
existing community assets. During Stage 1, the project team co-designed the 2SC
co-housing model for Village Square on Haverford, a new multi-use development in
Mantua. Using heterogenous data, we created an asset map of the relevant
resources and developed a plan for establishing and coalescing the pilot
community. In Stage 2, the project team will implement the 2SC pilot community
and collect and analyze multi-modal data to evaluate the success of the pilot.
The 2SC model has the potential to be implemented in similar communities
throughout the US, and results from this pilot could serve as a model for
equitable development through community-driven anti-displacement and co-housing
solutions, particularly for historically marginalized Black communities.

This project is in response to Track B - CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Bridging
the gap between essential resources and services & community needs.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.