* 2322123
* MCA: Avian systematics, speciation, and adaptation across large island archipelagos
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Herman Mays, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 224,476.00

Determining the boundaries between species is critical for answering basic
questions in biodiversity science and in the application of conservation
legislation and wildlife management plans. Genomics has influenced every field
in biology and the study of biodiversity is no exception; however, meaningful
training in genomic techniques is unevenly distributed. This Mid-Career Award
supports training in genomic tools in the study of species boundaries and
speciation for faculty and students at Marshall University in West Virginia,
through a unique training partnership with Ohio State University. This project
leverages an international collaboration to study systematics, biogeography, and
speciation in three groups of songbirds on the islands of Japan, Taiwan, and the
Philippines. Because islands cover only 7% of the earth but harbor 20% of the
planet’s biodiversity, studying island species in order to understand adaptive
radiations is especially important. This research will cultivate new knowledge
of the island birds of East Asia and foster better tools for understanding
species boundaries and speciation. The work will also enable training and
research opportunities in cutting-edge genomic methodologies and analyses,
applicable across the life sciences, to faculty and students at a primarily
undergraduate university in Appalachia.

The goal of the Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) program is to enhance the research
careers of mid-career scientists. The application of genomics in systematics and
evolutionary biology has revolutionized these fields; however, faculty at many
smaller institutions are saddled with teaching and other obligations that limit
the amount of time to devote to training in new methods. As the sophistication
of the questions addressed in systematics and evolutionary biology grow, typical
low-throughput sequencing techniques are no longer adequate. This MCA award
partners faculty and students at Marshall University in West Virginia (EPSCoR
state) with faculty at Ohio State University experienced in population genomics
and molecular systematics. This partnership will enable training in the
application of cutting-edge genomic tools in the study of species delimitation,
speciation, population genetics, adaptive evolution, and biogeography.
Specifically, this project will produce and analyze genome-scale and whole
genome datasets for three codistributed avian groups in East Asia – the yellow-
breasted flycatcher complex, the varied tit complex, and the Asiatic white-eyes.
Genomic data applied to these groups will allow researchers to assess the
reliability of different species delimitation methods, the influence of island
geography on population parameters, and the impact of adaptive evolution on the
genome.

This project is jointly funded by the Evolutionary Processes Program, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.