* 2322396
* MCA: Urban-resolving Modeling System - Urban Heat Island, Urban Hydrology, Air Pollution, and Aerosol-Cloud Interaction Nexus
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Mejia, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 291,216.00

This project will help the research team understand the impacts of urbanization
on weather and climate. It will provide valuable insights into how cities can
influence our local environment and the importance of sustainable practices in
urban planning. To do this, the project will develop a weather and urban model
that examines the interaction between the urban heat island, outdoor water, and
air pollution. This model will provide understanding of how cities and their
excess heat, vegetation irrigations and resuspended pollution particles can
affect cloud formation, especially rainfall and storms. The project will focus
on the city of Houston, where data collected during recent field campaigns, led
by the Department of Energy and National Science Foundation, have the potential
to improve weather and urban models. By looking at various weather scenarios and
factors, the research communities can get a more complete picture of the complex
relationship between cities and weather. This new knowledge will also help
improve climate adaptation and mitigation strategies and provide better support
to urban communities and decision-makers.

This project targets at improving the fundamental understanding of the physics
tied to how the urban environment modulates meteorology, including convection
and precipitation. It addresses issues of multiscale atmospheric interactions,
associating synoptic scale and mesoscale forcing with urban resolving processes
in the Houston area. The use of new observationally based products from the
DOE/ASR Tracking Aerosol Convection interactions ExpeRiment (TRACER) and
NSF/Experiment of Sea Breeze Convection, Aerosols, Precipitation and Environment
(ESCAPE), together with an Urban Modeling Systems that includes a newly
developed urban irrigation module, cutting-edge urban-resolving, cloud-
resolving, and aerosol-aware modeling, will provide a more complete and detailed
characterization of the impacts of urbanization on meteorology. To gain a more
general physical understanding of the key factors and processes involved this
project will examine the range of behaviors under different synoptic settings.
Research scientist from the Desert Research Institute, the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, and the University of Houston will collaborate to develop
the outlined urban modeling systems and enhance understanding of urbanization's
impact on warm cloud-aerosol interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.