* 2322047
* Beginnings: Workforce Innovation and Inclusion in Semiconductors and Emerging Research Areas
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Camille Crittenden, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,860.00

The increasingly urgent need for an educated STEM workforce, especially in the
semiconductor industry, is recognized by corporate leaders and U.S. policymakers
alike. The global demand for workers in this sector is projected to grow to
100,000 per year until 2030 to meet production needs. This project, Workforce
Innovation and Inclusion in Semiconductors and Emerging Research Areas (WIISER)
seeks to engage undergraduate students in industry internships near the
beginning of their secondary education. Diversifying the STEM workforce will be
essential to advancing the role of the U.S. as a global technology leader.
Because innovative ideas may arise from all individuals, the project will aim to
involve students from diverse backgrounds including transfer students, women and
underrepresented minorities, Pell-grant eligible and first-generation college
students. The project will leverage deep partnerships with a leading industry
and research innovation ecosystem in semiconductor design and manufacturing to
create transformative learning experiences for students from the University of
California (UC) campuses at Berkeley, Davis, Merced, and Santa Cruz.

WIISER will expand and diversify the available workforce for the semiconductor
industry through offering two tracks of experiential learning and professional
development programs. One group of students will work in the Berkeley Marvell
Nanofabrication Lab over the course of an academic year and through the summer
(NanoLab Fellows). Another group will be placed in 8-week paid summer
internships with semiconductor companies (Summer Fellows). Work plans will be
scoped in collaboration between UC and the host company to ensure both
meaningful experiences for students and substantive work outcomes for hosts. All
Fellows will participate in weekly workshops during the summer to boost their
job-readiness skills and overcome latent challenges, such as imposter syndrome.
Students will be assigned a mentor who will provide expertise and guidance as
the students navigate their internship and career pathways into the
semiconductor industry. The evaluation plan will test the effectiveness of our
project on student retention and growth of professional identity and sense of
self-efficacy. Our project aims to foster regional learning ecosystems
transferrable to other emerging technology fields. This project aligns with the
NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to
support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse
professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and
their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.