* 2322535
* Beginnings: Experiential Learning on Digital Agriculture and Plant Phenotyping Technologies (DAPPT)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jian Jin, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing the shortfall in
STEM graduates required to meet the growing demands of the food, agriculture,
and natural resources sectors. With the potential to revolutionize agriculture
through real-time data on crop health and environment, there is a critical need
to prioritize STEM education and cultivate a skilled workforce capable of
driving innovation in digital agriculture and phenotyping technologies. The
primary objective of this project is to provide immersive learning opportunities
in digital agriculture and plant phenotyping technologies (DAPPT), with a
particular focus on community college students. Collaboratively undertaken by
three institutions including Florida A&M University (FAMU), the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), and Purdue University (PU), FAMU and UNL will focus on
engaging historically underrepresented and underserved groups and community
college students by offering on-site field experiential learning activities to
those enrolled in STEM programs or associate degree programs, and PU will expand
the reach of the project to encompass industry workers and growers through
workshops on advanced technologies for precision agriculture.

The project's comprehensive approach involves the creation of three participant
cohorts annually in Florida, Nebraska, and Indiana, with the partners
facilitating travel for cohort visits and training sessions. Through a well-
rounded combination of experiential learning activities, including summer
internships, workshops, field visits, semester-based research and development
internships, the DAPPT project aims to equip participants with the requisite
skills, knowledge, and professional competencies essential for pursuing a career
in digital agriculture and plant phenotyping technologies. This project is co-
funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program
(HBCU-UP), which provides awards to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and
research at HBCUs. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by
the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning
opportunities for individuals from diverse professional and educational
backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to, career pathways
in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.