* 2322529
* Advanced Electromagnetic Analysis and High-frequency Impedance Design for Magnetic Ferrite Inductors and Transformers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Shuo Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 399,999.00

Electromagnetic interference (EMI) generated by modern power conversion circuits
is an electromagnetic (EM) pollution to all electronic circuits and equipment.
Wide bandgap (WBG) devices are high-speed semiconductor devices that can reduce
energy loss, cost, and size of the power conversion circuits, so they are deemed
promising to replace conventional Si devices in power conversion circuits.
However, their high speeds lead to higher EMI than conventional Si devices,
which slows down the wide adoption of WBG devices in the power conversion
industry. Magnetic components including inductors and transformers play a big
role in the generation and reduction of EMI in power conversion circuits. This
project aims to suppress EMI by significantly improving magnetic components’ EMI
suppression performance. The project will develop a fundamental EM theory to
bridge the magnetic components’ microscopic EM behavior with their macroscopic
electrical performance. Advanced design technologies will be developed based on
the developed EM theory to drastically improve magnetic components’ performance
to suppress EMI without sacrificing energy efficiency. The success of this
project will help to advance the fundamental magnetic component theory, remove
the EMI barrier, and facilitate the wide adoption of WBG devices in the power
conversion industry. This will in turn increase energy efficiency, reduce CO2
emission, and air pollution toward net-zero-carbon, provide more education,
commercialization, and economic opportunities, and improve our life quality.

The objective of this project is to explore the fundamental electromagnetic
mechanism of the high-frequency impedance peaks and valleys of magnetic
components in power electronics systems and develop design technologies to steer
these impedance peaks and valleys for EMI suppression. This project will first
develop a time-varying electromagnetic theory to characterize the EM behavior
inside the magnetic cores of the magnetic components. The impacts of magnetic
material characteristics, electrical parameters, and cores’ physical dimensions
on the EM behavior inside the cores will then be investigated. The relationship
between the microscopic EM phenomena inside the cores and the macroscopic
terminal impedance characteristics of magnetic components will be further
disclosed based on the developed theory. Finally, novel design technologies to
drastically improve magnetic components’ HF impedance performance for EMI
suppression will be developed. The developed EM theory and design technologies
will be validated by both the EM simulations using finite element analysis and
laboratory prototype experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.