* 2322532
* Beginnings Track: Experiential Learning for the Mechatronics Workforce in the Upper Peninsula and Northern Michigan
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Aleksandr Sergeyev, Michigan Technological University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joan Walker
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,930.00

Mechatronics is an emerging field that focuses on the development and practice
of automation for industrial applications. A diverse workforce must be prepared
to meet the growing job demand for Mechatronics employees. However, Mechatronics
requires highly experiential workforce development programs to provide the
professional and technical skills that are readily transferrable to the
industry. Such programs are lacking, and therefore the existing workforce cannot
meet the current and future demand. Representing a collaborative partnership
among Michigan Technological University, Gogebic Community College, West Shore
Community College, eight industrial partners, and three nonprofit organizations,
this project aims to provide accessible and comprehensive experiential learning
opportunities in Mechatronics to promote a diverse workforce for readily
participating in the US workforce. The industrial regional economy of the Upper
Peninsula and Northern Michigan are expected to benefit from the skilled workers
facilitated by this program.

This project will prepare a diverse cohort of participants for the five pillars
of Mechatronics: robotics, mechanics, electronics, cybersecurity, and artificial
intelligence. Participants in this project will partake in 1) an online
Mechatronics Education Portal with foundational knowledge, 2) hands-on
experiential Mechatronics Practice activities that link theoretical knowledge
with practical implementation, and 3) a Mechatronics Industry Pathways rotation
to provide participants with career outlooks in Mechatronics in industrial
settings. Professional development activities will be conducted to prepare
participants for their career and expand their network with industry
collaborators. Furthermore, this project will foster a community among cohorts
through professional mentoring and community-building activities to promote a
sense of belonging. The development of this curriculum will be undertaken in
coordination with industry collaborators and regional organizations with
dissemination for other educational programs nationwide. This project aligns
well with the goals of the ExLENT Program, supported by the NSF TIP and EDU
Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for
individuals from diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase
their interest in, and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.