* 2322307
* SBIR Phase I:  Massively Parallel Protocols for Software-based Wireless Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* James Martin, LUTRIS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,383.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project lies in its potential to implement state-of-the-art radio
communication systems faster and less expensively. Radio systems are an
essential part of everyday life, serving roles from entertainment to public
safety. But modern radio systems, designed to use the limited number of
available frequencies efficiently, are expensive to develop and deploy. A major
reason for the high cost is that custom silicon chips are needed to do the
processing that converts a weak radio signal into useful data. This project aims
to make radio systems much cheaper to build. Instead of building custom chips,
the team uses commodity computers and specially designed software that can run
the radio processing tasks at high speed. This speed is enabled by technology
that analyzes radio processing tasks and turns them into software which runs on
a processor with many individual computing cores. The economic impact is
twofold: that technology can reduce the cost of existing systems, such as
cellular LTE and 5G base stations, it also makes possible new applications which
are too expensive to build from custom hardware.

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to understand how to develop the processing
needed in modern radio system quickly and efficiently. The team also seeks to
address the features of communications protocols that are hard to implement
because the computations are too complicated or too much data needs to be
examined before the final output is generated. They will also address the
opportunities to change the protocol to eliminate the bottlenecks. The
technology will measure the how fast key radio algorithms run on commodity
computing hardware and how much time is spent on essential, but not productive,
tasks such as moving data between memories. The objective is a quantitative
estimate of how much data can be transmitted or received by a radio implemented
purely in software. Ultimately, the team will design protocols that scale with
the number of processor cores: twice as many processors giving twice the data
throughput.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.