* 2322392
* SBIR Phase II:  Chip-Scale Optical Frequency Standards
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Douglas Bopp, VAPOR CELL TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2025
* USD 956,313.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project produces compact
optical frequency standards using state-of-the-art optical frequency metrology
techniques adopted from national metrology institutes. Commercially, these
devices will produce fundamentally accurate and stable optical frequencies in
the form of laser light. End uses of these optical frequency standards include
telecommunications test equipment, aerospace sensors, semiconductor inspection
tools, and chemical measurement tools. The market trend is to produce more
compact, mass-producible devices to improve sensing capabilities across
industries. Improving the accuracy and stability of compact photonics
technologies will enable next-generation microelectronics and photonic systems
to produce reliable measurements without sacrificing durability or sensitivity.
The resulting products will be inexpensive and will lend themselves to scalable
manufacturing. Making these products accessible to the scientific and technology
communities will enable researchers and engineers to build intrinsically
accurate products based on definitions of the International System of Units (SI)
second. This product will compete within the Atomic Clock Marketplace which is
valued at $300 million, and which is growing at 6.25% per year. This effort has
the potential to reverse the ongoing problem of price-creep of timekeeping
devices that is currently preventing the large-scale adoption of quantum
standards.

The intellectual merit of this project is to use advances in microfabrication
techniques combined with fundamental molecular and optical physics to produce
compact, stable, and accurate optical frequency standards. Measurement science
requires the distribution and availability of measurement references and
standards. Optical frequency standards serve a variety of niche applications
requiring accurate measurements with light. This research will improve the
purity of chip-scale iodine vapor cells using novel materials and also fully
investigate the materials invented during the Phase I period of performance.
These vapor cells will be practical realizations of the SI second as agreed upon
by internationally accepted standards protocols. The core technical innovation
in this project will focus on producing a ‘physics package’ containing a chip-
scale iodine vapor cell with electrical functionality for controlling the vapor
pressure, laser light routing for implementing high-resolution spectroscopy, and
a software interface that converts the various sensor inputs into a precise and
accurate measurement of a molecular transition. The team will leverage trends in
optical clocks that have proved the utility of software-defined algorithms in
the interrogation, synthesis, and discipline of physics packages to counter
environmental and measurement-related disturbances ultimately producing a stable
and accurate device.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.