* 2322376
* SBIR Phase I:  The Resilience Gym
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Raj Bhargava, WAVERLEY CREATIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the creation of a "Resilience Gym", where mid-career,
college-educated employees can proactively develop their emotional health in the
same way they do their physical health at a regular gym. The current pandemic
and mental health crisis have affected society deeply. In a 2021 survey,
McKinsey found that 85% of frontline employees and managers do not find meaning
at work. The US Bureau of Labor Statistics reported 4.3 million people, or 2.9%
of the entire workforce, quit their jobs in August 2021. These statistics
demonstrate the urgent need to address the issue of workplace dissatisfaction
and support individuals in finding meaning and purpose in their lives. Since
2017, the team has successfully taught over 150 adult students to achieve their
potential by studying behavioral science research and applying it to their
lives. Over 50% of these students, despite having accomplished careers, are
dissatisfied with their lives and seek more meaning. The team has found that
adopting an empowering mindset is the most effective resilient action for these
students to achieve more and find deeper meaning in life. The Resilience Gym
uses technology to provide a scalable solution to improve the emotional health
and prosperity of working adults.

The team's innovation is a mobile and web app subscription service that delivers
a step-by-step Resilience Gym process and guides users to adopt new, empowering
mindsets. The product is based on decades of behavioral science research and
uses virtual reality, artificial intelligence and mobile nudges to provide a
scalable solution that is personalized the individual user. Based on real-time
progress, users may adopt new mindsets. The team will also incorporate
neuroscience research to enrich the solution. To develop the design, the team
uses the 5-step Stanford d.school design thinking approach (empathize, define,
ideate, prototype, and test) for which the team has deep expertise. The approach
is complimented with the agile methodology to have short milestones, scrum
meetings, and backlog tracking to ensure new learnings can be adapted from users
and delivered on schedule and within the planned budget. Combining the expertise
of technology startups and university researchers, the team develops
scientifically driven products that achieve both significant impact and
commercial success.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.