* 2322557
* Scholars of Excellence in Engineering Design
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Karim Muci-Kuchler, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2029
* USD 2,499,310.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas State University. Texas State University is a Hispanic Serving
Institution, and its campus in San Marcos, Texas, is at the center of a rapidly
growing innovation corridor that extends from Austin to San Antonio. Over its
six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to thirty-eight unique
full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in one of the following
engineering majors: Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Industrial
Engineering, Manufacturing Engineering, or Mechanical Engineering. First-time-
in-college students will receive up to four years of scholarship. In addition,
the project will include activities that engage students early and often in
cohort building, engineering identity formation, the development of important
professional skills, and exposure to the engineering profession. In particular,
the project will include training for faculty mentors, individualized student
mentoring that starts before students arrive on campus, cohort-based
professional learning communities that allow students to support each other, and
a sequence of workshops focusing on the product design and development process,
cooperative education experiences in industry, and undergraduate research
opportunities. If the proposed approach is successful, it could be useful for
STEM programs at academic institutions that want to support low-income students
with demonstrated financial need during their undergraduate education. Given the
demographics of the students served by Texas State University, success in
retaining and graduating engineering students could translate into increased
diversity in regional and national engineering career fields, which ultimately
builds the broader society’s capacity to solve today’s most complex design and
systems problems in ways that are equitable and sustainable.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. When
these talented students enroll in engineering programs, they often feel they do
not “belong” in engineering because of their financial situation, their math and
science preparation, the absence of family support or mentoring, and the lack of
engineering role models who share their cultural backgrounds. The project will
use a comprehensive system of supports aimed at fully integrating, centering,
and motivating these students to help them achieve their academic potential,
foster their sense of belonging to the engineering profession, and develop
professional skills. A sequence of product design and development workshops and
the possibility to participate in cooperative education experiences in industry
will allow students to connect what they are learning in their courses with the
practical aspects of the engineering profession. The latter is expected to
increase their motivation and persistence to degree completion. Opportunities to
participate in research experiences will allow students to consider the
possibility of pursuing graduate studies after obtaining their bachelor’s
degree. The effectiveness of the project will be evaluated by tracking the
scholarship recipients’ academic performance, retention rate, and graduation
rate. In addition, surveys will be used to determine the impact of project
activities in increasing student sense of belonging to the engineering
profession, self-efficacy in engineering design, and professional skill
development. An external evaluator will conduct periodic project assessments and
provide feedback and suggestions for improvement. Project results will be
disseminated via peer-reviewed articles and conference presentations. In
addition, project information and results will be presented to the Industrial
Advisory Boards of each of the engineering programs involved and will be made
available upon request to interested STEM faculty members via Texas State
University’s Digital Collections Repository. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.