* 2322146
* SBIR Phase I: Electrostatic Design for Cold-Cathode, Miniature X-ray Sources
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Winston Chern, X-SIGHT INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improved access to 3D x-ray imaging in
everyday life. Currently 3D x-ray imaging is used for applications where it is
absolutely necessary to non-destructively image an object. One example is in
healthcare, known as computed tomography, where imaging is performed 250,000
times per day in the US saving countless lives by enabling doctors to quickly
identify and treat disease such as stroke, heart attack, and cancer. Airports
are other locations where computed tomography is heavily used to quickly inspect
millions of bags per day to catch threats that were once unable to be seen
through conventional x-ray systems. The systems capable of 3D x-ray imaging for
the applications mentioned above are large, expensive and immobile which prevent
their use in more applications. This project enables a new architecture for 3D
x-ray imaging which promises to make systems less expensive, smaller and more
compact, require less power and demonstrate higher performance. This new
architecture will enable access to 3D x-ray imaging for new applications by
making it more affordable and available where and when it is needed, outside of
key infrastructure locations like hospitals and airports.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the first step
in developing the most critical component to a new 3D x-ray imaging
architecture: a miniature, high-performance, and inexpensive x-ray source.
Modern 3D x-ray imaging systems are large, expensive and immobile due to the
method of generating 3D images. A single x-ray source and detector arc pair are
rotated at high speeds to generate 2D images at different angles which are used
to reconstruct a 3D model. Modern x-ray sources and detectors are very bulky,
weighing over 100 pounds each, and necessitate substantial structural
reinforcement, resulting in systems that weigh over 1000 pounds. The proposed
new architecture uses a stationary ring of x-ray sources and detectors. The
x-ray sources are electrically turned on and off mimicking the rotation of
modern 3D x-ray imaging systems without spinning, resulting in a system that is
inexpensive and smaller, and uses lower power while demonstrating higher
performance. For these aspirations to be realized, a miniature x-ray source that
is smaller, high-performance and inexpensive must be developed. This project
will take the first steps to characterize such an x-ray source by measuring key
metrics such as the performance, resolution and reliability. The design will be
iterated through simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.