* 2322632
* Accurately mapping the seismic structure of the deep crust of the continental United States
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Weisen Shen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 204,449.00

Continental crust, the outermost layer of the solid Earth, plays a vital role in
understanding the Earth system: it bears important information about the Earth’s
natural resources, such as critical minerals; its thickness controls the first
order changes in elevation and landscape evolution; it serves as a pathway for
material exchange between the shallow crust and overlying mantle, and where
magma rises through; its composition and temperature bear the signature of the
early history of continents and controls the distributions of the geotherms.
Finally, its strength and dynamics dominate the distributions of natural hazards
such as earthquakes. However, accurately inferring its physical properties,
especially for its deep part, has been challenging due to the lack of direct
access through drilling and insufficient indirect sampling. Using seismic
energies that travel through the deep crust, on the other hand, can provide
systematic sampling to the deep crust and allow a continental-scale measurement
of its physical properties such as thickness. This research addresses challenges
in measuring the deep crustal properties by improving traditional seismic
methods so they rely less on assumptions about deep crustal conditions.
Additionally, the researcher will incorporate newly obtained measurements to
provide further information about the deeper part of the crust, which will help
infer the elastic properties that are sensitive to the composition and strength.
Finally, these novel techniques will be applied to data collected throughout the
continental United States through the EarthScope USArray to illuminate the
continental-scale deep crustal structure of the contiguous US. The research will
support a graduate student. Research opportunities will also open to students
from community colleges in the Long Island and NYC area. Additional K-12
outreach will be performed by collaborating with the NSF-funded EarthBUS
project.

The research target, the continental crust, especially the mid- and lower parts,
plays a crucial role in Earth Sciences as 1) its lower boundary (Moho) controls
the 1st order of topographic variation and its evolution, 2) it serves as a
pathway for material exchange between the shallow crust and mantle, and where
magma rises through; 3) its composition bears the signature of the early history
of continents; and 4) its temperature controls the distributions of the geotherm
and surface heat flux. The project aims to better map out the deep crustal
structures beneath the continental US. Elastic properties of the deep crust
(e.g., Moho depth, depth-dependent seismic velocity, and Poisson’s ratio)
indicate the thermal and compositional properties but are often challenging to
measure accurately. Of particular interest is the Poisson’s ratio of the deep
crust, as it is indicative of the abundance of quartz content, and thus plays a
crucial role in determining the chemical composition and strength of the crust.
In this project, a phased, 3-stage research will be conducted: First, a novel
method that combines the strengths of two traditional seismic imaging techniques
to solve the velocity-depth trade-offs comprehensively will be developed and
tested; Secondly, a new seismic observable, Rayleigh wave local amplification,
will be further incorporated to provide depth-dependent information of the
Poisson’s ratio; Finally, these novel techniques will be applied to data from
the EarthScope USArray, to illuminate the continental-scale deep crustal
structure of the continental US. Preliminary tests of the new methods with
synthetic data present a promising sign of solving the challenges. The research
will address challenges in measuring the deep crustal properties due to the
trade-offs in different seismic observables and a lack of data sensitivity. This
work will accurately map out the contiguous US's deep crustal structure at a
continental scale. The product of the research work, a new three dimensional
(3-D) model of the crust and uppermost mantle beneath the continental US, will
deepen the understanding of deep geological processes; It also provides insights
into how Poisson’s ratio varies with depth, adding an important seismic
constraint that can potentially solve for the chemical composition and strength
of the continents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.