* 2322218
* CC* Regional Computing: Great Plains Extended Network of GPUs for Interactive Experimenters (GP-ENGINE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Daniel Andresen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 981,182.00

The GP-ENGINE project advances the adoption of advanced computing and data
resources in the Great Plains Network region. This project will increase the
number of researchers and students served by both local and national computing
resources, strengthen the capacity and capabilities of campus research computing
professionals, and expand the regional capacity for research. Researchers will
be able to transition nascent ideas and codes into advanced computing code using
locally provisioned advanced computing resources. These codes can be later
executed on national high-throughput computing resources. These successes will
enhance institutional buy-in for sustainable regional and national research
computing systems.

The project leverages strong existing collaborations to provision and manage
graphics processing unit resources in Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota,
Kansas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas. It trains and supports researchers to adapt
their workbench codes into high-throughput computing codes that can be executed
on national platforms such as the Open Science Grid and the National Research
Platform. The project addresses computing needs of a diverse set of science
drivers from across the consortium, including problems in 3D protein molecule
generation, satellite image deep learning for wildfire burn area mapping, dark
matter and neutrino detection, real-time monitoring of land surface phenology,
cybersecurity attack graph generation, and intelligent manufacturing with
digital twins. The project improves STEM research and education through adoption
of JupyterLab computing notebooks. The deployed cyberinfrastructure supports
research and education in a region whose sparse population and geographic size
are ideal for developing advanced computing, data, and networking in under-
resourced EPSCoR states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.