* 2322898
* Algorithmic Design of Origami Mechanisms and Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cynthia Sung, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2026
* USD 479,255.00

The goal of this project is to develop algorithms for automated design of folded
robots with custom geometry and motion requirements. Folding is a commonly used
and scalable manufacturing process for making 3D objects from sheets of metal or
plastic. Currently, designing folded mechanisms and robots is a complex process
that requires even skilled engineers to go through multiple design iterations.
At the same time, however, many of the constraints that engineers must deal with
are geometric in nature and can be addressed algorithmically. New algorithms for
end-to-end design that convert design specifications directly into 3D physically
realizable robots would simplify the design process, lower barriers to robotics,
and open opportunities for custom robotics on demand when rapid deployment is
required, for example in emergency relief or in search and exploration of
unknown environments. In order to develop these algorithms, the researchers will
address fundamental questions in origami-inspired engineering, robotics, and
computational geometry. Although the work will focus on origami-inspired
fabrication, parts of the resulting system will also be applicable to other
fabrication techniques, including 3D printing or more traditional machining. The
research will provide formal insights into algorithmic design that enables fully
automated end-to-end design pipelines, resulting in valid, functional, robotic
components within hours or days.

The specific objective of this project is to formalize the design of kinematic
chains and trees that have required workspaces or achievable trajectories. The
main insight underlying this project is that geometric design problems of this
nature can be mapped directly onto path planning problems that have been
explored by the computational geometry and robotics communities. In particular,
the researchers take a modular approach, in which a robot is constructed as a
combination of link and joint components from a database, and each component is
associated with an equivalent path type. By casting the problem in this way, the
problem of kinematic design can be partially abstracted from the specific
fabrication details. The researchers will develop algorithms for converting
kinematic joint specifications into equivalent paths and robot designs, as well
as formal guarantees for when such a process is or is not possible. They will
fold the resulting designs out of plastic sheet in order to ensure that they are
physically realizable. The results will be disseminated through a combination of
open-source software with an associated graphical user interface for ease of
use, workshops at engineering conferences, and arts and educational workshops in
and around Philadelphia. The research will have broad societal impacts by making
the resulting design software accessible to a diverse population, including K-12
students, teachers, hobbyists, and other non-engineering users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.