* 2322714
* Pivots: Pivotal Pathways and Inclusive On-Ramps to Careers in Biomanufacturing
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sarah O'Connell, Gloucester Marine Genomics Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,558.00

This project's significance lies in its ability to provide supportive hands-on,
experiential education in the life sciences and biotechnology fields, providing
on-ramps to underserved and underrepresented individuals previously unable to
access STEM opportunities, thus enabling substantial career pivots. The
inability to meet the growing demand for biotechnicians weakens the nation’s
position as the global bioeconomy leader and poses national security risks
Through a certificate program and upskilling courses with robust support
services that enable success, the project will increase employability, wage
potential, and career growth for up to 180 adults over two years. This serves
the national interest by promoting the progress of science, advancing, and
supporting education and diversity. The project also contributes to the
advancement in the biotechnology field and benefits society by producing
professionals for the growing biomanufacturing industry. Additionally, the
project fosters a more inclusive scientific community and provides an example of
innovative, hands-on learning for the adult vocational learner. It establishes a
framework for closing a workforce gap while simultaneously addressing societal
goals of promoting equity and increasing access for diverse learners.

Gloucester Marine Genomics Institute (GMGI), a 501c3 non-profit founded in 2013,
addresses critical challenges facing our oceans, human health and the
environment through innovative scientific research and education. GMGI operates
the Gloucester Biotechnology Academy, whose 10-month biotechnology certificate
program combines hands-on classroom and laboratory training with paid
internships. GMGI prepares adults with no prior mathematics or science
experience who are struggling to connect with college and career, to pivot into
roles as laboratory technicians in life science and biotechnology fields. GMGI’s
proprietary curriculum allows participants to master standard lab practices and
fundamental molecular biology techniques including DNA extraction, amplification
and sequencing. A biomanufacturing workflow follows and participants prepare
solutions, media and plates for growing cells, engineer bacterial cells to
produce proteins of interest, generate cell banks and confirm productivity,
demonstrate proficiency in batching, sampling and decontaminating fermentation
processes, practice upstream and downstream processing and purification, and
incorporate process analytical technologies to monitor mammalian cell cultures
in single-use bioreactors. Students learn on industry-recommended equipment
including thermocyclers, UV-Vis plate readers, NanoDrop/Qubit instruments,
electrophoresis gel chambers, DNA sequencers, BioFlo fermenters, Celligen CLU
single-use bioreactions, AKTA Pure column chromatography, and additional tools.
In addition to technical coursework, students complete a career skills
curriculum preparing them for the job search and professional laboratory
environment. This project will increase outreach to move diverse and
economically disadvantaged communities and includes robust wrap-around services
for adult vocational learners including stipends, childcare and housing
vouchers, technology and transportation, DEIA training, as well as resources for
mental health services. The comprehensive curriculum taught by industry experts
and experienced educators breaks barriers and will be a model to enable
expansion and scalability, thereby closing important workforce gaps in the
advanced manufacturing fields. Outcomes will be thoughtfully captured,
monitored, and shared broadly through conferences and publications across
research, education, and industry. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT
Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support
experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse professional
and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to,
career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.