* 2322379
* SBIR Phase II: Novel size-changing, gadolinium-free contrast agent for magnetic resonance angiography
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Abhinav Sannidhi, NANOXORT LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,676.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide a tool for vascular imaging, an
area of medicine with a large clinical need. The developed blood pool contrast
agent (BPCA) has the potential to disrupt the current magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) contrast agent market because of its improved safety profile
and enhanced imaging of the vascular system compared to current gadolinium-based
contrast agents (GBCAs). The proposed technology has the potential to improve
the diagnosis and safety of contrast-enhanced MRA. This creates a win-win-win
scenario for everyone involved. For patients with vascular disease, this
solution provides a safer alternative with a more accurate diagnosis that will
allow doctors to prescribe safer, more effective treatments. For the patientâ€™s
family, it reduces financial and social burdens by enabling preventive treatment
due to earlier disease detection. For radiologists, the clearer MRA images may
lead to more accurate diagnoses. The product will be marketed to radiologists
and medical institutions that perform MRA to diagnose vascular thrombosis, renal
stenosis, and pediatric MRA.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to
optimize an iron-based BPCA for use in MRA for the detection of vascular
diseases. Contrast-enhanced MRA is a staple diagnostic procedure for imaging
blood vessels. The market is currently dominated by gadolinium-based contrast
agents (GBCAs) due to their excellent contrast enhancing effects; however, due
to their potential toxicity, GBCAs are designed to be rapidly cleared, leaving
only a short window for MRA image acquisition and resulting in suboptimal image
quality of blood vessels. To address the need for a safer contrast agent able to
provide enhanced vascular imaging, the Phase II project will optimize an iron-
based contrast agent that will enable an extended imaging window for improved
MRA resolution, but which is removed by kidney filtration. The research
objectives include: (1) optimizing the minimum viable product to enable dose
reduction and enhance the safety profile; (2) evaluating diagnostic imaging
efficacy and toxicology; and (3) demonstrating a scale-up manufacturing process
for the synthesis of the final formulation. This solution addresses the major
points required to de-risk commercialization and bring the technology closer to
the market.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.