* 2322335
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Computer Vision Methods for Diagnostic Medical Entomology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Autumn Goodwin, VECTECH, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,479.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to enable the provision of high quality vector surveillance data to
public health institutions domestically and internationally. Vectors, or
organisms that transmit diseases to other organisms, like mosquitoes and ticks,
have a significant impact on human health and agriculture, with associated
mortality and morbidity. This project aims to advance artificial intelligence
methods to identify mosquito species from high resolution images. While well
studied and documented, mosquito species identification remains a highly skilled
task, where the few capable of this skill for a given region often have many
other job responsibilities, making time devoted to the laborious task of
mosquito identification difficult to justify at scale, despite the necessity of
the data created. This project and its derivative works will enable
organizations without this skill in-house to acquire this highly valuable data.
The solution will also allow organizations with this skill in-house to task
shift identification to seasonal technicians, and field a larger dataset. This
larger dataset would enable better decision making for the control of mosquito
borne disease. If successful, these methodologies can be translated to other
vectors for disease, further benefiting public health.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is centered
around the problem of mosquito species identification. There are more than 3,000
species of mosquitoes in the world, each with different behaviors and capacities
for carrying disease. Regionally trained taxonomic experts can identify them
through visual inspection, but there is a shortage of such experts. Some
artificial intelligence (AI) methods for image-based identification have already
been developed, but they are only designed for a limited number of species and
face issues due to complex mosquito morphology and the variability incurred in
practical use by vector control organizations. This project seeks to enhance
existing methodologies for artificial intelligence (AI)-based insect
identification by making use of generative models to address issues in training
datasets caused by sampling biases. These models will be used to modulate the
presence of underrepresented attributes to make a more robust and less biased
model. The generative models used for this task will also be used to translate
the data for viability in one constrained image domain to another. The final
task is to use these models to modulate the training datasets for closely
related mosquito species to fine tune performance for minute, but important,
distinctions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.