* 2322860
* CAREER: Harnessing Serverless Functions to Build Highly Elastic Cloud Storage Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Yue Cheng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2026
* USD 240,028.00

Crucial data-intensive applications such as big data analytics, artificial
intelligence, and scientific computing exhibit highly dynamic and heterogeneous
data access patterns. These applications require a large data storage system
that is fast, elastic, cost-effective, and easy-to-use. Unfortunately, current
cloud storage offerings are unable to satisfy all of these requirements: big
data analytics applications can run up to 500X slower when they run as a cloud-
native application using a cloud object store; provisioning more cloud storage
resources does not solve the performance problem and storage over-provisioning
leads to millions of dollars of extra cost. This project rethinks the design and
implementation of next-generation, cloud-native storage infrastructures via a
new approach. This approach is enabled by a novel take on the serverless
computing paradigm -- serverless functions are elastic and truly pay-per-use,
making them a fast and inexpensive storage medium. This project aims to build
InfiniStore, a new cloud storage system, which elastically scales in response to
constantly changing data access patterns by orchestrating the collective memory
of serverless functions. Following an end-to-end, stacked approach, this project
will develop an elastic and inexpensive memory store using serverless functions,
techniques that provide strong consistency guarantees for data replicated in
serverless functions, fault tolerance mechanisms to maximize the data
availability in highly unreliable serverless environments, and a scalable
serverless file metadata service to support file semantics.

This project has the potential to redefine cloud storage pricing models --
InfiniStore enables memory-store-level pay-per-access that lets cloud users pay
for the data they access. This project will enable, in a broad range of
disciplines, the development of new, stateful, serverless applications that have
not been previously possible. All artifacts will be open source to support the
use and development both in academia and industry. This project has an
integrated educational plan, which also harnesses serverless computing but uses
it to develop a new serverless notebook cloud service, called InfiniCloud, for
interdisciplinary education. InfiniCloud will allow educators and students to
write and run serial or parallel Python programs at any scale, without needing
to manage servers or clusters. Moreover, this project will use InfiniStore and
InfiniCloud as a basis for various educational activities including curriculum
development, diversity building, undergraduate engagement, and workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.