* 2322505
* Collaborative Planning to Support Talented, Low-income Graduate Students Being Employed while Completing their Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Craig Ogilvie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Montana State University-Bozeman, Montana State University-Billings,
University of Montana, Montana Technological University, and Salish Kootenai
College. Over its one-year duration, this collaborative project will develop a
collaborative network, plan, and build the infrastructure that will form the
basis for a Track-3 S-STEM proposal to fund scholarships for full-time students
pursuing graduate degrees in engineering and physical, mathematical, biological,
environmental, and psychological sciences across Montana. In partnership with
the Montana High Tech Business Alliance and other state-wide employer
organizations, new master's students will receive scholarships for the first
three semesters of their studies in addition to employment in growing sectors of
the state’s STEM industry. Students will be employed full-time in the summer and
part-time during the academic year. Student focus groups, meetings with business
leaders, and listening sessions with tribal communities will develop shared
understandings of strengths and challenges that low-income students face,
enhance relationships, and ultimately inform a plan design grounded in
reciprocal benefits between low-income students (including indigenous students),
rural and reservation communities, and regional economies.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving graduates with demonstrated financial need. Low-income
students face many barriers to graduate education, including insufficient
finances, concerns about student debt, pressure to work full-time, and limited
knowledge of the “hidden curriculum” of graduate school. Students in rural
regions far from educational or industry hubs may be further reluctant to move
away from their families and communities to pursue STEM higher education and
careers. This loss of talent adversely impacts STEM industries due to the
considerable strengths that low-income, high-achieving students could otherwise
bring to these sectors. To fill this gap, this project will explore how
innovative partnerships between private high-tech industry and master’s-level
STEM degree programs can simultaneously help low-income students in rural
contexts achieve their full potential and meet critical workforce needs. By
engaging institutions across the state, students may need to move only short
distances between their undergraduate and graduate schools and can remain close
to their communities while benefitting from financial resources, social capital,
and help navigating complex institutional processes. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.