* 2322491
* Collaborative Research: Development of an Autonomous Ocean Observatory Node
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 75,110.00

The demand for observing the ocean beyond the coastlines has led to numerous
installations of sub-sea cabled observatories in the last two decades. However,
many scientifically-interesting places are too far from shore, thus, are
difficult for cables to reach. The vastness of the oceans calls for new
technologies to enable similar infrastructure to sense deeper oceans and enhance
scientific investigations in seismology, geodesy, ocean chemistry, marine
biology, etc. Recently, autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), gliders, and
seafloor robots and sensors have been utilized to observe and understand these
remote ocean regions. However, the lack of supporting infrastructures for these
robots and sensor networks has been the bottleneck for sustainable development.
Ultimately a versatile and highly capable Autonomous Observatory Node (AON) for
the deep ocean is desired to provide power recharging, data communication, and
Position, Navigation, and Time (PNT) services to deep sea sensor networks and
AUVs. In this project, the investigators will design and prototype a first-phase
AON consisting of two subsystems: the underwater acoustic communication
subsystem and the Underwater MicroGrid (UMG) subsystem. The acoustic subsystem
uses a large number of transducers to receive data from seafloor sensors and
AUVs and transfer their data to a surface glider which then relays the data to
the Internet. The acoustic subsystem will explore the underwater Multiple-Input-
Multiple-Output (MIMO) technology to provide simultaneous communication and PNT
services. The UMG subsystem takes a variety of power sources as input and
converts them into electrical power to support both continuous, low-power sensor
loads and brief, high-current demanding loads with the acoustic subsystem. Both
subsystems will take the Pressure Tolerant Electronic (PTE) approach to design
their critical components for enhanced power efficiency and pressure tolerance.
The prototypes will be pressure tested at 10,000 psi and ocean tested at 500 m
depth. The prototype AON will be first applied to deep ocean sensing and
earthquake early detection systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.