* 2322363
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: ETAUS Passive Localized Underwater Transiting Observing Systems (PLUTOS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Thomas Siderius, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 466,244.00

With the changing climate, there is an accompanying change in the abundance and
distribution of organisms from the smallest single celled organisms to the
largest whales. Observing these changes is critical to modeling and
understanding the relationship of physical and chemical properties of the ocean
to ecological factors. The Passive Localized Underwater Transiting Observing
Systems (PLUTOS) project will study links between underwater sound and biology
in the ocean, providing scientists with underwater "noses" and "ears" to detect
animals by their sounds and the cells they leave behind. When animals make
sounds in the ocean, they are indicating their presence; similarly, those same
creatures shed DNA as they move through the environment, and that environmental
DNA (eDNA) persists with concentration in proportion to the number of organisms
and the time since they have inhabited a particular location in the ocean. For
this project, the PLUTOS design will be used to look at the food web
relationship of seals, fish, and copepods in coastal environments.

The PLUTOS project will include multiple low-cost drifting autonomous loggers,
each system is ballasted to follow a set density in the water column such that
when each targeted depth is intensively sensed and sampled as the drifter moves
with the currents. The fundamental idea behind PLUTOS is that clustering of
multi-modal data streams including directional soundscape (e.g., 3D localized
sound sources in the environment), eDNA collection and real-time sensing, and
environmental properties like dissolved oxygen and temperature, will illuminate
the spatial and temporal variability linking ecosystems, eDNA persistence and
transport, depth-dependent directional soundscape, and coastal food web ecology
together. Design will include feasibility studies of eco-friendly materials and
non-disruptive passive acoustic navigation techniques. The project will include:
1) Adapting a low-cost, open-source, drifter system that addresses limitation in
cost and payload of existing systems; 2) Developing and assessing the
performance of species-specific in-situ eDNA sensors that are compact and low-
cost and low-power; 3) Developing new approaches for directional soundscape
processing, using array processing and machine learning approaches to provide
localization of individuals as well as density and distribution estimates for
seal populations. The resulting system will be used to evaluate the hypothesis
that correlations between species-specific soundscape information (seal calls)
and eDNA information (eDNA detection of seals, fish, and copepods) provide
information gain on abundance and density of food web participants versus time
and space versus single-variate information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.