* 2322806
* LTER: NGA Phase II - Resilience and Connectivity Across Transitions in the  Northern Gulf of Alaska Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Seth Danielson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,275,000.00

The Northern Gulf of Alaska (NGA) is a highly productive subarctic marine
ecosystem, and diverse coastal communities have relied upon it for hundreds and
thousands of years. Today, the NGA ecosystem continues to support national
fisheries, local coastal communities, and Tribal governments in terms of food,
culture, and economy. The NGA Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site aims to
understand this dynamic ecosystem. The NGA LTER overarching conceptual framework
is that intense environmental variability – both temporally and spatially – has
yielded a highly resilient ecosystem through species adaptation and community
organization. Building off 25 years of multidisciplinary observations along the
Seward Line and findings from Phase I of the NGA LTER, Phase II is improving
mechanistic understanding of this biome’s key organisms, ecological processes,
and responses to climate change. Phase II continues to educate students at all
levels and to engage with local communities to understand the questions and
concerns that they have regarding this ecosystem. Various agencies and
organizations partner with and leverage the NGA LTER, demonstrating the
importance of this LTER site and the data collected for the Gulf of Alaska
region.

Building on long-term data sets and findings from Phase-I, Northern Gulf of
Alaska LTER Phase-II research has three primary goals. First, the investigators
are continuing collection and analysis of long-term ecosystem data to understand
species abundance and connectivity, as well as their relationships to event-
scale and long-term change. Second, the team is exploring functional redundancy
of organisms as an underpinning of ecosystem resilience. Despite modest species
richness, the NGA hosts numerous instances of “redundant” taxa with comparable
trophic roles throughout the food web; the investigators propose that these
taxa, with differing but complimentary nutritional strategies, life histories,
and life-cycle timing, contribute to functional redundancy. Redundancy
stabilizes variability at higher trophic levels, thereby conferring resilience
to the system (i.e., maintenance or recovery of key ecosystem properties in
response to disturbance), and the degree to which redundancy stabilizes food
webs has not been well explored in pelagic marine ecosystems. Third, the team is
investigating the ecological role of physical fronts (i.e., transitions between
different water masses) and associated ecotones (i.e., transitions in biological
community structure) in the NGA. NGA is making use of new technologies that can
overcome historical limitations to the study of fronts and their constituent
communities at biologically relevant spatial and temporal scales. The
investigators hypothesize that fronts exert a disproportionate influence on key
ecosystem properties (e.g., production, export, biological diversity) and are
thus related to whole-ecosystem resilience. In addition, fronts are likely to be
influenced by both event-scale and long-term environmental change. The
observations and experimentation under each of these three themes are coupled to
modeling activities to understand relevant physical and biological relationships
that occur at frontal transitions. These biome-specific formulations are
exploring historical, current, and future ecological states based on climate
scenarios predicted for the NGA. Collaboration with other LTER sites is further
enhancing understanding of ecological theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.