* 2322250
* MCA: Problem-Based Learning for Warehousing and Order Fulfillment
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Mary Kurz, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2027
* USD 359,887.00

This Mid-Career Advancement project aims to serve the national interest by
increasing student competence in the warehousing and order fulfillment
industries. Large ecommerce companies can sell over 100,000 items per minute in
their busy seasons and deliver those in a tight window, supported by an in-house
research and implementation staff. However, many firms in the ecommerce space
operate without the expertise employed by larger companies. Many of these firms
may be able to identify potential areas of warehouse and order fulfillment
operational improvement, but not have the in-house expertise to address these
needs. Moreover, even students trained in these areas and their instructors may
not have the breadth of experience to develop student, and therefore
practitioner, competence in this area. Thus, there is a gap between the industry
needs and the educational experience and materials available to support student
competence-development in this topical area. This project will develop, refine
and distribute industry-based case studies and problem-based learning scenarios
for advanced undergraduate and master’s level graduate students in industrial
engineering. These instructional materials will be distributed through material
handling educational support groups and websites.

The overall goal of this project is to develop instructional materials and
hands-on activities, using a problem-based learning approach, for warehousing
and order fulfillment education for undergraduate and masters Industrial
Engineering students based on observable needs in the industry. This project
will address the following research questions: (1) What is the impact of
implementing a problem-based learning (PBL) approach for warehousing and order
fulfillment? (2) If problem-based learning is not the best choice for students
to learn warehousing and order fulfillment, is a case-based approach valid? (3)
Can problem-based learning materials be developed based on interactions with
local companies with warehousing and order fulfillment activities that are not
based on industry-based research projects? Project goals will be achieved
through four sets of activities: The principal investigator will (a) develop
place-based expertise in local warehousing and order fulfillment organizations
through extensive site visits; (b) develop technical expertise in Siemens
Tecnomatix Plant Simulation and FactoryFLOW; (c) develop and assess cases and
PBL modules for undergraduates and master’s students; and (d) disseminate
results to the research and teaching communities. Student learning will be
assessed using direct and indirect measures, including interviews and student
observations. Project results and outcomes will be disseminated through
engineering education conference and journal mechanisms and professional society
websites. This MCA award is funded through NSF's IUSE: EDU Program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.