* 2322009
* CIVIC - FA Track A: Pilot - Community Resilience through Engaging, Actionable, Timely, High - REsolution Air Quality Information (CREATE - AQI)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Sara Yeo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 969,672.00

Over 137 million people in the US live in areas with unhealthy levels of outdoor
air pollution. Children and student athletes are particularly vulnerable to
elevated air pollution levels because their lungs are not fully developed, and
they have more rapid breathing rates. Current air quality forecasts and
measurements fail to protect them from critical air quality hazards, like dust
and wildfire smoke. Utah is a prime example of a place with serious air quality
challenges driven by wildfire smoke and wind-blown dust. The geographic extent
and severity of these events is difficult to assess because State-run monitoring
stations are sparse and many rural counties have no means of air quality
measurement. Utah’s state and media outlets only provide air-quality forecasts
for 12 of 29 counties and these have low spatial resolution, are only for a
24-hour period, and are limited to ozone and fine particulate matter (i.e., 2.5
micron size fraction). They do not include dust nor do they account for the
spatial variability of the pollution. Utah’s current forecasting framework is
not automated and requires input from expert staff. Furthermore, due to Utah’s
complex terrain, local air-quality forecasts and air quality maps provided by
federal agencies can be highly inaccurate because they are designed for the
entire continental U.S. and do not account for microclimates or atmospheric
vagaries caused by elevation changes and rough terrane. This project provides
high resolution air quality data through innovative modeling and data gathering
mechanisms and approaches. It engages the community, in particular student
athletic coaches, to create neighborhood-scale, actionable air quality
information to help reduce exposure to air pollutant hazards, particularly for
children and youth participating in athletics. In addition to its broader impact
of protecting public health, the research will make advances in automated air-
quality forecasting, community-scale air quality sensing networks, and science
communication.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. This Civic
Innovation Challenge project will co-develop with stakeholders at the
neighborhood-scale, actionable air quality information to help reduce exposure
to air pollutant hazards including wildfire smoke and dust, particularly for
children. It will build off the project team's existing air-quality sensing and
forecasting infrastructure as well as strong civic partnerships it has developed
to collect and evaluate the necessary measurements. The forecasting tools,
effective message-delivery strategies, and quality metrics will help the
community protect children, athletes, and the public in Utah from air-quality
hazards. The project will expand the University of Utah’s existing air quality
sensing infrastructure by adding new sensing capabilities for dust and extending
the geographic coverage of its innovative air quality sensing network. These
data are then integrated with existing meteorological, dust transport, wildfire
smoke transport, air-quality forecasting models to generate automated, high,
spatial resolution, air quality forecasts. This will be done through the
involvement of university researchers from the University of Utah, school system
decision makers (e.g., preK-12 administrators and athletic trainers), and
governing bodies (the Utah Division of Air Quality, Health Department and Utah
High School Activities Association). This team approach and the innovative
combination of data and creation of data visualization tools with an easily
accessible interface will result in a high-resolution (i.e., 4-km horizontal
resolution and hourly readings from sensors), automated system that produces
numerical forecasts of air pollution hazards, in particular those related to
inversions, wildfire smoke, and dust. The system will operationalize and
integrate into the State air quality system a new, cost-effective, air quality
sensor to monitor and predict serious dust levels and other particulate airborne
matter that can be visualized through an interactive dashboard to understand
when dangerous levels are present.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.