* 2322706
* A Component-wise Model for Understanding Spin-Charge Interactions in Nanoparticle Solids Using Targeted Synthesis, Magnetometry, and Magnetoresistance
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeffrey Rinehart, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 414,704.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY At the heart of much of modern technology and
materials science lies the challenge of understanding and controlling the
interaction between an electron’s charge and its spin. This project, which is
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division
of Materials Research, targets that challenge by focusing on a phenomenon known
as magnetoresistance (MR). For a magnetoresistant material, a magnetic field can
be used to change the material’s electrical resistance. Unlike traditional MR
devices that employ intricate layered structures as the active MR material, this
project embraces a unique, simpler, and highly adaptable approach, namely
leveraging advances in low-cost, high-purity magnetic nanoparticle synthesis and
assemble them into MR-active hybrid composites. This method promises to be more
fault-tolerant and tunable, enabling researchers to develop, test, and refine
theories of MR and spin transport at an unprecedented pace. Furthermore, this
project enhances the impact of its research through a commitment to transparency
and accessibility in data management. In an era where data fuels discovery, the
team will focus on data analysis and software development embedded in FAIR
principles, building a culture of “open-source” research that is genuinely
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable to the public funders who make
the research possible.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY The research, which is supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research,
explores a nanoscale bottom-up approach to one of the most technologically
important methods of electronic spin-charge interaction: magnetoresistance (MR).
Instead of the traditional layered MR materials, the research team of Professor
Jeffrey Rinehart at UC San Diego focuses on granular MR materials composed of
nanoparticles synthesized with specific composition and magnetic phase
requirements. By leveraging advancements in colloidal nanochemistry,
unparalleled control over the magnetic structure of individual particles is
obtained and thoroughly characterized, thereby allowing rigorous correlation
with the MR behavior of composite material structures. This is the first time
that researchers establish quantitative structure-function relationships between
well-defined parameters: interparticle interaction strength, single-particle
magnetic anisotropy, and particle volume. Elucidating these key factors
influencing the MR behavior of the system allows mapping out the full landscape
of MR response as multidimensional response function, providing a far more
comprehensive characterization than has previously been attempted. Starting from
the simple but important ferrite-based systems, research expands to high-
performing magnetic materials with an ultimate goal of creating MR systems with
adjustable field sensitivity and pseudo-spin valve behavior for a variety of
sensing applications. The research includes an extensive data organization and
modeling component with an emphasis on alignment with FAIR data principles and
making data widely available for study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.