* 2322261
* I-Corps: High-Efficiency Digital Pump
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* John Lumkes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an energy-efficient digital pump. The proposed technology may
provide a viable solution to the efficiency, emissions, and energy-saving
challenges associated with traditional variable displacement pumps, commonly
used in energy-intensive sectors such as construction, agriculture, aerospace,
and automotive industries. Decreased energy consumption and carbon emissions
from digital pumps may play a crucial role in mitigating the impacts of climate
change and enhancing air quality. In addition, industry may leverage the digital
pump to create new machinery that addresses the growing demand for improved
performance, fuel efficiency, and regulation compliance. The advancement of
high-efficiency digital pumps has potential for numerous scientific and
practical applications, positioning it as a valuable tool leading to new
developments and enhancements in machines and mechanical designs.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a high-efficiency digital
pump that achieves higher energy savings compared to traditional pumps. The
proposed digital pump technology utilizes variable geometry cams to control the
pump's inlet and outlet valves. This technology offers advantages over
electrically actuated digital pumps, including eliminating delays in the
actuation process, consistent and reliable actuation profiles, and reducing
potential energy waste. It also eliminates the need for data acquisition
systems, complex controls, or added energy sources, resulting in a more cost-
effective and sustainable solution. By advancing and contributing to the
knowledge of fluid power systems, mechanical design, and actuation techniques,
this technology has implications for a diverse range of applications. Its
implementation may lead to improved efficiency and sustainability in several
sectors, stimulating further research and innovation in sustainable energy, a
crucial domain for combatting climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.