* 2322472
* Conference: The Microbiome Frontier of Mammalogy, a symposium and workshop for the International Mammalogical Congress in Anchorage, AK, USA, July 14-20, 2023
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Kelly Speer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2024
* USD 19,350.00

As we gain a better understanding of the associations between wild mammals and
microorganisms, it is becoming clear that we can leverage information from these
associations to test pressing hypotheses about mammalian conservation and
pathogen dynamics. Microbiome research in wild mammals suggests that microbes
enable dietary specialization, may facilitate migration or hibernation, impact
susceptibility of the mammal to disease invasion, and may have ancient
associations with their mammal hosts. A growing body of evidence indicates that
environmental change alters these mammal-microbe interactions and may have
consequences for mammal conservation and the role mammals play as wildlife
reservoirs of human pathogens. We need more researchers studying the
interdependence of wild mammals and microbes using creative thinking frameworks
in order to examine these complex systems. To increase the number of
mammalogists studying microorganisms, the investigators will hold a symposium
and workshop titled “The Microbiome Frontier of Mammalogy” at the 13th
International Mammalogical Congress. This symposium will showcase the cutting-
edge of research on mammal-microbe interactions and the workshop will teach
flexible thinking using the Indigenous concept of “relationality” as a framework
to conceptualize connectedness. The workshop is hosted in collaboration with the
Alaska Native Heritage Center, and the investigators acknowledge the guidance
and instruction from an Indigenous Elder. The support provided will increase the
interdisciplinary connections between mammalogy and microbiology and allow a
more holistically approach conservation and disease ecology of mammals.

Mammals harbor diverse and abundant communities of microorganisms in and on
their bodies. A burgeoning research field has begun to uncover the role that
these microbes play in the ecology and evolution of mammalian hosts. It has been
hypothesized that these communities could alter the ecology and evolution of
animal hosts. However, we lack a thorough conceptual understanding of many
facets of the microbiome given our current biological understandings. Akin to
interdisciplinary scientific approaches, there may be value in considering the
viewpoints or strategies of other fields of understanding, such as philosophy
and Indigenous knowledge. By considering or engaging in alternative or
complementary approaches, the sometimes static and rigid mindsets of academic
scientists are given the opportunity to relax. The field of the mammalian
microbiome offers a rich opportunity to begin combining approaches from long-
separated fields to synthesize our knowledge and understanding of mammalogy and
microbial ecology. In collaboration with co-organizers, the supported symposium
and workshop will initiate dialogue around these ideas and develop
interdisciplinary collaborations for building new research trajectories in the
fields of microbiology, mammalogy, and philosophy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.