* 2322734
* Pivots: Chicagoland Partnership for Semiconductor and Microelectronics Experiential Learning
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kimberly Black-Parker, Chicago State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2026
* USD 999,955.00

The project responds to two national imperatives -- the national security
concerns arising from the reliance on computing components manufactured abroad
and the need for engagement of underdeveloped and underutilized pools of talent
in the STEM workforce. The project is a partnership between a university, non-
profit community organizations, a national laboratory and industry to prepare
individuals from underrepresented minority groups with the skills necessary to
start new careers in the semiconductor and microelectronics industry in
Chicagoland by reskilling workers through a series of compensated experiential
learning activities. The results of the project include the creation of a
diverse and competitive high technology workforce in the emergent and growing
semiconductor and microelectronics industry in Illinois -- a region historically
well-suited for industrial production but long challenged by the effects of
deindustrialization from globalization. The semiconductor industry is critical
to economic competitiveness and national security. By supplying an educated and
ready workforce in Illinois, the project helps to improve national security
through the domestic production of semiconductors and microelectronics and
through the diversification of the location of their manufacturing in Illinois
and the Midwest.

There are five goals of the project: increased awareness of career opportunities
in the local semiconductor and microelectronics industry for individuals from
underrepresented minority groups, increased participation of individuals from
underrepresented minority groups in the U.S. semiconductor and microelectronics
industry, provision of experiential learning opportunities and culturally
responsive support for working adults to transition into new careers in
semiconductor and microelectronics manufacturing , increased economic
development of the Chicagoland region in the area of high technology and support
of national security interests of the U.S. by developing a diverse domestic
workforce prepared to work in semiconductor and microelectronics manufacturing.
These goals are accomplished through a four-phase model of educational
experiences along with a mentorship and support program. Phase 1 provides
foundational knowledge of semiconductors and microelectronics through hands-on
activities provided in classroom/small laboratory settings; Phase 2 is the
completion of an experiment or project at a national laboratory; Phase 3 is a
mini-internship at an employer in the semiconductor and microelectronics
industry; and Phase 4 is participation in a job fair and developing a
professional development plan. The project will advance the knowledge in
workforce development by generating promising practices about reskilling
individuals from underrepresented minority groups and their entry into careers
in the microelectronics and semiconductor industry. This project aligns with the
NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to
support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse
professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and
their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.