* 2322199
* CC* Planning: Developing a Plan to Improve Research Computing at Christopher Newport University
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ryan Fisher, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,966.00

The aims of this project are to develop and publish a five-year
cyberinfrastructure plan for scientific computing at Christopher Newport
University (CNU). The past decade has seen CNU dramatically increase its
research capabilities and impact, however the computing resources used are often
not accessible to the wider campus. A unified computing plan, which includes the
creation of a scientific computing cluster, is needed to support CNU’s research
programs and to provide resources to faculty across the university. In
collaboration with IT services, we are identifying the computing resources
necessary to meet research needs and estimating the infrastructure required to
support those resources. The end goal of this project is to develop a plan for
comprehensive scientific computing infrastructure at CNU that will support
existing research, enable researchers to expand into new fields, and allow CNU
to contribute to national cyberinfrastructure by providing new resources to the
Open Science Grid. CNU is a primarily undergraduate institution that has a
significant focus on student involvement in research. Research areas that are
heavy users of computational resources include experimental nuclear physics,
gravitational wave astronomy, natural language processing, other applications of
artificial intelligence to data science, and mathematical simulation. Through
the improved cyberinfrastructure supported by this work, students will have
significantly improved opportunities to engage in research that both expands the
forefront of our understanding of science and explores the use of emerging
technologies. Women and underrepresented students are specifically supported and
encouraged to engage in these research opportunities through several CNU's
initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.