* 2322514
* Accelerating Low-Income College STEM Students to Degree Completion at a Two-Year Hispanic Serving Institution in Rural Central Washington
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* Matthew Loeser, Yakima Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2029
* USD 995,886.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Yakima Valley College (YVC). As a federally-designated Hispanic-Serving
Institution, YVC serves a large population of low-income and Hispanic students.
Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to at least 60
unique full-time and part-time students who are pursuing associate's degrees in
several STEM disciplines. Students enrolled in first- and second-year college
classes will receive scholarships that will support them through degree
completion or transfer from YVC. Scholars will be selected based on a strong
record of prior academic achievement, financial need, and an expressed interest
in a STEM discipline. Once selected, students will be oriented to YVC’s New
Scientist Training-2 (NeST-2) program. NeST-2 Scholars will engage in a suite of
discipline-specific academic support services, receive one-on-one advising, and
participate in cohort-building enrichment activities. The project will expand
upon YVC's original NeST program by increasing the number of scholars, focusing
on their transfer success, and adapting techniques from university-based models.
This program will potentially produce important insights that support the broad
goal of diversifying the nation's STEM workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There
are three specific aims: 1) recruit students who are academically talented with
demonstrated financial need; 2) retain students once they become NeST-2
scholars, and: 3) generate new knowledge on the applicability to two-year
colleges of the Meyerhoff Scholars Program (a long-standing and well-regarded
student support program at a major Research 1 university). By studying the
effectiveness of academic and career support with simultaneous events that
reinforce belongingness, this program will identify strategies that offer a high
return on investment. Establishing evidence-based best practices can spur
replication of similar programs across the community college system of
Washington State and the country. To achieve this scale of change the results
will be disseminated widely through regional conferences. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.