* 2322873
* CAREER: Fundamental Transport Mechanisms of Evaporation From Non-Axisymmetric Droplets Confined on Hollow Micropillars Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Damena Agonafer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2025
* USD 445,354.00

Technology advances in micro- and power-electronics have revolutionized the way
people work, communicate, and live. However, the miniaturization and high power
densities require enhanced cooling technologies for reliable operation. Two-
phase liquid cooling, such as direct evaporation from microscale droplets,
utilizes the high latent heat of vaporization to effectively dissipate heat.
Evaporation from non-spherical droplets, owing to their larger surface area and
meniscus curvature, exhibits very different evaporation rates compared to a
spherical droplet. Consequently, cooling rates can be enhanced by using micro-
engineered surfaces to control droplet shapes. This project will establish a
theoretical and experimental basis for breakthroughs in two-phase cooling
technologies that can unleash the full potential of next-generation electronics
used for data centers, electric vehicles, and artificial intelligence. The long-
term educational goal of this CAREER project is to integrate project-based
research outcomes into education modules and motivate STEM majors by engaging
students from high school to the graduate level in surface engineering and
thermal transport research.

This project seeks to identify the different modes of heat and mass transfer
during the evaporation of non-axisymmetric microdroplets. While sessile droplet
evaporation has been studied extensively over the past hundred years, most of
them have only focused on the evaporation of droplets with capped spherical
shapes. Consequently, how different evaporation mechanisms are affected by the
non-axisymmetric droplet shape and how the droplet geometry is controlled by
micro-engineered structures remain unclear. This project seeks to elucidate how
the geometry and dimensions of micro-engineered structures affect the contact
line dynamics, thermocapillary flow, interfacial transport, and vapor diffusion
characteristics for evaporating non-axisymmetric microdroplets. Novel
experimental methods will be utilized based on a pressure-controlled
microfluidic system, micro-particle image velocimetry, and planar laser induced
fluorescence imaging to quantify evaporation mass transport and capture the
local flow and temperature patterns. These approaches will advance experimental
techniques in thermofluidic fields for probing the transport mechanisms of
liquid-vapor two-phase systems, providing insights into liquid-vapor interfacial
mass transport, micro-convection, and vapor diffusion during evaporation of non-
axisymmetric microdroplets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.