* 2322670
* S-STEM Collaborative Planning Grant: An accelerated 3+2 pathway to BS and MS degrees in Semiconductor Manufacturing and Quantum Science disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Matthew Doty, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,994.00

The long term goal of this collaborative planning project is to contribute to
the national need for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and
technicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at the University of Delaware
(UD) and West Chester University of Pennsylvania (WCU). Specifically, the
partnering institutions will conduct an intensive planning effort to prepare for
a future Track 3 S-STEM proposal centered on undergraduate and graduate scholars
pursuing degrees relevant to semiconductor manufacturing and quantum science
careers. These are important fields for America’s future economic
competitiveness and the demand for a skilled workforce in these areas is growing
dramatically. The specific goals of this planning project, which includes the
American Institute for Research (AIR), are to 1) assess the needs of the low-
income target student population, 2) design a system of supports that will meet
these needs, 3) investigate methods for monitoring the effectiveness of these
supports so that continuous improvement can be made, and 4) develop the
financial mechanisms to support future cohorts of scholars. The project will
establish a 3+2 program that supports low-income students as they earn a BS from
WCU and a Master’s degree from UD in a total of 5 years. The structure of the
program will significantly reduce both the time and net cost required to earn a
graduate degree and will accelerate students’ entry into the semiconductor
manufacturing and quantum science workforce.

This collaborative planning effort builds off WCU's current NSF S-STEM project
(award #2028230), which is supporting 18 undergraduates in earning bachelor's
degrees. WCU has developed a recruiting network including 20 high schools
serving diverse, predominantly low-income students in the greater Philadelphia
region. The newly developed 3+2 program will focus on students earning Physics
or Chemistry bachelor's degrees from WCU and progressing into one of four
master’s degree programs at UD: a) Quantum Science and Engineering, b) Materials
Science and Engineering, c) Electrical and Computer Engineering, or d)
Semiconductor Device Manufacturing. The scope of activities to be conducted
during the planning period include: 1) investigating high school students'
knowledge of and interest in career paths; 2) investigating which supports
currently in place for WCU S-STEM scholars should be continued or adjusted for
implementation in the future Track 3 submission; 3) investigating the factors
used by graduate admission committees to mitigate any biases that might impact
low-income applicants; 4) developing a design-based implementation research plan
to study and improve the effectiveness of all interventions; 5) developing a new
master’s degree program in Semiconductor Device Manufacturing; 6) completing
articulation agreements; and 7) developing faculty training and preparation
protocols. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income, academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.