* 2322459
* Travel: ISCRE 27: Chemical Reaction Engineering for Sustainable Development
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Ryan Hartman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

The most important events for the international reaction engineering scientific
community have historically been the International Symposia on Chemical Reaction
Engineering. The 27th International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering
(ISCRE 27) was organized to take place June 11-14, 2023, in Québec City, Canada.
This symposium provides a focus on the frontiers of chemical reaction
engineering related to sustainability, with an opportunity for international
networking within the scientific community. ISCRE meetings are held biennially,
rotating between North America, Europe, and Asia. This international reputation
combined with the efforts of the organizing and scientific committees ensures a
vibrant and diverse mix of participants, which offers supported students and
researchers the opportunity to engage and learn about the practical technology
challenges facing companies that apply chemical reaction engineering expertise.
The conference organizers anticipated approximately 330 in-person attendees from
academia, industry, and government based on previous ISCRE conferences held in
North America. Funding requested from the National Science Foundation will be
utilized to support the travel of early-career faculty, post-doctoral
researchers, and graduate students, with an emphasis on participation of
underrepresented groups.

The ISCRE 27 technical program is focused on the challenges of sustainable
development and how chemical reaction engineers can address these challenges
through their work. The Scientific Committee comprises sixty leading academic
and industrial researchers in sustainable chemical engineering from around the
world. Technical Sessions cover emerging sustainable engineering focus areas
such as CO2 Capture & Utilization, Electrocatalysis & Photocatalysis,
Electrification of Chemicals Manufacturing, Waste Upcycling, Hydrogen Production
and Storage, and Biomass Conversion. A combination of more than 150 oral
presentations and 150 poster presentations were planned to give students and
early career researchers a forum for sharing their work and expertise. Technical
Workshops will offer students the ability to learn additional practical skills
such as Laboratory Reaction Engineer (taught by Dow experts), Technical Writing,
and Reactor Scale-up Techniques. The awarded NSF funds will subsidize expenses
such as registration, travel, and hotel accommodations for students, postdocs,
and researchers. The nominee’s CV and presentation abstract along with any
recommendation letters from research advisors were evaluated by the ISCRE 27
Scientific Committee as the merit for the travel awards. The diverse makeup of
the conference attendees also presents the awardees the possibility for
international technical exchanges and cooperation. Supported attendees will be
able to submit their research for publication in special issues of Chemical
Engineering Journal and Chemical Engineering Science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.