* 2322355
* SBIR Phase I: CAS: A Novel Approach for Achieving Scale in Direct Air Carbon Capture
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Harrison Rice, VICTORY OVER CARBON, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 272,488.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in potentially contributing to the creation of a viable
gigaton-scale Direct Air CO2 (carbon dioxide) Capture (DAC) technology. The
technology could be a key pillar in preventing the worst effects of climate
change. For over a century, humanity has emitted billions of tons of CO2 into
the atmosphere each year. As more CO2 has accumulated in the atmosphere trapping
the sun’s rays, Earth’s temperature has continued to rise. According to the
Bipartisan Policy Center, gigaton-scale DAC stands to support the creation of a
trillion-dollar industry in the United States and underpin the development of 3
million jobs. This project is based on a novel DAC design addressing two key
hurdles to achieving the scale needed to effectively offset CO2-caused climate
change: cost to build infrastructure and energy to run processes. The system
injects carbon capture fluid with a monoethanolamine (MEA) spray and removes
that spray with an exhaust particle separating centrifuge. Through this hollow
design, it not only saves on building costs, but may be poised to save on
ongoing energy costs. Energy cost in a carbon capture contactor is a function of
pressure drop or drag. The company's hypothesis is that a centrifuge is
significantly more aerodynamic than the honeycomb-like filling currently used in
contactors. The energy savings can translate into a system with significantly
lower pressure drop and, therefore, lower ongoing energy costs to run. The
program is organized into research objectives that investigate each area of
technical risk. The first objective is calculating the optimal fluid particle
size for capturing carbon dioxide from the air and optimizing the MEA operating
range within the proposed system through Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and
lab testing. The second objective is determining the relationship between the
fan and centrifuge through physical prototyping. The third objective is
designing the facility shape itself though a mix of CFD and physical
prototyping.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.