* 2322242
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: Targeted Micro-retrofits based on Building Envelope Scans using Drones, GPR, and Deep Neural Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Semiha Ergan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,999.00

Addressing a critical issue in New York City, this project targets the impending
shortage of building inspection staff and the rising labor costs, especially
with the implementation of Local Law 97. Traditional data collection for roof
moisture reports in the building science and roofing consultancy industry is
time-consuming, costly, and poses safety risks. This projectâ€™s technology offers
a transformative solution that is cost-effective, labor-efficient, non-invasive,
and scalable. It enables building inspection practitioners to perform more
inspections than traditional methods, significantly reducing time and cost.
Partnering with roofing consultants, community solar organizations, local school
boards, and the municipal government, this project is particularly beneficial
for groups with limited funding and large building portfolios, aiding in
devising cost-effective compliance plans for climate legislation like Local Law
97. Also, the social science arm of this project investigates the barriers to
the adoption of this technology and provides strategies to overcome them. The
efforts will be continued after the CIVIC project through an NYU-based startup
focused on commercializing the technology developed and refined throughout the
project. Overall, this project increases efficiency, reduces costs, and improves
safety in the building inspection process, potentially impacting the industry
significantly and contributing to the broader goal of improving building
maintenance and energy efficiency all over the nation.

This project focuses on the development and deployment of an autonomous robotic
data collection platform equipped with advanced sensors, including ground
penetrating radar, LiDAR, GPS, visual cameras, and thermal cameras. It also
utilizes drones to capture thermal and RGB data of building envelopes. These
technologies enable the detection of moisture, thermal anomalies, and other
building envelope issues without invasive procedures, minimizing the need for
physical visits by engineers. The collected data is sent to cloud-based servers,
where AI-powered software analyzes the information using deep learning and robot
perception techniques to generate detailed reports on the moisture levels and
overall condition. Combining drone-based data collection, advanced sensor
technologies, and AI analysis enhances the accuracy, efficiency, and
comprehensiveness of building envelope inspections. This project's scope
involves piloting the technology on large roofs with complex obstructions and
obstacles, particularly in New York City. This real-world testing enables system
refinement and optimization for different building types and contexts. By
improving building inspections with such an integrated approach, this project
improves the effectiveness, cost-efficiency, and safety of the process,
addressing critical building envelope issues and supporting sustainable building
practices.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.