* 2322190
* Collaborative Research: U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: CIF: AF: Small: Enabling Beyond-5G Wireless Access Networks with Robust and Scalable Cell-Free Massive MIMO
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Duy Nguyen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 262,967.00

In wireless cellular networks, interference between user signals in adjacent
cells remains a persistent problem that hinders connectivity at the cell
boundaries. A new architecture for wireless networks is emerging that eliminates
the concept of cells and relies on a distributed network of access points across
a wide area that share data and cooperate to combat interference. This new
``cell-free'' approach has been shown to provide significantly more uniform
coverage and data rates comparable to, and in some cases better than, the
classical centralized cellular approach. To date, most theoretical studies of
cell-free systems have assumed relatively favorable radiowave propagation that
leads to good performance using simple linear signal processing methods. This
project, by contrast, focuses on less favorable scenarios that require more
complicated non-linear statistical methods. The research under the project will
be conducted with collaborators from U.S., Irish, and Northern Irish
institutions, and will support a diverse cohort of postdocs, PhD, Master's, and
undergraduate students in key 5G and 6G technologies.

The primary goals of this research are to develop nonlinear statistical
inference methods for estimation and detection and devise robust and scalable
resource allocation solutions for cell-free massive MIMO under less favorable
channel propagation conditions. Project research activities will advance the
current state of knowledge on cell-free massive MIMO and are organized into
three interconnected thrusts: i) Developing nonlinear variational Bayesian
methods for centralized and distributed processing, focusing on channel
estimation, data detection, and user activity detection tasks; ii) Developing
novel user-centric pilot designs and power control schemes, considering
practical challenges in cell-free massive MIMO such as hardware impairments and
fronthaul quantization errors; and iii.) Devising robust and scalable resource
allocation strategies to resolve the user congestion issue and improve network-
wide energy efficiency, considering non-uniform data traffic load conditions.
The project's demonstration of the capabilities of robust and scalable cell-free
massive MIMO will inspire collaborative and cross-disciplinary research efforts
and establish cell-free massive MIMO as a transformative beyond-5G/6G wireless
access technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.