* 2322340
* SBIR Phase I:  Sown To Grow - Measuring Growth in Trusting Relationships between Students and Educators with Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Disha Gupta, SOWN TO GROW, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to help educators to develop deeper relationships with
their students, assist schools in identifying students who lack strong
relationships and need additional support, and help school districts understand
the emotional health and relationship strength of their schools. Student
emotional well-being, student absenteeism, and teacher burnout are some of the
most pressing problems facing K-12 education today. A significant body of
research shows that positive student-teacher relationships help students adjust
to school, contribute to social skill development, promote academic performance
and resiliency, decrease absenteeism, and foster engagement. Schools struggle
with relationship building at scale - it takes time to form connections, not all
students are willing to open up, and teachers need help and training on
understanding and responding to the varied experiences and needs of their
students. This project, if successful, will help schools address these
challenges at scale. Additionally, the data from this project will help teachers
contribute to learning science and behavioral health research, while providing a
blueprint to the education technology industry on how to implement advanced
technology in an ethical and transparent manner that augments, rather than
replaces, existing education structures and systems.

This project builds an innovative technology that will understand and measure
the strength of the student-teacher relationships at scale. The technology will
develop new frameworks for defining trusting relationships based on the depth of
student reflections, teacher responses, and how responses change and grow week
over week. Advanced natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning (ML)
techniques will model these frameworks based on real student-teacher
interactions. NLP typically focuses on using models to understand text inputs
and predict/generate responses. Through this project, the team seeks to use new
NLP/ML techniques to understand and assess the interactions and levels of trust
between individuals. The NLP/ML models will analyze the depth of student
reflections and interpret the nature of the teacher responses separately. The
output of these two models will then be combined to understand the strength of
student-teacher relationship by creating a student-teacher relationship trust
metric. This metric will help understand student-teacher relationships at scale
across schools and districts all over the country.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.