* 2322980
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Shoe Insoles to Assess Walking Function in Real Life Environments
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Damiano Zanotto, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sensitive, quantitative assessments that focus on ambulatory
function in real-life settings to evaluate safety and effectiveness of new
treatments in clinical trials and post-marketing surveillance in individuals
with neurological conditions, such as neuromuscular disorders, Parkinson’s
disease, Huntington disease, and Multiple Sclerosis. Walking is the most
frequent activity of daily living and a key contributor to functional
independence. New pharmacological treatments are changing the therapeutic
landscape for several neurological conditions, altering their natural history,
with encouraging results in ambulatory function. Walking-related digital
mobility outcomes have the potential to objectively capture daily performance to
supplement clinical assessments and patient-reported outcomes, thereby providing
a more comprehensive picture of a patient’s condition. Interest in the use of
wearables in clinical research to assess the efficacy of new interventions is on
the rise. It is estimated that by 2025 nearly 70% of all clinical trials will
involve wearables, while the average pharma company can save $100 million/year
in trial development spending by adopting more objective, sensitive, and
granular digital mobility outcomes. Yet, most devices for real-life gait
monitoring are limited to volume digital mobility outcomes, which are easy to
capture but lack stride-by-stride granularity. This innovation could enable the
collection of accurate volume and stride-by-stride gait metrics longitudinally,
in patients’ living environments, to help understand how disease trajectories
are affected by new treatments. By capturing subtle but clinically meaningful
functional changes over shorter time periods, the innovation could reduce the
cost of clinical trials and bring effective treatments to patients faster and
more affordably.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of abstraction models that
synergistically combine conventional signal processing methods for wearable gait
monitoring systems with the vast expressive capability of machine learning
regression and the superior personalization properties of transductive
inference. Instead of replacing conventional methods, this innovation's machine
learning models correct their outputs using an optimized set of input features,
thereby generating accurate stride-by-stride spatiotemporal and kinetic digital
mobility outcomes without the computational burden that plagues end-to-end
machine learning models and hinders their implementation in embedded systems. By
leveraging the strengths of transductive inference, the innovation's models
provide unprecedented accuracy over extended-time measurements without the need
for subject-specific labelled data. This novel approach provides algorithmic
support for next-generation wearable technology to fill the accuracy gap between
gold-standard laboratory equipment and emerging wearable gait monitoring
devices, which hampers the widespread use of these systems in clinical research.
By widening the range of applicability of wearable gait monitoring devices, the
innovation will promote the understanding of real-life ambulatory function and
its trajectories over time in healthy and clinical populations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.