* 2322482
* Exploring Pathways to Access, Collaboration, and Equity for Central Appalachian Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Josephine Rodriguez, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for trained experts and
professionals in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), by
facilitating planning for a future S-STEM Track 3 proposal aiming to support and
graduate talented students with financial need. The planning effort is a
collaboration between the University of Virginia (UVA) and two institutions in
rural Central Appalachia: The University of Virginia’s College at Wise (UVA
Wise) and Southeast Kentucky Community & Technical College (SKCTC). The project
will recruit and engage three additional community college partners as part of
the planning activities. UVA is a public, R1, and flagship institution while UVA
Wise is its small liberal arts division in rural southwest Virginia. SKCTC is a
public, community and technical college serving southeastern Kentucky that is
part of the Kentucky Community and Technical College System (KCTCS). This
project builds on a Track 1 S-STEM project at UVA Wise, that recruited its first
cohort in 2019 and has graduated the first twelve of 26 anticipated scholars.
Major planning activities include planning workshops, a learning series,
organizational and needs assessment at each partner, an analysis of regional job
prospects, and the development of a theory of change and logic model. Through
the planning process and the development of a future Track 3 S-STEM proposal,
this project will contribute to the important work of transforming the Central
Appalachian region and broadening participation in the STEM workforce.

This project will strive to increase STEM degree completion of low-income,
talented undergraduates primarily from Central Appalachia. To accomplish this,
the project will: (1) build on partnerships between UVA, UVA Wise, SKCTC, the
Virginia Community College System, KCTCS, and the Appalachian Regional
Commission; (2) identify and expand partnerships with regional two-year
institutions and industry partners; (3) solidify transfer and articulation
agreements between partners; and (4) disseminate lessons learned about
developing equitable S-STEM partnerships. The planning effort will be guided by
equity-minded best practices for collaborations and will prepare the description
of its equitable and collaborative process to communicate widely to academic
communities that support low-income students. A Community Advisory Board with
members from industry, supporting agencies, and community colleges will assess
progress towards project objectives. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.