* 2322465
* Pivots: VETS-HASTE: Veterans SkillBridge through Industry based Hardware Security Training and Education
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sandip Ray, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The design of modern semiconductor devices involves a complex and widespread
supply chain comprising multiple vendors, intellectual property providers,
platform integrators, foundries, testing facilities, and other entities. In this
intricate process, there is a clear potential for a malicious actor to introduce
security vulnerabilities that undermine the entire system's integrity. The
presence of compromised hardware components in commercial or military
cyberinfrastructure can lead to severe and widespread implications for security
and safety. Thus, ensuring hardware security is vital for establishing a strong
semiconductor design ecosystem. However, there is a significant shortage of
adequately trained hardware security workforce despite the critical need in our
government and private sectors. This project will develop a sustainable and
scalable experiential learning program for underserved participants in STEM to
gain new skills and pathways into hardware security careers.

This project will utilize innovative learning science strategies to actively
involve a diverse group of veterans, a significant underserved population, in
experiential hardware security training. Veterans possess unique qualities and
skills, including hands-on experience, resilience, attention to detail, and
diverse backgrounds, making them an untapped resource for the advanced
technology field, particularly in hardware security. The project will prioritize
the recruitment and support of veteran participants, who will undergo an
industry-driven course by leveraging university resources and then engage in a
series of authentic learning activities facilitated by industry partners, such
as in-situ modeling, expert mentoring, and internships. In addition, the project
will provide ample opportunities for career exploration and self-discovery to
enhance participants' conceptual knowledge and cultivate their interests in
hardware security careers. Finally, independent formative and summative
evaluations will be conducted to continuously improve the program design.
Through these endeavors, this project will create a diverse and skilled pipeline
of workers for the domestic semiconductor industry, thereby contributing to
economic and national security goals. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT
Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support
experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse professional
and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to,
career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.