* 2322420
* CC* Data Storage: Closing Caltech's data storage gap: from ad-hoc to well-managed stewardship of large-scale datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Thomas Morrell, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Caltech Library and the campus IT group, IMSS (Information Management Systems
and Services) are collaborating to build research data storage and sharing
infrastructure for a sustainable future. Two Open Storage Network (OSN) pods
provide 2.2 TB of long-term storage for both Caltech researchers and the wider
research community through the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination
Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program. OSN storage enables the existing
CaltechDATA institutional repository to share larger files and empowers Caltech
researchers to generate Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR)
data. 15 campus research groups are committed to openly sharing over 600 TB of
data, spanning a wide range of research areas including biological sequencing
and imaging, astronomy, geosciences, and engineering.

This rich data resource broadens participation in science by providing global
access to raw data from cutting-edge microscopes, telescopes, and supercomputers
that are currently limited to Caltech researchers. Training-based workforce
development components include OSN instruction through basic
cyberinfrastructure/programming workshops, in-class instruction, and training
sessions that are open to all students, postdocs, faculty, staff, and
collaborators. Support for a diverse group of student workers will engage them
in the management of CaltechDATA and OSN storage. The open-source storage
architecture serves as a model that other universities can deploy through open
documentation. The combination of OSN and an open-source data repository such as
InvenioRDM serves as a model of using open-source tools for institutional
research data management and broadening participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.