* 2322208
* STTR Phase I:  Snapshot, on-machine metrology system for high-precision optical manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2024,09/30/2025
* Rongguang Liang, LIGHT RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2025
* USD 274,524.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project advances precision manufacturing. The on-machine metrology
system will have a transformative effect on highly efficient and precise optical
manufacturing, additive manufacturing, and precision machining. These industries
currently face a shared technical challenge: the lack of real-time quality
control during fabrication. The on-machine metrology tool's real-time quality
control capabilities will not only drive efficiency in high-precision
manufacturing but also contribute to reduced manufacturing costs and enhanced
product quality. Overall, the project's anticipated outcomes include an
efficient high throughput manufacturing process with on-machine metrology, the
development of a compact, snapshot, multi-wavelength on-machine metrology
system, and the establishment of a next-generation innovation and
entrepreneurship training program.

This STTR project seeks to develop a compact, snapshot, dual-mode, multi-
wavelength interferometric system for in situ metrology in high precision
manufacturing. The lack of real-time quality control during fabrication is a
critical hurdle, leading to delays and manufacturing errors. This system
integrates unique techniques to overcome this challenge and enhance throughput
and accuracy. The technology utilizes a polarization-based, multi-wavelength,
snapshot technique providing real-time measurements of machined surfaces with
minimal environmental impacts. By offering instant feedback on surface quality,
reducing iterations for diamond tool centering, and improving throughput and
accuracy, the system becomes the smallest interferometric system suitable for
integration into existing equipment for in situ metrology. The project's goal is
to develop a market-ready, on-machine metrology system through prototyping,
software development, and performance validation. This real-time, in-situ
metrology process is estimated to achieve efficiency improvements of 30% or more
in diamond-tool alignment and 50% or more in surface metrology. Successful
development and commercialization of this system will hold significant
intellectual merit, overcoming a critical hurdle in high-precision manufacturing
and enabling real-time quality control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.