* 2322664
* LTER: Seasonal Controls and Emergent Effects of Changing Land-ice-ocean Interactions on Arctic Coastal Ecosystems (BLE II)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Kenneth Dunton, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,275,000.00

This project continues the Beaufort Lagoon Ecosystems Long Term Ecological
Research (BLE LTER) program. The BLE LTER was added to NSF’s network of LTER
sites in 2017 and current work represents the second phase of this long-term
effort. The project focuses on interactions between physical, chemical, and
biological properties of nearshore ecosystems along Alaska’s northern-most
coastline. The study addresses fundamental questions about what controls and
sustains food webs in Arctic coastal waters and how climate change is altering
these food webs. The project also examines the effects of climate change on
greenhouse gas emissions near the Arctic land-sea interface. Estuaries along the
Beaufort Sea coast support productive and biologically complex assemblages of
biota that are important to the Indigenous residents of the Alaskan Arctic.
These assemblages are inherently shaped by extreme seasonal variations in
physical and chemical conditions yet are increasingly challenged by shifts in
seasonality as well as other climate change impacts in the rapidly warming
Arctic. Studies based out of Utqiagvik (formerly Barrow), Deadhorse, and
Kaktovik, Alaska, are addressing how changes in shoreline erosion, freshwater
inflows, ice cover, and ocean circulation over seasonal, annual, and longer
timeframes influence near-shore food webs, from bacteria to top predators. This
includes consideration of resident and anadromous fishes and migratory birds
that serve important cultural and subsistence roles in the lives of Alaska
Natives that live along the Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast. While the project’s work
on food webs includes components that are of particular interest to local
communities, components focusing on greenhouse gas emissions have broader
societal relevance. Inputs of organic carbon from land to sea are increasing as
permafrost (perennially frozen ground) thaws in the warming Arctic, and this
project is studying how decomposition and associated release of greenhouse
gasses from these inputs may contribute to global warming. Research activities
are conducted in collaboration with local and broader stakeholder groups. This
project is also strongly committed to education, including graduate and
undergraduate student training, post-doctoral mentoring, continuation of popular
schoolyard activities in Kaktovik, and establishment of new K-12 and community
college (Iḷisaġvik) programs in Utqiagvik.

Ecological studies suggest that temporal forcing is critical to our
understanding of what controls food web structure. More specifically, there is
mounting evidence that the differential availability of seasonally-distinct
resources is particularly important for defining trophic linkages and
maintaining stability and resilience of food webs. The BLE LTER is using lagoons
along the Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast as experimental units to explore this
concept. Arctic lagoons serve as excellent test beds because they experience
extreme variability in seasonal cycles, which are now subject to rapid
directional shifts driven by climate change. Our overarching question is: How do
variations in terrestrial inputs, local production, and exchange between lagoon
and ocean waters over seasonal, inter-annual, inter-decadal, and longer
timeframes interact to control food web structure through effects on carbon and
nitrogen cycling, microbial and metazoan community composition, and trophic
linkages? Arctic lagoons provide a unique opportunity to study these
interactions in the absence of fringing wetlands that often modulate land-ocean
interactions in other lagoon systems. In addition, barrier island geomorphology,
which exerts a strong control on water exchange between lagoons and the open
ocean, is highly dynamic in the Arctic because sea-ice effects are superimposed
on the effects of currents, sea level, and waves. Thus, connections between
inputs from land and lagoon ecosystems are more direct, and water exchanges
between lagoons and the open ocean are more variable than is typical of lower
latitude systems. The project’s study sites are in Elson Lagoon (western
Beaufort), Simpson Lagoon and Stefansson Sound (central Beaufort), and Kaktovik
and Jago lagoons (eastern Beaufort). The BLE LTER team conducts seasonal field
work during ice covered, ice break-up, and open water periods and deploys
sensors for continuous long-term measurements of key biogeochemical and
hydrographic parameters. The project also includes watershed and lagoon
ecosystem modeling components. While working to advance understanding of
fundamental ecological principles, this project provides a much-needed mechanism
for tracking and understanding 1) how natural climate cycles influence coastal
ecosystems in the Arctic, and 2) how climate change effects such as permafrost
thaw, shifting precipitation regimes, and losses of sea ice alter coastal
ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.