* 2322346
* STTR Phase I: Patient-Specific System for Early Detection and Identification of Epileptic Seizures
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Fahad Saeed, AI-NEOTECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to provide epileptic patients, and their
caregivers a smart system that can predict seizures before they occur. There are
more than 3 million adults and 1 million children in the US, and more than 50
million people worldwide, suffering from epilepsy. Repeated and unpredictable
seizures significantly affect the quality of life of people suffering from
epilepsy. These seizures remain the leading cause of economic, emotional, and
physical injuries for people with epilepsy and their caregivers. Design,
development, and integration of artificial intelligence (AI) models with
instruments that detect abnormalities in brain waves like electroencephalogram
(EEG) for real-time seizure prediction may bring improvements for these patients
and their caregivers. This technology is poised to capture a portion of the
rapidly growing $6 billion US market of AI healthcare solutions.

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project supports the
development of a novel consumer product that works with caregivers to
proactively mitigate the risk of seizure events in people with epilepsy. Current
commercial solutions are mostly reactive, and support is available only after a
seizure event. The company will fill this gap by developing, testing,
integrating, and evaluating machine learning (ML) models - applied to EEG data -
for epileptic seizure prediction. The scientific approach will leverage
inherently heterogenous and complex edge technologies. Data connectivity with
third party vendor EEG caps, microcontrollers, smart phones, and cloud services
rely on many different operational technologies and communication standards.
This research will overcome these challenges with hardware and software
solutions that will integrate these services within an edge device to enable
application portability and simplify deployment. Challenges such as inference on
limited computational power and energy devices, and its effects on the
accuracy/sensitivity of the predictions will be solved using robust cross-
validation techniques, extensive testing, and benchmarking using community
standards. The technical product of this research will advance caregiver
knowledge and increase understanding of epileptic seizures as well as increase
patient well-being.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.