* 2322946
* ISS: Accelerated disruption of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) in microgravity: a model for muscle aging
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lisa Larkin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,146.00

Physical frailty affects the ability of older people to remain independent and
is mainly due to the age-related loss of skeletal muscle mass (sarcopenia).
Sarcopenia causes loss of mobility and increased disability and dependency, as
well as increased risk of falls, which can be fatal. The estimated hospital cost
associated with sarcopenic disabilities in the United States is $40.4 billion
per year. Despite the huge personal and societal costs, no broadly applicable
treatments to prevent age-related muscle loss have been identified and only
modest progress has been made in understanding the mechanisms behind it. This
lack of understanding is a critical barrier to developing optimal therapies to
reduce the severity of frailty and its devastating effects. Astronauts and
animals exposed to microgravity experience similar loss of muscle mass and
function, suggesting that microgravity is an accelerated model for studying age-
associated loss of muscle function and could potentially be used to accelerate
the discovery of treatments for sarcopenia. Therefore, microgravity offers a
unique experimental environment to test physiological systems in a weightless,
unloaded, state that may lead to new insights into the age-associated
pathophysiology of sarcopenia allowing for identification of key points for
intervention. This NSF/CASIS Collaboration on Tissue Engineering and
Mechanobiology on the International Space Station (ISS) to Benefit Life on Earth
award supports research in this unique environment. Given the poor understanding
of frailty, both physical and mental frailty, by the general USA populations,
the project also aims to engage with stakeholders to improve the environment for
older people (e.g., technology development manufacturers, health care workers,
general public, aging patient cohorts).

Sarcopenia is marked by a disruption of the structure of neuromuscular junctions
and changes in the ability of muscles to handle reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Disruption of the neuromuscular junction structure is also seen in an
accelerated way in response to microgravity. The overall hypothesis is that
microgravity and aging result in similar disruptions of the structure and
function of neuromuscular junctions and thus nerve-muscle interactions leading
to loss of muscle mass and function. To address this hypothesis, a fully
integrated bioreactor for long-term culture, contraction and monitoring of
contraction-induced reactive oxygen species from tissue-engineered human nerve-
muscle constructs that can be used both on the International Space Station (ISS)
and ground experiments will be developed. These outcomes, force generation and
ROS generation, evaluated in real time, will be augmented by subsequent analysis
of neuromuscular junction structure, transcriptional profiles, and secreted
factors that will provide important insights into muscle weakness in aging and
microgravity environments, leading to the potential development of novel
interventions for both situations. This bioreactor capability will be very
attractive to academic researchers, especially as a viable alternative to
studies using rodents. The novel bioreactor system will provide a resource to
rapidly test pharmaceutical or non-pharmaceutical interventions to maintain
neuromuscular function and muscle mass and weakness in the elderly and other key
clinical disorders and so will be appealing to industrial partners. An
increasing elderly population with significant incidence of age-associated
muscle weakness requires an increased demand for anti-aging products and
lifestyle interventions which have enormous economic potential for the
pharmaceutical and personal care products sector and there is therefore
potential for economic benefit and improved quality of life as a result of their
development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.