* 2322867
* RUI: Regulation of starch degradation by the pseudoamylase, BAM9
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Berndsen, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 633,589.00

Plant starch is an important molecule for humans. In addition to being a primary
source of nutrition for humans and many domestic animals, humans use starch in
the laundry, food, pharmaceutical, and paper making industries. Despite the
widespread use, our understanding of how starch is synthesized and degraded by
plants is limited. Both processes affect the shape and form of starch, which
affects the way the starch can be used by humans. This project aims to
understand the regulation of starch degradation in the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. This plant has several enzymes called amylases that degrade starch
with distinct activities and apparent functions. This project will describe the
molecular and biochemical action of two types of amylases, beta and alpha, as
they work together to degrade starch during plant stress. One of the project’s
goals is to develop new insights into how the structure of starch is controlled
in plants. The experiments in this project will be carried out at a
predominately undergraduate institution and involve at least 15 undergraduate
students. These students will perform a majority of the experiments and develop
their technical and professional skills as scientists which will aid them for
future graduate education and careers in science. Additionally, teachers and
students at a local elementary school will participate in a research project to
develop the students’ understandings of the scientific process.

Starch is a complex biomolecule composed of two distinct sub-structures, amylose
and amylopectin, which are polymers of glucose with different levels of
branching. Starch accumulates and is degraded through several different
mechanisms that are dependent on the plant species, plant tissue, and external
factors such as time of day and stress. While there is a general understanding
of these mechanisms, many of the details including the specific stimuli and
regulatory steps of starch synthesis and degradation are unclear. This project
aims to detail the structural, biochemical, and molecular mechanism for the
involvement of the beta-amylase BAM9 in regulated starch degradation. This
protein does not have apparent starch degrading activity but does appear to
enhance the activity the alpha amylase, AMY3. This project will characterize how
BAM9 interacts with AMY3 and the activation mechanism of BAM9. Further
experiments will identify and describe the cellular events that regulate BAM9
leading to activation of AMY3 and starch degradation in response to stress.
Ultimately, this project will provide the first biochemical and mechanistic
characterization of the pseudo-amylase BAM9, and more broadly, how regulated
enzyme complexes degrade starch.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.