* 2322213
* MCA: Physiology-based mechanistic models of vector fitness to forecast species responses to coarse- and fine scale anthropogenic environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Gideon Wasserberg, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2026
* USD 283,164.00

Emerging infectious diseases may be from new disease in a population or have
existed previously but are rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range.
Many new diseases are associated with spillover from a wildlife source into
human populations. Anthropogenic (human caused) climatic- and land-use changes
are often thought to be key drivers of disease emergence. This is especially
true for arthropod vectors that are particularly sensitive to small changes in
climatic and microclimatic conditions. Therefore, the prevention of such
outbreaks necessitates advanced predictive models. Most current distribution
models are based on correlations rather than on causal mechanistic
relationships. Physiology-based mechanistic models hold a promise to overcome
the limitations of correlational models by capturing specific biophysical
signals linking life-history traits (e.g., larval development, mortality,
growth) with environmental variables. Using the sand fly Phlebotomus papatasi as
a case study, this project will develop a mechanistic model and will field-test
its predictions, with clear public health implications in terms of reducing
human exposure for the pathogens these sand flies transmit, including Old-World
cutaneous leishmaniasis and pappataci fever being the most significant ones. In
addition, this project will advance the theoretical and analytical frameworks of
the emerging field of disease biogeography applied to a vector-borne disease in
a changing world. This project will provide training for students and
professional development opportunities for faculty.

This project will use comprehensive physiological lab experimentation to build
mechanistic models of fitness to forecast vector species responses to coarse-
and fine-scale environmental change. The specific aims are to: (1) determine the
physiological parameters that make disease vectors more sensitive to global
climate change and influence their geographical spread and transmission
potential (coarse scale) and (2) determine the role of microclimatic variation
due to land use modification on the metapopulation dynamics of vector-borne
disease systems (fine scale). Specifically, this project will integrate
mechanistic and correlative ecological niche models to reconstruct the fitness
of the sand fly and the distributional ecology of the transmission. Mathematical
and machine learning models will be calibrated using laboratory (physiological
experimentation) and field-collected (occurrences) data coupled with
environmental variables. The project will study in detail the structure, size,
and position of the ecological niche of P. papatasi by manipulating critical
environmental variables manifested at coarse (e.g., temperature, relative
humidity, photoperiod) and fine (e.g., soil temperature, moisture, organic
matter) spatial scales. Field sampling will be conducted in Israel to test the
predictions of the model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.