* 2322010
* SBIR Phase I: Microdissection Optimization for Molecular Profiling and Clinical Lab Use
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ting-Pau Oei, XMD DIAGNOSTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,594.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Cancer affects millions of Americans and people worldwide. The National Cancer
Institute (NCI) reports that the number of new cancer cases will reach 30
million by 2040, representing an enormous cost to American society and the
economy. There is a dire need for innovative technologies such as molecular
diagnostics and personalized medicine to combat cancer. Modern molecular testing
methods such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and next-generation sequencing
(NGS) often suffer from low tumor content and genetic contamination from non-
cancer cells contained in their samples - resulting in an insufficient amount of
DNA for accurate molecular testing. This research will focus on microdissection
as a means of obtaining cancer cells for testing. The proposed tumor cell
purification and extraction will enable the company to focus on modelling and
optimalization of individualized cancer treatments rather than non-cancer cells.
The solution combines mathematical modeling, mathematical optimization, and
real-world experimental verification which will contribute significantly to
successful commercialization of clinical lab instruments and complementary
products.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to conduct
scientific research to understand the optical, thermal, and mechanical
interactions that occur during microdissection. The resulting modeling will be
used to enable reliable extraction of cancer cells from patient biopsy samples,
accounting for different sample types and cancer-cell stain intensities.
Microdissection purifies cancer cells from human samples and enables molecular
testing and genetic profiling. Current instruments for tumor cell purification
and extraction are either arduous or unreliable. In this project, the aim is to
conduct research to model and optimize the opto-thermal-mechanical interaction
of microdissection by taking into consideration common tissue variations (i.e.,
tissue types, tissue thickness, and stain intensity). This technology will be
used to determine the specific operating specifications for successfully micro-
dissecting tissue specimens and developing an instrument for research and
commercial clinical laboratory use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.