* 2322276
* Collaborative research: Arctic Shelf sediment fate - an observational and modeling study of sediment pathways and morphodynamic feedbacks in a changing polar environment
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Emily Eidam, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 211,412.00

In many coastal environments, shoreline erosion provides a major source of
sediment to the ocean. Over time, this material is transported along the shore
(to nourish beaches) and/or offshore (to form deeper-water mud patches). Some of
the highest rates of coastal erosion occur in the Arctic because ground
containing permafrost thaws easily under the influence of warm ocean water and
wave attack. But once that sediment enters the Arctic Ocean, we know very little
about where it goes. Studies of sediment transport have been a critical part of
coastal management and geologic inquiry for the past several decades but have
focused on temperate and tropical environments not impacted by seasonal sea ice.
We have a critical need to expand these studies to the Arctic in order to
improve our understanding of the fate of sediments, which can re-shape
coastlines, change the character of the seabed, and transfer nutrients from land
to ocean. This research is timely in light of accelerating coastal erosion
associated with reductions in seasonal sea-ice extent and intensifying wave
energy, trends which are forecast to continue. This study is designed to
determine the primary pathways of sediments in the coastal ocean during the
open-water season, when frequent wind storms are expected to mobilize sediments
recently delivered to the seabed. Measurements will include particle
concentrations, sediment migration on time scales of seconds to months, seabed
composition, and seabed geotechnical properties. These data will be used to
model how the Alaskan continental shelf may evolve over thousand-year timescales
in response to changing shorelines and wave conditions. This project will be
tackled by a team of researchers with field, geotechnical, and modeling
expertise. Networking with local communities, training of graduate students, and
engagement with undergraduates at the University of North Carolina through
classes as well as programs aimed at introducing students from underrepresented
groups to scientific research are planned.

Accelerating coastal erosion is one of the critical environmental changes
occurring in the Arctic and is associated with intensifying wave climates driven
by annual reductions in sea-ice extent. At present, parts of the Alaskan Arctic
coastline are experiencing some of the greatest rates of coastal erosion
worldwide. These rates are accelerating, representing an increased source term
of sediment and associated nutrients into the coastal ocean. While studies of
continental shelf dynamics have provided great insights to sediment transport at
temperate and tropical latitudes, we know relatively little about the pathways
of sediment on Arctic continental shelves. These remote environments are
shrouded by ice for up to nine months of the year and experience unique
processes like ice pressure-ridge formation, disturbance of the seabed by
anchor-ice growth, and 'strudel scour' during breakup. These processes can
confound traditional seabed signatures of sediment accumulation. Thus, this
project proposes to pair measurements of seabed properties with dynamic
measurements of sediment fluxes within the water column during the storm season
to determine the key mechanisms and pathways of sediment flux. Field data will
be used to drive morphostatic and morphodynamic models of shelf profile
evolution to determine feedbacks between wave propagation, erosion, and changes
in the shelf profile over millennial timescales. The field site encompasses
Harrison Bay and the adjacent shelf, which receives sediment from rapidly
retreating bluffs and the Colville River.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.