* 2322048
* MCA: Developing a Paleorecord of Hg in Long-Lived Mollusks from the Gulf of Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Graham, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 237,317.00

Mercury (Hg) contamination is a serious environmental problem that affects
ecosystems and human health, with most of human exposure coming from marine fish
consumption. The impact of climate change and natural climate variability on the
movement and bioaccumulation of Hg in marine ecosystems is not fully understood.
Such understanding is vital to setting targets and assessing the progress of
policy efforts to limit Hg contamination of marine ecosystems and human
exposure. This research seeks to develop an approximately 1000-year record of Hg
preserved in clam shells collected from the Gulf of Maine, one of the most
rapidly warming regions of the world’s oceans. Like tree rings, clam shells
possess layers that can be precisely dated and have potential to preserve highly
resolved signals of past variation in Hg concentrations and accumulation by
biota. Importantly, this Hg record can be paired with other kinds of climate
proxy information preserved in the clam shells, giving detailed information
about how marine Hg in this organism changes in response to a changing climate.
This record will provide an especially useful dataset for calibrating and
improving models for predicting the effects of policy and climate change on the
recovery of marine ecosystems from centuries of Hg pollution. Other broader
impacts include development of a new regional scientific partnership between
researchers at a predominantly undergraduate institution (Grinnell College) and
a large public research university (Iowa State University) and new opportunities
for undergraduate research.

Samples of the mollusk Arctica islandica will be collected from coastal
locations in the Gulf of Maine and shell Hg concentrations compared to water,
sediment, and biota concentrations of total Hg and methylmercury (MeHg). These
comparisons will permit the researchers to evaluate whether shell Hg is a robust
proxy of environmental Hg and MeHg bioaccumulation and to assess reproducibility
of coeval shell samples. A master chronology of Hg in Gulf of Maine will then be
constructed based on measuring shell Hg at high-resolution for an existing
cross-dated A. islandica shell archive spanning the last millennium, a period
which spans significant climatic and ocean circulation changes and large
increases in Hg emissions from local and global sources. This record can be
directly compared to existing and novel paleoclimate proxy records, including
existing oxygen stable isotope records and newly measured trace-element records
(Ba and Mn). Results of this work should permit determination of the sensitivity
of Hg bioaccumulation to natural climate variability and evaluation of coupled
biogeochemical-climate models used for predicting trajectory of future Hg in
marine biota under various climate change scenarios.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences Geobiology and
Low-Temperature Geochemistry Program, the Division of Ocean Sciences Marine
Geology and Geophysics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.