* 2322075
* SBIR Phase I:  The Next Generation of High-Speed Dielectric Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Stefan Pastine, THINTRONICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 272,771.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project centers on developing a high-speed, high-performance insulator
platform for Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) that will significantly enhance
performance in networking, communications, and computing. While PCB
manufacturing has seen significant advances, innovation in insulator technology
has been lacking for two decades. This gap has led to suboptimal performance in
signal integrity, data rates, efficiency, heat generation, form factor, and
cost. Such limitations can be overcome by replacing fiber-reinforced laminates
with non-reinforced, low loss materials. By developing a novel class of
insulating materials, the project will enable faster processing speeds and
higher data rates to facilitate the development of next generation electronics.
This project aims to work with US-based PCB manufacturers to de-risk supply
chain bottlenecks and on-shore manufacturing jobs.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop novel,
synthetic polymer alternatives to current fiber-reinforced materials for printed
circuit boards (PCBs) that are skew-free with a low dielectric constant (Dk) and
low dissipation factor (DF). PCBs are paramount for all electronics but result
in high signal loss due to the anisotropy of the fiber-reinforced laminate
materials traditionally used. As demand for higher data rate rises, skew-free,
ultra-low loss, and low Dk materials are needed. Current dielectric materials
have non-uniform dielectric properties, so transmission lines encounter a
different effective Dk, causing skew and limiting data rates. By developing
synthetic polymer films as an alternative to traditional PCB dielectric
materials, the team aims to develop low Dk (≤ 2.8) and low DF (≤ 0.0026)
materials that are inherently skew-free and low loss. Novel thermosetting
polymer formulations must be developed and characterized. Successful evaluation
of materials with properties conducive to PCBs can then be taken through pilot
manufacturing to determine their viability in large-scale manufacturing
environments. Finally, these low Dk, low DF materials can be used to create
prototype PCBs to evaluate their reliability before generating more complex PCB
structures required for high-density-interconnect-type applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.