* 2322772
* Beginnings: Sensor Technology as a Vehicle to Cultivate Experiential Learning for Emerging and Novel Technologies
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rong Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leroy Jones II
* 09/30/2026
* USD 875,291.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by training a skillful
workforce to meet the growing technology challenges delineated in the CHIPS and
Science Act of 2022. Sensor technology is among the fastest-developing branches
in modern technology and contributes to all aspects of industrial applications.
The transformation in miniature, intelligent and convoluted sensor systems will
enable scientific and engineering innovations in the defense, space, civil,
health, and environmental technology sectors. To embrace such a transformation,
Illinois Tech’s ExLENT project, through the International Center for Sensor
Science and Engineering (ICSSE), assembled a team of experts to provide cross-
disciplinary, experiential training in combined areas of advanced manufacturing,
artificial intelligence, biotechnology, environmental control, semiconductor and
microelectronics.

The goal of the project is to prepare underserved groups, particularly veterans,
and underrepresented populations in STEM with the technical capability to tackle
the multifaceted challenges in the sensor technology sector. The project
consists of education and mentored research in sensor technology in an academic
setting, followed by related industrial internship training. Specifically,
through a 9-credit certificate program, Illinois Tech’s ExLENT project offers
dedicated mentorship, hands-on training, and one-on-one collaborative career
support through faculty mentors, industrial partners, and Veterans
Administration (VA) associated organizations. Of note, the project will afford
veterans unique opportunities for reskilling/upskilling and reintegrating into
civilian society, creating a strong career path into the emerging technology
workforce. This project aligns with the NSF ExLENT program, funded by the NSF
TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning
opportunities for individuals from diverse professional and educational
backgrounds to increase their interest in, and their access to, career pathways
in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.