* 2322325
* MCA: Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Improve Understanding of Biogenic Volatile Organic Compound Emissions and Chemistry over Heterogeneous Forest Landscapes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Karena McKinney, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 259,518.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project will leverage advances in imaging
technology, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) techniques
to advance sampling strategies and prediction methods for mapping biogenic
volatile organic compound (BVOC) emissions in heterogeneous landscapes. BVOCs
play an important role in the chemistry of the atmosphere by influencing the
oxidative capacity of the troposphere and the associated chemical cycles of
atmospheric trace gases. The emissions of reactive BVOCs have implications for
ozone production, air quality, health effects, and climate.

This project will apply AI methods to forest imaging data to plan BVOC field
sampling locations in two disparate forest ecosystem types: Central Maine and
near Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil. As many of the target areas are inaccessible,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) will be used to sample BVOCs above the selected
forests. This project will address the following questions: (1) How can BVOCs
over a heterogeneous landscape be optimally sampled with a limited number of
sampling locations? (2) To what extent do BVOC concentrations vary across
heterogeneous forest features? (3) What do varying above-canopy BVOC
concentrations suggest about differences in BVOC emission rates from the
underlying forest subtypes? and (4) At what scale and to what extent do spatial
variations in BVOC emissions significantly affect regional and global emissions
estimates? The final goal of the study is to compare the maps of BVOC
concentrations with emissions predicted by standard emission models such as
MEGAN.

This project has the potential to develop tools that could have a wide range of
applications in environmental sensing and be of great interest to the
atmospheric chemistry and broader environmental science community. The project
includes support for a summer undergraduate student to participate in the
research. There are also plans for a summer institute on AI-driven sensing and
environmental modeling provide new opportunities for undergraduate students to
become involved in innovative STEM research. This project is co-funded by the
Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the geosciences and
by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.