* 2322462
* Seasonal Measurements of Hydrogen Oxide Radical (HOx) Chemistry in Forests
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Philip Stevens, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 872,179.00

The goal of this project is to make additional measurements of the concentration
of hydroxyl radical and peroxy radicals in different forest environments in
order to provide robust tests of current models of atmospheric chemistry. These
measurements will occur in several different forest environments, including the
Indiana University Research and Teaching Preserve field lab near the Bloomington
campus and the PROPHET (Program for Research on Oxidants: PHotochemistry,
Emissions and Transport) tower site in northern Michigan. The hydroxyl radical
and peroxy radicals control the lifetimes of many important trace gases in the
atmosphere, such as methane. Hydroxyl radical reactions also initiate the
oxidation of carbon monoxide and volatile organic compounds, that in the
presence of nitrogen oxides can lead to the production of ozone and secondary
aerosols in the atmosphere, the primary components of photochemical smog. An
accurate understanding of this chemistry is important to assess the impact of
changes in emissions as a result of control strategies and environmental change
on the composition of the atmosphere.

To capture the change in chemistry as isoprene and other biogenic VOCs emissions
impact the atmosphere, measurements will be conducted during the seasonal
transition, with the measurements conducted just prior to leaf bloom in the
spring and continuing afterwards into the summer. Concurrent measurements of
nitrous acid (HONO), which can be a significant source of hydroxyl radicals
(OH), along with measurements of total OH reactivity will be made in order to
quantify radical sources and sinks. Measurements will be made both above and
below the forest canopy, including measurements of peroxy radical (RO2) fluxes,
in order to improve our understanding of the sources and sinks of radicals in
these environments and to determine whether there is significant transport of
radicals above and below the forest canopy.

The research will be used as a component of interdisciplinary training in
atmospheric chemistry and environmental science for graduate students. In
addition, a newly developed air pollution module will be implemented for Indiana
University’s Summer Experience in Sustainability and the Environment camp for
high school students, focusing on underrepresented minorities, first generation
college, and financial need students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.