* 2322270
* MCA Pilot PUI: Validating and Constraining Catastrophe Models with Paleo Tropical Cyclone Data for Enhanced Risk Management
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Joanne Muller, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 262,393.00

Tropical cyclones (TCs) are a serious threat for densely populated coastal
communities. This is particularly true for the Florida coastline. Along the
Florida coast, sprawling concentrations of people and properties have resulted
in a recent rapid increase in human exposure to TC landfalls. Hurricane Ian made
landfall on the Southwest Florida coast on September 28, 2022. This storm
presented all three of the hazards commonly associated with hurricanes: wind,
rain, and storm-tide surge. But by far the most catastrophic impacts were from
the storm-tide surge. High water marks on Fort Myers Beach reached near 16 feet.
Hurricane Ian could be one of the costliest natural disasters in US history at
$112.9 billion USD. In the risk industry, such low-probability, high-impact
events like these are known as “Tail-Risk Events.” Tail-Risk Events often cause
widespread economic chaos, and they are also often associated with substantial
and devastating loss of life. This research will extend the Southwest Florida
hurricane record back thousands of years by means of Paleotempestology. Sediment
cores from coastal “blue holes” will be analyzed to reconstruct the history of
TCs in the area. This will result in a more robust understanding of the TC
frequency distribution along the US coastline, thereby reducing the loss of life
and infrastructure attributable to TCs. This project will also connect to the
broader risk management and modelling communities. These partnerships will
ensure that the paleo research can appropriately attach to catastrophe risk
decision-makers. Project data generated will not only be used by the risk
industry, but by other stakeholders as well. The other stakeholders include
agricultural businesses; habitat restoration groups; coastal land managers;
individual property owners, municipalities, scientists, and business. The data
can further be used to outreach to emergency managers, the media, community
leaders and the community at large. This project will also have a significant
impact on diversity in STEM by supporting underrepresented minorities in STEM.

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project will involve four different, but
highly interconnected and interdisciplinary activities: 1) With the mentorship
and collaboration from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) the team
will build on Southwest Florida’s long-term TC dataset, by adding new
reconstructions from Southwest Florida blue holes; 2) With the mentorship and
collaboration from partner Oasis the PI will receive training on the Oasis Loss
Modeling Framework (LMF), attend training workshops and deploy models, and learn
about how catastrophe (Cat) models are used to inform views of risk; 3) With the
mentorship and collaboration from partner Reask the PI will learn how stochastic
TC data sets are developed, how they feed into dynamical storm surge models, and
how they combine to produce risk estimates. The research will identify what
types of storms in stochastic catalogues are able to deposit geologic TC layers
and complete sensitivity analyses for field sites of interest; and 4) With the
mentorship and collaboration from partner Maximum Information the research will
bring new intense TC landfall paleo datasets, that are temporally an order of
magnitude greater than the existing instrumental historical record, to risk
modeling firms and (re)insurance companies. In summary, the estimated paleo TC
return periods calculated during this study will be used in baseline Cat model
validation, calibration and deterministic scenario (stress) testing (which
inform views of Maximum Probable/Possible Loss).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.