* 2322084
* CC* Regional Computing: Development of Undergraduate High-Performance Computing Capacity with the CIMUSE Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Marcus Bond, Missouri Western State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Apon
* 11/30/2025
* USD 693,923.00

Four Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), Missouri Western State
University, Truman State University, Webster University, and Southeast Missouri
State University, in the Computational Infusion for Missouri Undergraduate
Science and Education (CIMUSE) consortium, provide high-performance computing
(HPC) nodes for undergraduate research and education, with accessible state- and
nation-wide resources as job sizes grow. University of Missouri Research Support
Solutions manages the nodes on a day-to-day basis, allowing the participating
institutions to focus on expanding computational usage at their respective
campuses and other undergraduate institutions statewide. Talented students learn
about HPC at summer workshops. Faculty also increase their knowledge and skills
in the use of HPC. The goal is to establish and expand a statewide community
using advanced computational techniques for undergraduate research and education
that can be replicated nationwide.

The HPC compute nodes (2xAMD EPYC 7713, 2.0 GHz, 128 core/node, 512 GB RAM/node)
for the CIMUSE Consortium provide HPC resources to PUIs in Missouri. Research
projects will involve undergraduate student researchers, while educational
projects focus on developing tools and pedagogies to train students in
computational techniques. Initial research projects encompass cosmological
simulations, pseudo-Jahn-Teller Effect studies, organic-inorganic perovskite
hybrid simulations, rapid intrusion detection, and transposable genomics.
Initial education projects involve constructing a Virtual Data Science Lab,
incorporating simulations into undergraduate astronomy classes, and introducing
cybersecurity exercises to the computer science curriculum. The HPC system will
be managed by the Research Support Solutions (RSS) team at the University of
Missouri - Columbia, increasing access for the undergraduate community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.