* 2322572
* FET: Small: CMOS+X: Integration of CMOS and voltage-controlled magnetic tunnel junctions for probabilistic computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The fast growth of artificial intelligence applications currently outpaces the
advances in their underlying semiconductor-based hardware. As a result, there is
an urgent need for improved machine learning (ML) chips, which provide superior
energy efficiency, reliability and security compared to existing solutions. At
the same time, even with the best available computing hardware today, many
important optimization problems cannot be solved using known algorithms in an
efficient and scalable manner. Examples are the Boolean satisfiability,
traveling salesman, and integer factorization problems, which have important
applications ranging from microelectronic chip design to drug discovery,
logistics, transportation, and cryptography. This project aims to develop
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) prototypes that solve these
problems using the physics of appropriately designed probabilistic circuits.
These ASICs represent a physics-inspired and domain-specific computing
architecture, where hardware and software are co-designed to solve a specific
problem which cannot be efficiently solved – using finite time and energy
resources – on any general-purpose classical computing chip. The project is
expected to impact a wide range of artificial intelligence and optimization
applications across various industries, while also providing new fundamental
insights into the emerging class of probabilistic computing architectures. In
addition to its research objectives, a key goal of this project is also
workforce development for advanced semiconductor technologies. Research results
will also be incorporated into new course materials being developed at
Northwestern University.

This project will develop integrated circuits where complementary metal-oxide
silicon (CMOS) circuits are integrated with voltage-controlled magnetic memory
devices, which will serve as ultrafast true random number generators. The chips
are aimed for two application areas which will be investigated in this project:
(A) Low-power machine learning processors based on probabilistic circuits:
Convolutional neural networks require large numbers of transistors and high-
power dissipation. The researchers will develop a stochastic computing
implementation of neural networks integrated with magnetic memory devices, which
simplifies the multiplication and addition operations, resulting in significant
reduction of power consumption and chip area. (B) Combinatorial optimization
processors based on probabilistic circuits: This project will also develop
probabilistic optimization circuits where the optimization problem of interest
is mapped onto an appropriately designed network of probabilistic bits on the
ASIC. The performance and efficiency of the ASICs for both problems will be
compared to existing general-purpose computing hardware.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.