* 2322121
* Harnessing Electrochemically-Injected Interstitial Atoms in Oxide Semiconductors for Doping and Purification
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Edmund Seebauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2027
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Metallic elements and oxygen form solid ceramic compounds
such as titanium dioxide that can be used, not only in commercial products like
sunscreens, but also in sophisticated electronics, sensors, and materials for
energy production and storage. The usefulness of ceramics for such advanced
purposes often depends upon tiny concentrations of atomic scale irregularities
in the regular array of atoms that make up the solid. Certain kinds of these
irregularities, such as extra atoms wedged into the structure ("interstitial
atoms") can be introduced into the solid intentionally to benefit its
properties. The work supported by this grant investigates how to use specially
prepared surfaces exposed to water solutions with an electrical voltage to
controllably create interstitial metal atoms. Success will permit metal atoms to
be introduced in precise ways near room temperature, in contrast to the hot
conditions at hundreds of degrees used by typical methods. As a result,
manufacturing advanced ceramics should become cheaper, faster, and lead to
solids with far superior performance. Work under this grant is also developing
real-world learning modules implemented within the Worldwide Youth in Science
and Engineering program at the University of Illinois for high-school students
to help raise interest in science and engineering, and especially in new
materials for sustainable energy applications. Several activities to promote the
importance of ethics in science and engineering are being pursued. Additional
outreach aimed especially at high school girls and first-generation students
involve weeklong summer residential camps to encourage interest in science and
engineering. The investigators are also hosting several undergraduate
researchers to participate in the work.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Interstitial atoms in semiconductors are extra atoms wedged
into the crystalline structure that represent atomic-scale irregularities, or
"defects." Specifically prepared surfaces that are exposed to aqueous liquids
act efficiently and controllably to inject interstitial atoms into the
underlying bulk near room temperature, especially when subjected to
electrochemical bias. Using surfaces for this purpose represents a new and
versatile tool for tuning material properties after initial synthesis. The
approach enables straightforward and inexpensive processing methods, and
accesses a regime wherein kinetic, rather than thermodynamic, effects dominate
defect behavior. It therefore becomes possible to create materials and
structures with heretofore unattainable properties that circumvent thermodynamic
constraints. For example, purification of isotopes beyond natural-abundance
limits becomes possible. Applications are expected to span defect engineering,
chemical and isotopic purification, and doping for electronics, sensors, and
renewable energy production and storage â€“ all performed post-synthesis. The
approach is most suited for applications involving high surface-to-volume
ratios, such as nanostructures, thin films, or porous materials. This work aims
to understand the diffusion and trapping of injected metal interstitials in
ceramic oxides under electrochemical bias. The work employs single-crystal
rutile titanium dioxide as an exemplary oxide with important technological
applications. The experimental approach relies mainly upon diffusion
measurements of titanium and oxygen tracer isotopes, and of the example dopant
manganese. Modeling of defect diffusion and reaction at the mesoscale (2-500 nm)
links experimental diffusion profiles to atomistic calculations to unravel the
complicated temporal phenomena that are expected to accompany both doping and
solid-state purification. Atomistic calculations by density functional theory
provide activation barriers for comparison with the outputs of mesoscale
modeling, and identify possibilities for interstitial clustering that might
inhibit movement of metal interstitials into the solid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.