* 2322782
* Enhanced Engineering Education for Underserved Communities of the San Joaquin Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* Louis Nadelson, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2029
* USD 2,497,095.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at California State University-Fresno, a Hispanic-Serving Institution and
Asian-American Pacific Islander Serving Institution. Over its 6-year duration,
this project will fund scholarships to 31 unique full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in electrical, computer, civil, geomatics, or
mechanical engineering. First year students will receive 4-year and 5-year
scholarships depending on their needs for degree completion. This project will
integrate multiple evidence-based high-impact practices (HIPs) to support
student academic success. The main aspects of this grant are: a) a focus on
supporting and documenting the progress of talented, low-income, primarily
first-generation and minority college students, b) collaboration among three
departments in the Lyles College of Engineering, and c) a focus on project-based
learning, which involves students working on real-world engineering problems,
linked to community service.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion for low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The aim
of this project is to boost the performance and outcomes of talented low-income
students to close the gap between those students and their higher-income peers.
The program is designed to support student development of critical thinking and
problem-solving skills, and promote creativity, innovation, and service to
society. The project’s research plan will monitor several factors, including
students’ perception of themselves as engineers, their STEM self-efficacy, their
engineering identity, their perceived barriers and concerns, and the
effectiveness of mentoring to support their learning, engagement, and success.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.