* 2322214
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Streamlining and Supporting Access to Public Assistance Programs in Louisiana
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Carl Harris, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,888.00

Nearly 20% of children under age five in the US live in poverty. To support
these children, the US government funds various social safety-net programs to
provide nutrition, healthcare, early childhood education, and additional income
for families. Research on many of these programs demonstrates long-term
academic, health, and economic benefits to participating children. However,
these programs, which are administered at the state and local levels, are
divided among multiple agencies, resulting in separate, and typically
cumbersome, application processes. Information on programs and eligibility is
neither centrally located nor easily findable, and application portals are often
clumsy, confusing, duplicative, and outdated. These usability problems can
hinder participation in beneficial programs. Without targeted efforts to
simplify and streamline the application process for families, many young
children in poverty are unlikely to receive all the benefits of the critical
health and education programs for which they are eligible. To address this
issue, this project will develop a streamlined application portal for Louisiana
families, in which they can apply for multiple programs that support low-income
children without duplicating efforts.

This project's aims are to improve and streamline the benefits application
process for Louisiana families and to increase enrollment rates in participating
programs. The team achieves these aims by building on current efforts to improve
user experiences in Louisiana’s SNAP application. This award enables a new pilot
SNAP application, which will offer randomly selected eligible families the
option to automatically send their SNAP application information and documents to
Louisiana WIC and to New Orleans Public Schools’ early childhood education
programs. Through this randomized design, this project can identify the causal
effects of the streamlined application on application rates to WIC and early
childhood education programs. Interviews with local agency leaders and
stakeholders will identify the necessary elements to develop and maintain a
streamlined application at scale.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation. This
project is jointly funded by CISE-CIVIC INNOVATION, SBE-S&CC, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.