* 2322253
* MCA: A Three-Generation Study of Family Bereavement and Child Wellbeing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Smith-Greenaway, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Antwan Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 545,831.00

This project examines the consequences of parental and grandparental death for
children. With the COVID-19 Pandemic creating an unprecedented surge in parental
and grandparental deaths in the United States, there is a pressing need for
rigorous social science outlining the consequences of these childhood
experiences. The project explores effects of family bereavement on a variety of
outcomes for children, including behavioral problems, mental and physical
health, and cognitive and academic outcomes. Findings from this project clarify
the services and points of intervention that could help children and their
surviving parent(s) or caregivers navigate a death. Further, this MCA project
facilitates collaboration and training opportunities that help women to advance
into higher academic ranks.

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) project has three research goals. First, the
project examines the experiences of parental and grandparental death and
subsequent child wellbeing, focusing on multiple developmental stages and
domains. Second, the project explores whether disadvantages associated with
parental or grandparental death are concentrated among subsets of the child
population. Third, the project examines if any adverse outcomes associated with
a death are explained by its implications for the surviving parent(s) or
caregivers. The project achieves these goals through the analysis of the Future
of Families and Child Wellbeing Study (FFCWS), a population-based cohort study
that enrolled a sample of 4,898 newborns of mostly unmarried parents from 20
U.S. cities between 1998 and 2000. The FFCWS has re-interviewed the focal
children and their parents/caregivers as many as five times between the childâ€™s
birth through age 15. The study features notable percentages of respondents who
were parentally and grandparentally bereaved during childhood. The project
assists academics, decision-makers, and the public to understand the effects of
bereavement on the health, prosperity, and welfare of children and families.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.