* 2322879
* SenSE: Closed-loop Artificial Pancreas with Noninvasive Monitoring of Glucose and Diet
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Xia Zhou, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 11/30/2023
* USD 547,344.00

Abstract Title: SenSE: Closed-loop Artificial Pancreas with Noninvasive
Monitoring of Glucose and Diet Proposal Number: 2037383 Principal Investigator:
Xia Zhou, Gregory Forlenza, Qiang Liu, Temiloluwa Prioleau & Tam Vu
Institutions: Dartmouth College, University of Colorado & University of Texas

Non-technical Abstract: Type-1 diabetes affects over 1.25 million people in the
United States and its incidence is increasing every year. The majority of type 1
patients are not successful in achieving target blood glucose levels and control
has actually been worsening in recent years despite expanded use of
technologies. Inadequately controlled diabetes is the leading cause of
blindness, kidney failure, heart attack and peripheral vascular disease possibly
leading to amputation and in some cases death. Joint use of a continuous glucose
monitor and insulin pump is considered the current gold standard for management
of type-1 diabetes. Existing technologies, however, suffer from two well-
established limitations: high user burden due to the need for manual “meal
announcements” to estimate insulin doses and low adherence to glucose monitoring
devices due to the inconvenience of constantly breaking the skin for sensor
insertion and irritation from the sensor adhesive. Thus, there is an urgent need
in public health for fully automated, closed-loop glycemic control for type-1
diabetes patients, which will be the focus of the proposed research.

Technical Abstract: The proposed work aims to develop and pilot a joint
multimodal sensing system that can provide continuous noninvasive glucose
monitoring data in addition to automated meal detection with an estimate of meal
intake. Both types of information are necessary to inform artificial pancreas
algorithms for prediction of bolus (i.e. short-acting) insulin dose needs. More
specifically, the proposed system is in the form of an ear-worn device, tackling
key systems and algorithmic challenges to realize a fully closed-loop artificial
pancreas system. The intellectual merits of the proposed work are following.
First, it will develop novel system designs to realize fine-grained, robust
dietary sensing by fusing three streams of signals (i.e., bio-electrical
signals, motion, and acoustic signals); Second, it will advance existing
optical-based noninvasive glucose monitoring by addressing challenges of skin
scattering and mitigating the impact of confounding factors and user diversity;
Third, it will present new energy-efficient machine learning models dedicated to
enabling local execution at micro-controllers, dealing with the limited number
of labeled training data, and ensuring data privacy and communication
efficiency; Finally, it will characterize and validate biological and behavioral
biomarkers most relevant to diabetes management for implementing an artificial
pancreas systems and develop new approaches for adaptive sampling and noise
handling to ensure accurate monitoring of target events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.