* 2322497
* Beginnings: Experiential Learning for Emerging Biotechnology Careers
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Michele Morris, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2026
* USD 953,005.00

Biotechnology is an emerging and rapidly developing field with high unmet demand
for well-trained entry-level positions. The shortage of trained biotechnology
workers to fill well-paid jobs will only be exacerbated as the field continues
to expand unless new pathways are established for individuals to enter the
biotech workforce. This project will grow and diversify this workforce through
an innovative and immersive experience that engages non-traditional students
from community colleges in the field of biotechnology. Compared to peers at
larger research-intensive institutions, students from community colleges are at
a disadvantage in securing experiential learning opportunities, yet the success
of our nation’s growing biotechnology industry depends upon a skilled workforce.
This project will help students from two-year institutions gain invaluable
applied learning and professional skills, preparing them for careers in industry
laboratories. This project builds an innovative partnership between industry,
post-secondary education, and a non-profit research and training institute to
pave the way for a diverse workforce equipped to solve tomorrow’s biotechnology
challenges.

Students pursuing associate degrees and stackable certificates are an ideal
prospective workforce to help meet the growing demand for skilled biotechnology
workers. Experiential learning opportunities such as industry-aligned training
and internships provide these students an efficient on-ramp to a career in
biotechnology. This project utilizes a team approach to recruit, prepare,
certify, mentor, and train participants in an experiential learning path.
HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology will work with the Alabama Community
College System, Calhoun Community College, and Drake State Community & Technical
College to recruit participants and provide degree credit for participation.
HudsonAlpha will provide laboratory-based training and support for the
Biotechnician Assistant Credentialing Exam (BACE) and certification. A network
of biotechnology companies in North Alabama will provide trainees with
internship experiences and mentorship. Uniting these entities will further the
development of a diverse, competitive workforce by creating new pathways for
students to learn about biotechnology careers and participate in an applied
learning program with fewer barriers to entry. Project outcomes will give
insight into the effectiveness of offering experiential learning for a community
college audience and how the provision of wrap-around participant support can
impact student participation and persistence in emerging technology fields. This
project aligns with the NSF ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU
Directorates, as it seeks to support experiential learning opportunities for
individuals from diverse professional and educational backgrounds to increase
their interest in, and their access to, career pathways in emerging technology
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.