* 2322964
* Collaborative Research: Design and mechanistic studies on microenvironment-sensitive polymeric nanoparticles for simultaneous contents release and ultrasound imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kausik Sarkar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 344,139.00

Non-technical Description: Many diseases, such as cancer, are dreadful because
often, they are diagnosed late when therapy proves ineffective. Moreover, when
therapy is available, it involves debilitating side effects, including other
life-threatening conditions. The primary healthcare objectives, therefore, are
early, noninvasive accurate diagnosis and effective therapeutic intervention
without harmful side effects. Here a cross-disciplinary scientific team led by a
pharmaceutical chemist and an engineer from two universities will develop and
study the fundamental science behind a single clinical implement with the dual
aim of improved diagnostic ultrasound imaging and targeted therapy which becomes
active only in the target region. The team aims at synthesizing nanometer-size
polymeric particles. They are similar in structure to body cells and can carry
therapeutics to target areas evading the bodyâ€™s defense system. The particles
are chemically engineered to implode in a specific chemical environment found
only in diseased conditions and deliver their cargo. The proposed research will
systematically investigate the chemistry of these nanoparticles through
experiments and theory to optimize their desired effects and the mechanism
behind their ultrasound reflectivity. The principal investigators have proposed
an array of educational activities involving high school interns,
undergraduates, and Ph.D. students in multi-disciplinary projects with real-life
clinical applications preparing them to enter the twenty-first-century
workforce.

Technical Description: The objective of this proposal is to conduct foundational
studies on polymer nanoparticles (polymersomes) that are programmed to release
their encapsulated contents under specific biochemical environments common in
diseases and simultaneously are responsive to ultrasound to allow imaging and
ultrasound-assisted release. It uses reduced oxygen partial pressure as a model
trigger for release. The proposed studies will develop the design principles of
multimodal polymer nanoparticles for future applications in drug delivery to
tumors and simultaneous ultrasound imaging. The team will optimize polymer
design so that the resultant polymersomes become responsive to the reduced
oxygen levels and release the encapsulated contents. The nanoparticles will be
made to entrap air allowing simultaneous ultrasound imaging before their
destruction. These echogenic content-bearing polymersomes will be tested in
three-dimensional (3D) cultures of cancer cells containing hypoxic niches. The
award will support activities that broaden participation of underrepresented
minorities in research and education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.