* 2322722
* Supporting Talented, Low-Income Undergraduate and Graduate Students in Chemistry and Biochemistry through Career Explorations, Research Experiences, and Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2029
* Andrienne Friedli, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2029
* USD 1,972,199.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students in chemistry with demonstrated
financial need at Middle Tennessee State University, a public research
university in Murfreesboro, TN. Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships for up to 60 unique Master of Science (MS) students, and up to
90 full time junior and senior students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science
(BS) degrees in Chemistry or Biochemistry. The project aims to increase student
persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with proven effective
supporting activities, including faculty and peer mentoring, research
experiences, professional development courses, graduate school and employment
preparation, and participation in discipline-specific conferences. With the help
of mentors and advisors, scholars will create individual plans for career goals
and steps toward achieving those goals. Opportunities to engage with faculty
mentors, peer mentors, and professional advisors will allow scholars to find
support as they navigate professional, social, and financial challenges. Project
research and evaluation activities will explore the impact of the project’s
mentoring, engagement, and scholar support components on academic outcomes and
career directions for low-income students.

The overall goal of the project is to increase timely degree completion for low-
income, high-achieving BS and MS students with demonstrated financial need. The
specific aims of the project are to deliver high impact scientific and
professional development opportunities to scholars. Undergraduate scholars will
be encouraged to select two credits of research per year or engage in (paid)
summer research; and graduate scholars will participate in research leading to a
successful thesis. Networking with industry professionals and alumni,
interacting with employers at career fairs, and participating in seminars,
literature discussions, and other departmental events will also be encouraged.
The project team will collect and analyze qualitative and quantitative research
data on academic success, student engagement, and self-efficacy to explore
strategies to support low income and underrepresented scholars as they prepare
for their future careers. An independent evaluation effort will assess the
effectiveness of the project at meeting the evolving needs of scholars and,
along with project research, contribute to the broad dissemination of
activities, findings, and outcomes. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.