* 2322581
* Improving Recruitment, Retention, and Graduation in STEM for Low-Income Students in Central Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Michael Cullin, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2028
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Commonwealth University of Pennsylvania, a public, broad access,
primarily undergraduate institution. Over its six-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 38 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Digital Forensics
and Cybersecurity, Engineering, Geosciences, Mathematics, and Physics. First-
year students will receive up to four years of scholarship support. The project
will improve student persistence through a combination of academic, social, and
professional supports including a first-year learning community, faculty
mentoring, peer tutoring, early service-learning research opportunities,
professional experience grants, major success maps, first-year seminars, and
career counseling. The key impacts of this project are persistent improvements
to STEM student recruitment and support systems at Commonwealth and a better
understanding of the impact of targeted student success measures on scholar
retention in STEM. Because Commonwealth University serves a primarily rural and
low-income region, this project has the potential to broaden participation in
STEM disciplines and benefit economic development in north central Pennsylvania
and the U.S. Science and Technology workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Towards
this goal the project team will pursue three specific objectives. First, is to
increase matriculation of low-income students in STEM disciplines by 10%
compared to 2022-23. Second, is to retain 92% of project scholars from first- to
second-year, and third, is to graduate 83% of project scholars in 4 years. This
project will fill critical gaps in the understanding of the impacts of specific
student success measures by first studying the effect of tools such as first
year seminars, major success maps, professional experience grants, and service-
learning on low income student success in STEM disciplines, as measured by
metrics such 2-year retention rates, DFWI%, and 4- and 6-year graduation rates.
Next, the project will explore how these tools improve student outcomes by
investigating their effects on psycho-social constructs associated with
increased retention and graduation such as self-efficacy, sense of belonging,
and disciplinary identity. Third, and lastly, the project will develop
understanding of activities that can be used to build cohort cohesion across
multiple campuses. This project will be evaluated using a mixed-methods approach
built on information from institutional research, interviews, surveys, and focus
groups. Lessons learned and best practices will be shared with local, regional,
and national audiences through presentations at STEM education and disciplinary
conferences, publication in appropriate education and disciplinary journals, and
a dedicated project webpage. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.