* 2322254
* MCA: The role of symbiont toxins in a defensive mutualism
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Mariana Mateos, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2025
* USD 264,224.00

Symbioses between animals and microbes are ubiquitous in nature and can strongly
influence the ability of animals to use resources and cope with different
environmental stressors and disease. An emerging and exciting theme in symbiosis
is the ability of microbes, particularly bacteria, to protect their hosts
against natural enemies. Such defensive associations are highly pertinent to
agriculture and human health, as they can influence, in negative and positive
ways, the effectiveness of measures targeted at diverse insect pests and insect-
vectored pathogens. Although records of such defensive associations have rapidly
accrued, knowledge of how these bacteria defend their hosts is lagging. Studying
such interactions is difficult because it is usually not possible to grow and
manipulate the bacterial partner independently of the insect. This project
capitalizes on the powerful research tools available with the fruit fly
(Drosophila melanogaster) model system to understand the role of toxins produced
by an inherited bacterium (Spiroplasma) that protects flies against parasitic
wasps. This project will also leverage exciting natural variation in the ‘three-
way’ bacterium-fly-wasp interaction to uncover how certain wasps are able to
avoid damage caused by the bacterium. These studies will help identify the
general principles governing symbiont-mediated defense in nature. This project
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in science and enhance
scientific literacy, through research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as in-class and outreach activities.

The taxonomic diversity of hosts, symbionts, and natural enemies recorded in
defensive associations is broad and rapidly growing, but understanding of the
defensive mechanisms themselves is mostly restricted to a few associations
involving members of a single bacterial group (Proteobacteria). Research
progress has been hampered by the paucity of genetic and laboratory resources
available for non-model hosts, symbionts, and natural enemies, precluding
identification of general principles governing symbiont-mediated defense. This
project investigates a system involving an influential bacterial lineage (genus
Spiroplasma: Class Mollicutes) that is not only highly divergent but is also
distinct from the best studied defensive symbionts. Several lines of evidence
suggest that the mechanism by which Spiroplasma prevents the successful
development of wasps that parasitize Drosophila, involves a Spiroplasma-encoded
toxin. However, whether the toxin is necessary and sufficient to inhibit wasps
has not been demonstrated; a task that is hampered by the inability to
successfully transform Spiroplasma. This project will use bacteria-free
transgenic Drosophila, to carefully examine whether the Spiroplasma-encoded
toxin can disable wasps that parasitize Drosophila larvae. Complementary
experiments will investigate the mechanism(s) by which certain wasp species are
able to avoid damage by Spiroplasma. Therefore, this project will yield novel
insights into the mechanistic underpinnings of a tripartite coevolutionary arms
race that is emerging as a model system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.