* 2322840
* AerialHitches: Forming and Controlling Hitches for Fully Autonomous Transportation Using Aerial Robots with Cables
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Subhrajit Bhattacharya, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/28/2027
* USD 599,429.00

This project will improve aerial robots so they can grasp, manipulate and
transport objects better and without human intervention. Conventional aerial
robots rely on grippers (i.e., end effectors) and robotic arms for manipulating
and transporting objects. These parts not only add significant weight, but also
reduce flight duration and complicate the control of the robots. This project
introduces an innovative alternative, wherein the robots utilize lightweight
cables to form 'hitches' for performing manipulation tasks, bypassing the need
for weighty external components. The benefit of cables is that they are
lightweight and flexible, allowing for versatile manipulation techniques that
traditional rigid grippers cannot provide. Cables can also conform to objects of
various shapes and sizes, increasing the range of tasks an aerial robot can
perform. Additionally, using cables dramatically reduces the overall weight of
the system, resulting in increased flight duration. This groundbreaking concept
has the potential to greatly improve productivity in fields such as
construction, logistics, and disaster management, where high-frequency,
repetitive transportation tasks are common. In these sectors, using a cable-
based aerial robotic system could reduce safety risks associated with manual
transportation and work in elevated or hazardous areas.

On a technical front, the project entails abstracting common cable
configurations into a finite-dimensional space to manage the physical dynamics
of the cables. A reinforcement learning algorithm will be formulated based on
this abstraction, expediting the convergence to optimal actions by utilizing an
ideal dynamics model. Topology-based planning algorithms will be developed to
form the hitches, accounting for the specific movements required. In lieu of
creating plans from scratch, a library of hitches will be established to
streamline the transportation process, which can be adjusted according to
transportation requirements. Through this project, the potential contributions
include advancements in reinforcement learning for controlling interlaced
cables, modeling cables using topological frameworks in aerial robotics, and
progressing our understanding of the principles governing aerial robot behavior
and manipulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.