* 2322919
* CNS Core: Small: Core Scheduling Techniques and Programming Abstractions for Scalable Serverless Edge Computing Engine
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Liting Hu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 12/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The proliferation of 5G and beyond facilitates the advancement of next-
generation technologies, including smart cities, self-driving cars, online video
gaming, virtual reality, and augmented reality. This necessitates a re-
evaluation of how these services are characterized and deployed. Serverless
computing is an emerging paradigm, referring to a software architecture where an
application is decomposed into triggers (also called events) and actions (also
called functions), and there is a platform that provides seamless hosting and
execution environment, making it easy to develop, manage, scale, and operate
them. This project aims to build a next-generation serverless edge computing
engine that empowers a vast number of distributed edge applications, such as
data analytics, edge AI, and media streaming, to run efficiently at the edge
through the Function-as-a-Service model.

This project breaks the traditional abstractions and redefines new abstractions
in the scheduling layer and storage layer that collectively deliver a scalable
serverless edge computing engine. First, a full decentralized scheduling
architecture is proposed, which dramatically improves the scalability of the
proposed serverless edge computing engine. Second, an active object store
abstraction is proposed, which is used for storing and sharing application
states in a user-customizable manner. Third, the proposed serverless edge
computing engine is implemented on top of the open-source software stacks. The
evaluation is multi-pronged and includes micro-benchmarks for component testing
and real-world applications for overall system testing. The results of the
research are integrated into the undergraduate and graduate systems courses. The
source code, datasets, tools, techniques, and new course materials developed in
this research will be made publicly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.