* 2322603
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On the ground and from above: A multi-factor analysis of the direct and indirect drivers of tallgrass prairie small mammal communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Holly Jones, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,780.00

Title: Doctoral Dissertation Research: On the ground and from above: A multi-
factor analysis of the direct and indirect drivers of tallgrass prairie small
mammal communities

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project investigates the role of
both broad-scale land cover and small-scale management activities in driving the
populations of small mammals, such as mice in voles in tallgrass prairies.
Tallgrass prairies provide critical ecosystem services such as carbon storage,
cultural connections, and water retention. By building our understanding of
prairie food webs, we aim to equip land managers with a more complete picture to
inform management decisions. Furthermore, this study contributes to the
knowledge about complex prairie ecosystems and management effects across
multiple scales. On broader impacts, this study 1)trains dozens of volunteers,
including undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds, on small mammal
trapping methodology, 2) provides support for land managers aiming to make
evidence-based management decisions, and 3) develops and implements a lesson in
landscape ecology for use in undergraduate classrooms.

The multi-scale drivers of small mammal populations are not currently well-
understood, especially in critically threatened tallgrass prairie habitats. To
better understand these complex systems, this study uses long-term small mammal
trapping data, long-term vegetation surveys, and land cover data derived from
drone imagery to examine how land cover and management activities shape small
mammal populations, directly or indirectly, through impacts on vegetation. Due
to their central role in prairie food webs, understanding small mammal
populations helps decipher the community's health as a whole. By analyzing the
drivers of these species, this work advances the knowledge about prairie
communities and the impacts of habitat change and management activity,
especially in the wake of human activities that may degrade or restore the
ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.