* 2322712
* Preparing Students for Careers in Biotechnology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2029
* Mark Jensen, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2029
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Concordia College, a four-year liberal arts institution. Over its 6-year
duration, the "Concordia Leads: Instructing and Mentoring in Biotechnology"
(CLIMB) project will provide scholarships to 36 undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Mathematics, Neuroscience, and/or Physics. First-year students may receive up to
five years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase student
persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective supporting
activities, including academic support services, mentoring, undergraduate
research experiences, paid internships, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences. Through partnerships with local biotechnology companies, this
project will prepare students for careers in biotechnology – an industry
identified as an area of national importance and one that is experiencing
tremendous growth in the region around the college and across the country.
Because Concordia College is an increasingly diverse institution that recruits
from a region with a high population of underrepresented students, this project
has the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields and build the next
generation of workers in the biotechnology industry.

The principal goal of the CLIMB project is to recruit, retain, and prepare
academically talented, low-income students interested in pursuing careers in
biotechnology. Four specific objectives will guide the work of the project team.
First is to build a diverse applicant pool with recruiting strategies targeted
toward students from populations underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM
careers and biotechnology in particular. Second is to provide both academic and
social support systems focused on retaining scholars and allowing them to
flourish. Third is to connect scholars with a network of mentors who will
provide personal, academic, social, and vocational support. Fourth, and finally,
is to work with local industry partners to offer vocational guidance, knowledge,
and experiences that will prepare scholars for successful careers in
biotechnology. Three cohorts of 12 CLIMB scholars will be selected. Once at
Concordia, a number of support systems will be provided for the scholars.
Cohorts will first form an Orientation Club that will become a first-year
seminar course with a focus on strategies for successful learning in STEM. CLIMB
scholars will have regular meetings with academic counselors and access to
prioritized academic support services. A coordinated network of mentors,
including faculty, staff, peers, and STEM professionals will support the
scholars throughout their academic journey. In partnership with local
biotechnology companies, scholars will be offered vocational opportunities
including career awareness presentations, industry tours, teaching seminars,
research experiences, and paid internships. Program evaluation will be performed
by an external evaluator, and formative guidance will be regularly provided by
an industry advisory panel. The effectiveness of the strategies developed and
tested for recruiting underrepresented populations, supporting them both
academically and socially, educating and mentoring them for careers in
biotechnology, and preparing them for success will be disseminated to inform the
broader STEM education community, thereby widening the impact of the CLIMB
program beyond Concordia’s campus. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.