* 2322911
* Student Travel to International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication, 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Chih-Hao Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 18,000.00

This award supports the student attendance at the 66th International Conference
on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication; San Francisco,
California; 30 May to 2 June 2023. The EIPBN meeting is the premier lithography
and nanofabrication meeting in the world and attracts participants and
presenters from academia, industry, and government laboratories. This forum is
instrumental in the generation and incubation of breakthrough and transformative
ideas in many scientific areas including nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing.
This international conference is a key mechanism for linking basic science with
engineering towards the development of useful nano-enabled products, which are
significant to the US and world economies. This conference offers a forum for
the open exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific research and
ideas. This award will partially support the participation of undergraduate and
graduate students, to train the next generation of researchers in nanotechnology
and nanomanufacturing and to broaden participation by students who would
otherwise not be able to attend.

EIPBN is a major international meeting and will provide a single forum for
discussion of the latest developments in directed energy-enabled synthesis,
fabrication, imaging, measurement and characterization of nanoscale structures,
devices and multi-scale systems. NSF funding will be used to support about 36
students financially so that students may participate in short courses, the
commercial session, the technical program, and other social events. There are
also a number of key student programs, including a Career Mentoring Session with
academic and industry leaders, as well as Women in Nanofabrication (WIN)
Luncheon to discuss diversity challenges faced by nanotechnology researchers and
scientists. This year’s program also includes a conference-wide Panel Discussion
on “The CHIPS Act and the Future of US Semiconductor Manufacturing” with
representatives from government research lab, industry, and academia. The
conference organization committee will reach out to underrepresented groups to
recruit student presenters and participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.