* 2322343
* SBIR Phase I:  Repair, Weld, and Build Metallic Parts with Fill Impact Welding
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Anupam Vivek, APPLIED IMPULSE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to develop a welding technology that will improve the
repair, joining, and additive manufacturing of metallic parts and features.
First applications include material additions to repair gouges and mis-drilled
holes during aircraft production and service, both of which represent
significant financial opportunities. Repairs to the structural material are not
currently permissible in a production environment due to adverse effects of
currently available repair methods on base material properties, usually due to
extreme temperatures. Aerostructure manufacturers have a strong incentive to
minimize the weight of the aircraft structure, often at the significant
financial and environmental expense of scrapping a whole panel. Maintenance,
repair and overhaul often entails total replacement of damaged components with
new ones as improper repairs of critical components can cause catastrophic harm.
Replacement of parts is expensive and has long lead times due to high-value,
low-volume nature of the aerospace industry. This project will develop an
effective restoration method to repair of metallic components, while being
agnostic to the material and part geometry. Reclamation of previously
unrepairable parts made from materials such as titanium, nickel, and aluminum
has a large positive environmental impact. Additionally, by broadly enabling
solid-state joining, this technology will disrupt the welding industry, globally
valued at $20 billion. The foundational technology platform, led in the US, will
produce new jobs in science, technology and engineering fields while bolstering
domestic manufacturing supply chains.

The innovation underpinning this project involves the sequential, tactical, and
controlled deposition of metals using explosive welding. Explosive welding uses
coin-sized metallic elements launched to speeds in the range of 300-1000m/s
without explosives. While it is known that explosive welding can weld large
plates together, the method is not suited to automation or conventional
industrial settings. Impact welding will be developed as a fill-welding
technique, much like a filler metal in conventional welding, and will use
wrought sheet metal as feedstock. Here, electrically vaporized metallic foils
will be used as the driver for the fill elements and the research will focus on
whether those elements can be launched reproducibly to develop large bond areas
and reproducible positioning. The ability to control element shape and
orientation during flight and produce an interface that is fully welded are the
most high-risk aspects of the technology. Mechanical testing, scanning electron
microscopy, and inline process monitoring such as photonic Doppler velocimetry
will be performed. This effort will develop a new process-structure-property
loop, with the goal of producing parts that are better than those made with a
competing technology such as cold spray as measured by total energy consumption,
cost, and mechanical properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.