* 2322849
* I-Corps: Tactile Displays for Haptic Gloves
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Christopher Harrison, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that has the potential to increase accessibility for
those with vision impairments both in augmented and virtual reality. Tactile
graphics are considered to be critical for teaching spatially structured
information like maps, geometry, and mathematical equations. However, dynamic
tactile graphic displays today are often prohibitively expensive. The low cost
and compactness of this technology could drastically change the availability of
tactile graphic displays as well as refreshable Braille. Miniature hydraulic
actuation is a foundational technology that has broad potential in other
markets, such as soft robotics, wearable devices, prostheses, and other medical
devices.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of created miniature arrays of
actuators which can produce the relevant pressures and deformations for haptic
feedback. The individual actuators are electrically driven, individually
addressable, compact, and dynamic. Additionally, the arrays are low cost,
lightweight, and they scale favorably for large numbers of actuators. This
effectively enables a new type of display that is capable of conveying detailed
tactile “images” of shapes and edges across an area of skin. These innovations
will be incorporated as tactile displays into haptic gloves to enable the sense
of touch in augmented and virtual reality environments. The skin is a
distributed sensory organ with over 250,000 tactile afferent fibers spread
across the external surface of the body, and it is like the retina in its
ability to sense across space. As the skin is stretched, compressed, and
vibrated at different points, higher level objects are recognized, such as keys
in your pocket. This type of nuanced, high volume tactile information transfer
happens constantly and without effort in daily actions. An immense amount of
knowledge can be contained in the sense of touch, such as the pattern of a
surgeon’s suture, or the orientation and location of an object within a robot’s
grip, yet it is hard to communicate. A dynamic tactile display allows this
knowledge to be presented and is a fundamental piece of technology for the sense
of touch, enabling additional research and commercial effort. While visual
displays have reached the limits of the retina, the most complex haptic feedback
that most people encounter is the buzz of a smartphone or click of a trackpad.
This project will explore haptic gloves for robotic teleoperation tasks, and
from simulation companies for emergency response training, and medical
education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.