* 2322424
* SBIR Phase I:  Overcoming interaction barriers in augmented reality via wearable multimodal sensing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Tyler Chen, SKYWALK INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project enables people to intuitively interact with
augmented reality technologies. Currently, augmented reality input modalities
can be extremely unreliable, making it nearly impossible to use traditional
mouse-and-keyboard applications on these devices. The company is proposing a
device that may overcome this interaction barrier by allowing augmented reality
manufacturers the ability to make more complex and meaningful applications. The
device will turn human hands into cursors, turn any surface into a touchscreen,
and unlock new human-computer interactions. Using this device with augmented
reality headsets is expected to prove advantageous for potential applications in
education, medicine, defense, and manufacturing.

The company is building an interface for augmented reality input, paving the way
for a differentiated path to increasing augmented reality content. This
technology could allow for rapid communication of information at a rate falling
between that of typing on a computer and physically speaking, unlocking untapped
productivity for users of augmented reality platforms. These outcomes will be
met through the development of a reliable and functional wrist-worn, near-
infrared sensor network that will improve the capture of input data. Unlike
current devices, this technology is not hindered by the cameras' limited field
of view or obstructions, or by the unreliability of other wearable input capture
devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.