* 2322701
* Beginnings: Democratizing Research and Experiential Education for Microelectronics
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Brian Warnecke, College of Southern Maryland
* Cooperative Agreement
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

As the U.S. ramps up its domestic semiconductor manufacturing capacity, a
strong, diverse, domestic microelectronics industry workforce is needed. To
address this urgent need, the University of Maryland, College Park (UMD) is
partnering with two regional community colleges (CC) â€” the College of Southern
Maryland (CSM) and Montgomery College (MC), and regional industrial technology
partners to expand the pool of research- and industry-ready students by creating
a new, project-based, experiential learning program for second-year community
college students in microelectronics. Specifically, the focus will be on
projects in emerging and novel technologies critical for competitive future
careers in microelectronics. Electrical and Computer Engineering programs in
Community Colleges serve a diverse population, and providing new training
opportunities can significantly support underrepresented students in
transferring to 4-year degree programs, boosting their career potential. The
transition from a local community college to a 4-year degree university program
is often difficult due to many interrelated reasons (e.g., being first
generation, lack of mentorship and sense of inclusion, financial challenges
etc.) and this project seeks to provide the needed support and experiential
learning pathway from academic research to industrial internships for students
that seek careers in this rapidly expanding technical area. This project will
unite and coordinate regional educators and industrial partners to create a more
equitable, efficient, educational pathway that serves the national need for a
strong microelectronics workforce to solve the problems of tomorrow. The
Democratizing Research and Experiential Education for Microelectronics (DREEM)
team will carry out an 8-month experiential learning project for second-year
community-college students in Electrical Engineering to provide critical
technical skills and career-advancing opportunities that includes: a focused
3-week practical workshop on targeted design skills, a semester-long, hands-on
research project with University of Maryland, College Park faculty to develop
laboratory skills, and a summer internship with industrial partners. With a
focus on emerging technologies such as manufacturing of biosensors, neuromorphic
signal processing circuits, and machine learning, this project will be
emphasizing skills important for the next generation of designers. Students will
be individually co-mentored by faculty from the University of Maryland, College
Park and local community college faculty with advising activities such as hands-
on research projects, resume preparation, and internship applications. DREEM
students will also have access to advanced laboratories and facilities at both
the University of Maryland, College Park and the USMSM (University System of
Maryland, Southern Maryland) Southern Maryland Autonomous Research and
Technology (SMART) Building including the state-of-the-art Maryland Autonomous
Technologies Research Innovation and eXploration (MATRIX) Lab in Southern
Maryland for research. Multiple in-person events will bring the student cohort,
faculty, and industry partners together for brainstorming and the creation of
personal relationships that are critical for professional development and
guidance. To ensure inclusive participation of students with financial needs,
each stage of the experiential learning project will be funded at a competitive
hourly rate. The effectiveness of preparing students for industry will be guided
by an Advisory Board that enables direct input from the industry stakeholders as
well as perspectives from engineering education advocacy and diversity, equity,
inclusion, and access. Evaluation of the project will be performed by an
experienced Education Research Specialist from the University of Maryland
Teaching and Learning Transformation Center. This project aligns with the NSF
ExLENT Program, funded by the NSF TIP and EDU Directorates, as it seeks to
support experiential learning opportunities for individuals from diverse
professional and educational backgrounds to increase their interest in, and
their access to, career pathways in emerging technology fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.