* 2322085
* CIVIC-FA Track A: Youth-Centered Civic Technology, Science, and Art for Improving Community Heat Resilience Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Phillip Wiseman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Civic Innovation Challenge Full Award (CIVIC-FA) project addresses the risk
of increasing temperatures in cities due to climate change. It develops and
pilots a novel approach that integrates youth arts, science and technology, and
spirituality. The planned activities provide governments and residents with rich
data to guide their planning and mitigation efforts. The project brings together
academic researchers, government officials, and civic organizers to facilitate
healing from trauma and planning for the future. Central to climate change
adaptation and resilience is the creation of meaningful roles for youth as well
as a deep understanding of organizational partnerships. The project also
explores how technology can make decision-making more inclusive.

Within cities, historically marginalized neighborhoods often have measurably
higher temperatures and fewer resources to reduce heat-related risks. Engaging
with the residents living in those neighborhoods is critical yet difficult, due
to the legacies of discriminatory urban planning practices that have left deep
traumas. The Roanoke Method (trauma-informed resilience planning) is developed
to support community well-being and healing through public policies. The project
evaluates how participation in cross-organization partnerships affects
conceptualizations of the problem of urban heat and potential solutions. The
team also creates new digital platforms designed to present past, present, and
future visions of the city in the context of shocks and disasters. The
activities and training materials produced from the research-civic partnership
could be transferable to other cities facing similar challenges including
limited organizational capacity, mistrust between residents and government, and
pressing needs to adapt built environments to climate change.

The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy,
Department of Homeland Security, and the National Science Foundation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.