* 2322436
* Creating Pathways to Computing Careers through Experiential and Engaged Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Frank Gomez, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will award a total of 150
scholarships to support cohorts of 30 academically talented students each year,
with a demonstrated financial need, who are pursuing degrees in computing at the
California State University - San Bernardino. The goal of the project is to
invigorate computing education in California's Inland Empire region by creating
pathways to computing careers. The pedagogical changes to the introductory
computing courses, supported by this award, will benefit more than 1,250
students.

Four objectives will guide the project team. First is to increase the retention
and graduation of low-income undergraduate students. Second is to transform the
introduction to programming courses to include culturally responsive and active
learning pedagogical techniques. Third is to develop a summer research program,
and fourth is to expand and sustain a quarterly forum that brings together
technology companies, policymakers, and thought leaders, enabling students to
participate in local community-based experiential learning opportunities. The
research component of the project will assess the impact of the scholarship
program on low-income computing students' retention, academic success, and
degree completion. Furthermore, it will explore how engaged learning and
mentoring influence students' interest in pursuing research experiences and
careers. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.