* 2323795
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Information Integrity: A User-centric Intervention
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Wenwen Dou, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 217,000.00

Combating misinformation in the digital age has been a challenging subject with
significant social implications, as misinformation continues to impact
contentious contemporary events from elections to responses to pandemics.
Despite decades of research, misinformation remains a serious threat as most
technical mitigation methods focus on improving detection accuracy and fail to
consider social and emotional perspectives. This project assists in enhancing
information integrity by identifying influencing communities, agents, and
culturally resonant information to identify tipping points in public dialogue on
controversial issues and offering venues of user-centric interventions at scale.

This project moves away from source-centric accuracy detection and debunking to
focus on user-centric interventions that integrates psychological and socio-
cultural constructs, computational theories, and machine learning (ML)
algorithms to prototype interventions for testing. The first focus of research
has the goal of analyzing and identifying social norm emergence--the shared
beliefs or acceptable behaviors of communities, and tipping points when beliefs
are about to change rapidly. The second focus of this research is to uncover the
cultural contexts of belief, personalized to each individual, to optimzie the
receptivity of scientific evidence in online network dissemination. The third
pillar (Interaction) provides human-in-the-loop visual analytics framework to
support users in verifying and making users' own decisions as to what they
belief. Underpinning this work is the development and testing of novel deep
learning models based on topology ML, which effectively predict heterogeneous
social norm emergence for timely intervention, identify top trusted features for
engagement, and temporal explainable artificial intelligence for transparent
interaction with users. The involvement of leading misinformation mitigation and
journalism education organizations such as the Poynter Institute helps to ensure
social impacts in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.