* 2323696
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Active Learning-Based Material Discovery for 3D Printed Solids with Locally-Tunable Electrical and Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Anamika Prasad, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2027
* USD 432,418.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
project will establish a multi-disciplinary active learning method to discover
new materials chemistries for additive manufacturing (AM; or 3D printing)
wherein the electrical and mechanical properties can be locally controlled. This
is a multi-disciplinary approach with an integration of advanced synthesis,
characterization, simulation, and data science protocols. AM has seen
exponential growth in recent years. One emerging area is to use AM for
functional devices. However, the current AM techniques face challenges in
fabricating these devices due to the lack of multi-material capability. Digital
light processing (DLP) 3D printing is a rapidly developing AM technique due to
its advantage of high speed and high resolution. The research will develop
advanced data-driven approaches which utilize both experimental and
computational training data to address the multiple design objectives and guide
successive rounds of experiments. These approaches will be used to discover new
resin formulations for DLP 3D printing where the local material properties can
be controlled from soft to stiff and conductive to non-conductive. The active
learning method will greatly expedite the development of new materials for AM.
The research will have significant societal and economic impacts serving to
maintain and enhance the US leadership position in AM. The research will be
disseminated to undergraduate, graduate, and high school students and involve
them in research. The research will involve students from underrepresented
groups and promoting divergence, equity, and inclusion in the STEM field.

Discovery of new polymers for AM has been hindered by the existence of a large
number of ingredient monomers, large property differences among printed
polymers, and the lack of an efficient approach to rapidly select these monomers
at proper ratios to make polymers with properties that can meet the application
needs. Preliminary work has demonstrated the feasibility to use an active
learning approach to discover new resins with different monomer compositions for
targeted mechanical properties. This work has shown that it is possible to use
the copolymer ink design to print a monolithic part with locally variable
mechanical properties and conductivity. The research will first establish a
suite of high-throughput methods for polymer property evaluation by experiments
and simulations. These include rapidly synthesizing polymers composed of
different monomers at different ratios, characterizing their mechanical and
electrical properties, and predicting these properties using molecular dynamics
simulations with classical and machine learning based force fields trained on
density functional theory calculation data. Assisted by these high-throughput
methods, the research will establish an advanced multi-task active learning
model that uses data from molecular dynamics simulations and from a limited
number of experiments to predict polymer electrical and mechanical properties. A
combined iterative approach between experiments and simulations will provide
insight into effects of polymer composition and structure on polymer
conductivity, mechanical properties, and property gradients. Finally, the active
learning model will be used to guide the selection of monomers to design and
fabricate 3D functional devices.

This project is supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.