* 2323469
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Deep learning guided twistronics for self-assembled quantum optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Qimin Yan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 440,000.00

Non-technical Description: Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) materials can
host intriguing quantum properties not found in their bulk counterparts.
Furthermore, stacking 2D materials with control over the twist angles between
adjacent layers provides a versatile way to obtain novel quantum materials with
unprecedented properties. Such “twistronic” materials can have applications in
electronics, photonics and quantum information science and technologies.
However, with the new degrees of freedom, the materials design parameter space
becomes exceedingly large, posing a significant challenge to predictably design
and precisely make materials to enable such unique properties. In this DMREF
project, the collaborative team from University of Pennsylvania, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and Northeastern University will use computer aided deep
learning models and theoretical tools to predict designer twistronic materials
prepared in specific states and guide the unique self-assembled crystal growth
to engineer twist angles in different 2D materials. The team will perform
property measurements to characterize these systems and also extend the ideas to
quantum photonics to assemble on-chip devices. Results from synthesis,
characterization and device measurements will be fed back to the theoretical
models for establishing a self-consistent and tightly integrated research for
further discovery of new designer twistronic materials with precisely controlled
responses that can enable a new paradigm for quantum materials research with
applications in computing, communications, imaging and sensing.
Interdisciplinary research activities will be integrated with educational and
outreach initiatives by involving students at all levels from diverse
backgrounds in the collaborative research project with emphasis on quantum
materials and photonics.

Technical Description: Modern quantum materials are typically designed by
engineering symmetries combined with strong spin-orbit coupling at the atomic
and lattice length scales. In two-dimensional (2D) materials with chiral
symmetry complemented by many-body interactions such as interlayer coupling,
controlling the interlayer twist angle offers a promising strategy to achieve
novel quantum properties such as flat bands, topological phases, and large
nonlinear optical responses. However, two major challenges impede the progress
in “twistronic” materials: 1) the dramatic increase in the degrees of freedom of
the systems makes it prohibitively difficult to predict the material
compositions, crystal phases and interlayer twists needed to achieve a
particular quantum phase; and 2) the current material fabrication method
consisting of exfoliating and reassembling 2D material layers with manual
control over the interlayer twist angles is a laborious process with low yields.
In this DMREF project, a highly interdisciplinary team will break the
fundamental limitation of designing twistronic materials via deep learning-based
symmetry and topological engineering of materials and metamaterials. Starting
from a quantum paradigm, the atomic scale symmetry and topology in 2D materials
will be optimized for targeted chiral responses. Guided by theory, multilayer
twisted 2D materials will be synthesized with rational control over interlayer
twist angles, compositions, and crystal phases to realize novel and predictable
quantum properties. New knowledge will be generated to enable the rational
design of quantum twistronic materials with highly predictive power to
demonstrate novel chiral optoelectronic responses, which will also be extended
to quantum photonic systems. These advances can enable the next generation of
electronics and optical devices such as on-chip coherent chiral emitters,
entangled photon emission and detection with precisely controlled responses. The
interdisciplinary project will provide an excellent educational opportunity for
training graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students on the important concepts of
geometry, crystal structures and quantum physics with an emphasis on increasing
the participation of underrepresented groups. Funding for the award is from the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Divisions of Materials Research (DMR)
and Chemistry (CHE) through the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.