* 2323456
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Topologically Designed and Resilient Ultrahigh Temperature Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Gregory Thompson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 731,650.00

Ultrahigh temperature ceramics are a class of materials with exceptionally high
melting temperatures. Consequently, they hold great promise for extreme
environment applications that include hypersonic flight, nuclear fusion
reactors, and concentrated solar power. However, they are brittle at low
temperatures, which negatively impacts functionality. Conversely, these
materials deform too much at ultrahigh temperatures. Usually, one of these
properties can be improved at the expense of the other, making optimization
difficult. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) project will develop a new method to simultaneously improve both the low
temperature and high temperature properties of these materials by devising a
means to design and manufacture specific crystal structures and unique
microstructures. As part of this research effort, the next generation of
scientists and engineers will be trained in a cross-disciplinary manner as they
work together to bridge different disciplines. This education will be expanded
through an active high school and undergraduate summer program that identifies
underserved demographics in STEM. Additionally, this project will educate
secondary school teachers about materials science, and specifically ceramics,
giving them the toolsets to integrate such information into physics, chemistry,
and physical science courses dramatically broadening the impact of the science
generated.

The overarching goal of this project is to design ultrahigh temperature ceramics
that are both resistant to fracture at low temperatures and resilient against
creep at high temperature. This will be achieved by designing the ceramic from a
bottom-up approach that utilizes the materialsâ€™ own natural length scales and
chemistry to stabilize low symmetry crystal structures whose elongated shapes
fit together creating an interlocked material microstructure. A combination of
computational tools, including first principles and machine learning, will be
integrated into experimental methods that directly synthesize customized powder
morphologies where the structure and property performance is characterized.
Through this iterative loop of interactions and outcomes, specific metal and
nonmetal species will be identified and designed to promote desired phases with
interlocking morphologies. By simultaneously improving toughness and deformation
resistance in our ultrahigh temperature ceramics, this research will enable the
advancement of technologies for use at extreme environments, while providing
unique training for students in a multidisciplinary educational environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.