* 2323667
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Organic Materials Architectured for Researching Vibronic Excitations with Light in the Infrared (MARVEL-IR)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Guoxiang Hu, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 196,256.00

Non-technical Description: The detection of infrared (IR) light underpins modern
science, technology, and society in profound ways, permitting the observation of
objects and information that are invisible to conventional detectors, imagers,
and cameras. However, despite decades of development, current IR semiconductors
possess numerous drawbacks that limit their widespread use and the development
of critical emerging technologies. This project will investigate completely new
light-matter interactions, theoretical and computational approaches, novel
polymer semiconductors with tailored electronic structures, and devices to
enable optical to electrical transduction of IR light, a fundamentally new
capability for organic materials. These materials and devices will satisfy the
functional and economic requirements for technologies that can address critical
national needs with global societal impacts in climate change, manufacturing,
energy, healthcare, information science, consumer applications, future aerospace
and defense-wide applications, and many others. New theoretical, synthetic,
characterization, and device advances will coalesce with Air Force Research Labs
and industry partnerships to produce new materials and devices for technology
transfer. Workforce development efforts will focus on multidisciplinary
education through co-mentorship, industry and Department of Defense
interactions, outreach to underrepresented high school and undergraduate
students, and professional development actives for research and leadership
training.

Technical Description: This project will address grand challenges to
revolutionize our understanding of charge photogeneration and emerging solid-
state transport phenomena in order to enable optical to electrical transduction
of IR light from organic materials. To achieve this, the research team will
establish a closed loop between theory, computation, synthesis, spectroscopy,
and device fabrication, engineering, and physics. Revolutionary ab initio and
time-dependent quantum chemical calculations that incorporate non-adiabatic
dynamics will for the first-time provide detailed insight into IR excitations in
correlated organic materials with complex excitonic, vibrational, polaronic, and
spin properties. Systematic theory-synthesis-spectroscopic approaches will be
developed and applied to benchmark these new theoretical approaches and
correlate molecular design with emerging functionality and coherent
quasiparticle dynamics across multiple spatiotemporal timescales. This will be
related to the fundamental electro-optical physics and device performance,
enabling new functionality. These new, foundational design principles will be
combined with experimentally validated physical structure-property models and
data-driven machine learning methods to simulate new polymer structures, rapidly
screen materials candidates, improve performance, and create new material
libraries. This will create a comprehensive materials genome for conjugated
polymers that operate throughout the IR. Thus, this project will enable
fundamentally new scientific capabilities and revolutionary performance in
organic electronic devices, acting as a core enabler of transformative
technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.