* 2323083
* Collaborative Research: Fusion of Siloed Data for Multistage Manufacturing Systems: Integrative Product Quality and Machine Health Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Yuebin Guo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Janis Terpenny
* 12/31/2026
* USD 223,843.00

As products become more intricate, it is very common that modern manufacturing
processes which involve multiple stages are required. The output workpiece of
one stage is the input workpiece of the next stage. In a multistage
manufacturing system, not only does the health condition of a machine interact
with incoming and outgoing product quality, but the outgoing product quality
also impacts the machine health condition and product quality at downstream
machines. Due to the complicated interactions among product quality and machine
health conditions across multiple stages, for effective system monitoring and
operational control, it is insufficient (even misleading) to consider product
quality issues and machine condition degradation issues separately at each
individual machine. With the fast progress of sensing and information
technology, a large amount of product quality data and machine health condition
data at multiple machines in a multistage manufacturing system are easily
acquired and accessed. This project establishes a series of data-driven
methodologies to achieve efficient monitoring and operation of multistage
manufacturing systems through integrative modeling of product quality and
machine health data. The developed methodologies are tested and validated in a
laboratory testbed and on real production systems with industrial collaborators.
This project contributes to workforce training by promoting the
interdisciplinary research of manufacturing, computing, sensing, and data
analytics and provides unique training opportunities for students through new
curriculum development and various outreach activities.

An integrated mathematical framework to describe spatial interactions among
different machines and the temporal degradation of each machine is investigated.
At the core of the framework, a flexible non-homogeneous hidden Markov model is
used to describe the machine temporal degradation. The interactions between
product quality and the machine health condition are considered by incorporating
exogenous factors into the model. Designed around the integrative model, four
interrelated research tasks include: (i) Learning quality interactions and local
anomaly indicators, (ii) Learning machine degradation model and failure
prognosis, (iii) Stochastic control for system-level operation optimization, and
(iv) Testing and validation. The project provides added capabilities for a
modern manufacturing factory by making it more integrated in control through the
exploitation of ever-growing available quality data and machine health condition
data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.