* 2323229
* IMR: MT: NetFlex: A Flexible Scalable &amp; Privacy-Preserving Network Measurement Platform to Iteratively Collect Multi-modal Multi-view Network Data from Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Arpit Gupta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2025
* USD 240,557.00

As our dependence on internet-based services for work, education, healthcare,
and entertainment continues to grow, the quality of broadband access becomes the
critical factor determining our experiences with these services. However, this
access quality in the US differs among regions, communities, and demographic
groups, leading to digital inequities. Policymakers need high-fidelity data
reflecting the actual state of access quality to address these inequities.
Unfortunately, the existing tools gather poor-quality data that often fail to
reflect users' experiences. This project aims to develop a new Internet
measurement platform, NetFlex, that addresses the fundamental limitations of
existing Internet measurement tools. Specifically, NetFlex facilitates the
collection of high-quality network data at scale. Policymakers can use this data
to make better decisions to counter digital inequities. Moreover, this project
plans to deploy Netflex at campus networks, exposing students to (realistic)
network measurement data and enhancing their learning experience.

The project's novelty is that it facilitates the iterative collection of the
"right" active or passive network measurement data from multiple vantage points,
empowering the assessment of broadband access quality and diagnosing events that
disrupt the user experience. Specifically, it offers a simplified user interface
that displays high-fidelity reporting of the network's state and simplifies
diagnosing degradation events. Under the hood, NetFlex embraces service-oriented
architecture for data collection, i.e., it disaggregates different network
measurement and data collection tasks into independent services. It also
transforms the collected network data into holistic and standardized network
data representations. These design choices enable NetFlex to strike a balance
between flexibility, scalability, and privacy. Finally, the project will
leverage two compelling use cases to showcase how NetFlex improves the quality
of collected network measurement data and how the new data can better assess the
broadband quality and diagnose degradation events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.