* 2323317
* DMREF: Accelerating the Design of Adhesives with Nanoscale Control of Thermomechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Vikas Tomar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2027
* USD 930,768.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
supports the generation of new knowledge related to the design of advanced
adhesives for use in many industries, including automotive, aerospace,
electronics, construction, and defense. Adhesives have significant benefits over
traditional fasteners because they can bind different materials to one another
and can be applied to wide areas which distributes the applied stresses and
reduces failure. However, traditional epoxy adhesives can be very brittle. This
research project will focus on understanding the structure-property
relationships of epoxy adhesives that will enable the design of adhesives that
are less brittle, more environmentally friendly, and are lightweight. This work
will combine state-of-the-art experimental, simulation, and machine learning
techniques to learn about these structured adhesives and accelerate the design
and development cycles. As a part of this approach, we will ensure that the data
and models will be widely shared so that they can be leveraged by academic,
industrial and government researchers. Society will benefit from this project
both through the new knowledge of structured adhesives, as well as through the
education and training of diverse student populations at three universities on
how to effectively combine experimental and modeling approaches to design new
materials.

Hierarchically structured adhesives exhibit exceptional promise to incorporate
multiple toughening mechanisms into epoxy adhesives. However, there are many
outstanding questions about the potential multiscale assembly and toughening
mechanisms of these materials. Hierarchical epoxy adhesives have large
combinatorial variable spaces, complicated multiscale structures and properties,
and inherent tradeoffs during multi-property optimization, which results in
decades-long development cycles. The primary objective of this work is to
develop the requisite fundamental understanding to enable the discovery and
design of hierarchically ordered adhesives with tailored thermomechanical
properties. Specifically, we will develop validated multiscale models to
increase our understanding of block copolymer self-assembly in epoxy, the
adhesion forces, and other key mechanical properties (toughness, modulus) for
hierarchically ordered adhesives. The hierarchical structure of the materials
will be developed using a combined top-down/bottom-up approach which leverages
additive manufacturing and block copolymer self-assembly, respectively. To
accelerate the discovery process, experimental and multiscale modeling-generated
data will be incorporated along with machine learning tools for property
prediction into an existing tool called Polymer design using Machine-learning
Assisted Property Screening. The resultant upgraded tool will be an integrated
computational materials engineering framework for adhesive design with strong
connections to molecular building blocks and quantitative structure-property-
performance relations which will be made available to a broader community of
stakeholders.

This project is supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.