* 2323385
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel device to enhance the traditional paper book reading experience for young children
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Carinne Meyrignac, CALI'S BOOKS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the development of an innovative, screenless, interactive
educational device for early childhood education. The project will bring to
market a book-like device that delivers audio content when the pages are
pressed, establishing the viability of delivering mixed-media interactive
content in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics for children from
kindergarten to second grade. By performing a scientific study of how children
engage with content on the device relative to the same content in paper and
tablet form, this project seeks to prove the benefits of alternative,
screenless, interactive learning. The project leverages fundamental educational
science. It also has the potential to improve public scientific literacy and
engagement with science and technology in the United States while offering
important health benefits by reducing screen addiction in young children.
Excessive screen time has been linked to a range of negative health outcomes,
including increased risk of obesity, decreased sleep quality, and impaired
social and emotional development. The project has the potential to generate
significant revenue by commercializing the device both directly to consumers and
through partnerships with schools.

This project will see the development of an innovative, screenless learning tool
for young children, by seamlessly integrating technology into a traditional book
format. The proposed platform consists of three major components: a book cover
that houses swappable book inserts, embedded electronics that play audio in
response to a page touch, and software that powers interactions and
connectivity. A microcontroller recognizes an inserted paper book and offers a
personalized interactive experience using content stored on the device. Button
icons printed on the book pages line up precisely with a physical button grid
embedded in the device, supporting learning activities. The success of this
project requires the development of three hardware components and three software
components that seamlessly work together in a connected ecosystem. The research
and development team focuses on developing a workable device that can be brought
to market and sold to customers, releasing an initial story-based content
library, and conducting a user-testing study to learn about how children engage
with the device relative to screen-based alternatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.