* 2323499
* Collaborative Research: Predicting the Mechanical Properties of Biomimetic Apatite Crystals Due to Co and Cr Ion Substitutions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Arun Nair, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 254,925.00

Non-technical Abstract: When implants, like hip implants made of cobalt and
chrome degrade, they can release atoms of those heavy metals into the
surrounding bone. Some of those atoms can make their way into the bone itself;
more specifically they can get inside the hard part of your bones which is made
up of a mineral called apatite. The movement of these atoms into the apatite can
change the way your bones work, making them more likely to break. However,
because the apatite minerals in your bones are extremely small, it has been very
difficult to study where these heavy metal ions go and how they affect bone
strength. The goal of this project is therefore to use a combination of computer
modelling and experiments using very powerful X-rays to figure out where the
metal atoms go in the apatite mineral and determine whether or not they make the
bone more breakable. By combining computer models and experiments, techniques
will be developed that allow researchers to understand how metal atoms interact
with bone apatite and predict how those atoms affect bone strength in the
millions of people with cobalt and chromium containing bone implants. Integrated
with this research, the principal investigators will strive to create
environments that make students more confident about their scientific abilities.
This will be done by providing opportunities for students to work in the lab, by
teaching inclusive classes that reach broad audiences, and by acting as role
models for students who do not often see people like them (women and racial
minorities) in scientific roles.

Technical Abstract: Degradation of cobalt (Co) and chromium (Cr) containing
implants are associated with release of heavy metal ions and an increase in bone
fracture risk. Since bone is primarily composed of apatite mineral which
exhibits a high propensity for cationic substitutions, it is likely that the
bone matrix is absorbing these ions resulting in significant changes in crystal
structure and mechanics. The principal investigators hypothesize that the
incorporation of cobalt (Co) and chromium (Cr) in the near-implant bone plays a
significant role in promoting fracture. However, due to the difficulty in
studying nano-sized apatites, there remain several unanswered questions relative
to this process including how Co and Cr substitute into apatite, how the ions
affect the apatite mechanical properties, and what Co and Cr concentrations are
needed to affect bone fracture. To answer these questions, an ab initio-based
model of apatite crystals with Co and Cr substitutions will be developed to
predict the change in crystallographic and mechanical properties of apatite
crystals at the nanoscale. These predictions will be validated by experimental
approaches using biomimetic apatite systems and high-energy synchrotron X-ray
diffraction techniques. These data will be combined to create multiscale models
of apatite crystals to study fracture initiation processes due to Co and Cr
substitutions. The results from this study can benefit millions of North
Americans with cobalt-chrome implants by creating a new avenue for treatment
developments to minimize fracture in this already at-risk population. In
addition, they will facilitate the tunability of apatite biomaterials for future
bone graft and scaffolding applications. Integrated with the research, is an
educational plan which seeks to increase self-efficacy in the realm of science
for a variety of students. This will be accomplished by providing lab access to
undergraduate and graduate students, developing culturally relevant inclusive
scientific courses, and acting as role models for under-represented students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.