* 2323174
* IMR: MT: xGTracker -- Mobile xG Performance Monitoring and Data Collection Platform to Enable Large-Scale Crowd-Sourced Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Feng Qian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2025
* USD 279,913.00

Commercial 5G networks are becoming more widely available. Their key advantage
is much higher speeds, enabling emerging applications such as multimedia
streaming, VR/AR (virtual reality/augmented reality), and autonomous vehicles,
to name a few. Measuring the performance of these networks and emerging
applications becomes important to understand how they function and to identify
areas of improvement especially for designing the next generation of such
technologies. This collaborative project brings together investigators from the
University of Michigan and University of Minnesota to create a platform for
measuring the performance of 5G, 6G, (i.e., xG) networks and show the changes
over time along with the performance of the emerging applications.

xGTracker is modular, extensible, configurable, cross-technology, and
application-centric measurement platform. First, xGTracker has several
configurable components and enables researchers to add/replace components. It is
capable of selecting available radio bands/technologies to conduct measurements.
Second, xGTracker will integrate existing real open-source applications as well
as generating different workloads to emulate others for collecting application
Quality of Experience metrics. Third, xGTracker allows for dynamic server
selection based on several parameters such as (location, carrier, and workload).
This helps understand the impact of server location on the collected metrics.
Fourth, XGTracker will report energy consumption for different system/device
components which enables monitoring the energy consumption for emerging
applications. Finally, xGTracker fully considers user privacy allowing users to
choose what and how to share their data.

The broader impact of the project has multiple dimensions. First, xGTracker
provides tools that measure and characterize the performance of commercial xG
networks. This will benefit xG customers, application developers, and xG
carriers. XGTracker has the potential to be integrated with industrial
collaborators improving the quality of experience for hundreds of millions of xG
users in the future. Second, xGTracker presents an opportunity to integrate
research and education. It will contribute new content to networking and mobile
courses taught and help design various course projects. xGTracker will also be
used to show 5G technology to students especially from underrepresented groups
and simulate their interest in STEM.

The repository for the xGTracker Platform is at https://github.com/xGTracker-
Platform. The project is expected to be open-source under a BSD-style permissive
free software license for other researchers to contribute to it and add new
features. The data collected through the xGTracker platform will then be made
available through different performance maps to show the performance of the
different technologies over time as well as the quality of experience for
different applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.