* 2323490
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Digital infrastructure for sustainable consumption
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jennifer Heung, Saint Mary's College of California
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 05/31/2026
* USD 122,166.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
develop and employ new transdisciplinary approaches to address sustainable
consumption and production as a socio-technical system to help inform decision-
making for sustainable, resilient, and just systems of consumption and
production.

The Digital Infrastructure for Sustainable Consumption (DISCo) project seeks to
produce both theoretically informed and practically oriented knowledge on how
sustainable consumption (i.e., consumption that is less resource and carbon-
intensive and/or less environmentally damaging) can be enabled through digital
technologies. The team seeks to understand if digital technology can help close
the gap between our intentions and actions (e.g., recycling, buying second hand,
food waste diversion) when it comes to sustainability. The project team seeks to
build upon existing research examining single app use and app use within a
relatively homogenous community, to address three questions around (1) how
digital technologies become part of our routines, (2) how digital technologies
can interact with existing consumption patterns and (3) when do these
technologies succeed in shifting behavior (i.e., under what conditions)? The
project team will use methods from life cycle analysis and ethnography to better
understand the impact of the proposed tech solutions. With the focus on food and
mobility services the analyses will provide important information about changing
behavior around transportation and food, both large portions of most individuals
daily carbon consumption. The proposal team represents six countries (Sweden,
Norway, Turkey, USA, and Japan) in related fields (sociology, communication,
food and environmental sciences). The projectâ€™s overall approach stems from the
range of fields employed and is organized into 5 work packages with
interconnected research activities. Stakeholder involvement occurs throughout
the project with societal partners participating in workshops and as part of the
expert teams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.