* 2323328
* Conference: North American Comparative Immunology 2023
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Katherine Buckley, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The 13th North American Comparative Immunology (NACI) meeting will be held June
4 – 8, 2023 at the Auburn University Hotel and Conference Center in Auburn, AL.
The primary objective of this meeting is to bring together researchers
interested in immune responses in a wide range of organisms. Although the field
of immunology has long benefitted from studies in model organisms, recent
technological advances have enabled scientists to pursue research questions in
previously unavailable organisms. Furthermore, in the face of a changing global
climate the prevalence of emerging infectious diseases is increasing and posing
additional threats to the health of both humans and agriculture. Studying
organisms that are either directly threatened or species used in industry can
provide unique insight into immunobiology, medicine and evolution and the
potential for novel therapeutics. NACI 2023 will provide a forum for researchers
studying immune systems in a broad array of organisms to discuss conceptual
advances and experimental techniques in comparative immunology. Specifically,
NSF funding will be used to make this meeting accessible to trainees by
defraying travel costs for junior researchers and attendees from local
universities particularly those from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs)
and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).

NACI meetings provide a forum to foster collaborations among scientists
interested in immune function from an evolutionary perspective. Researchers will
present cutting-edge work in hematopoiesis, antimicrobial peptides, antiviral
responses, mucosal immunity, phagocytosis, microbial recognition, antigen
presentation, affinity maturation and microbiome analysis. However, unlike more
traditional immunology meetings, this work has been performed in a diverse range
of taxa (e.g., corals, snails, sea urchins, tunicates, lungfish, fish, frogs,
and mammals). NACI meetings provide a small venue that encourages student
participation and fosters networking among scientists at all career stages. The
meeting consists of plenary and poster sessions that enable students to receive
feedback on their work from this international community. By offsetting
registration and travel costs, the proposed funds will enable researchers at all
levels to attend this meeting. Through intentional recruitment and targeted
advertising to institutions throughout the southeastern U.S. and offsetting
costs for historically-excluded populations, funds will introduce new
researchers to the field of comparative immunology. A planned workshop will
provide all attendees with novel strategies to improve mentoring skills. Results
from NACI 2023 will be disseminated by posting abstracts on the NACI website and
inviting students to publish a meeting report in an appropriate journal. We will
also designate a social media team of postdoctoral fellows or junior faculty
members who will “live-tweet” talks during the meeting. By complementing the
breadth of scientific diversity at this meeting with gender, racial and ethnic
diversity of its participants, NACI 2023 will directly contribute to broadening
participation in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.