* 2323125
* Collaborative Research: The Genomic Basis of Evolutionary Innovations in the Squamate Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tiago Rodrigues Simoes, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 679,192.00

Throughout the history of life on Earth, organisms have evolved multiple
adaptations to a constantly changing environment. In many instances, key
innovations arise coincident with the origins of groups and provide the
opportunity for the diversification of many species. However, the evolution of
the underlying genetic mechanisms responsible for these important adaptations
across the tree of life are not well known, leaving a major gap in our knowledge
about the evolution of key innovations. This research will combine information
from complete genomes with anatomical data from both living and fossil species
of squamates (lizards and snakes) to pinpoint the timing of major evolutionary
changes in anatomy, and determine areas of the genome associated with such
changes. This project will also provide training opportunities for students and
early career scientists, yield new open access databases, and contribute to the
education of underrepresented groups in STEM through outreach about research on
squamates and genomics.

Squamates are an excellent model for studying evolutionary innovations, with
~11,000 living species and a rich fossil record spanning over 240 million years.
An understanding of the genomic basis of evolutionary innovations across all
major groups of squamates has been historically limited by the lack of whole
genomes, comprehensive trait data, and appropriate analytical tools. To address
these limitations, the project will compile comprehensive phenotypic data for
370 living and fossil squamate species and build a database of complete genomes
representing >90% of living squamate families, resulting in the most complete
database for squamate reptiles ever assembled. Using emerging tools for
comparative genomics and phylogenetics, this research will provide two broadly
interesting products: 1) the first whole-genomic squamate tree of life with a
precise timeline of squamate evolution; 2) a detailed understanding of how
evolutionary rates across multiple regions of the squamate genome and phenome
have changed across time, and their correlation with each other. The latter will
reveal the genomic changes associated with key adaptations in squamate
evolution, such as the origin of highly mobile snake skulls and body elongation
across various lineages. Collectively, the research will determine whether
changes in protein-coding genes or non-coding regulatory regions of the genome
are responsible for evolutionary innovations in the tree of life; identify the
genetic pathways involved in organismal growth, development, and other life
functions that have driven species diversification; and provide discoveries and
tools widely applicable to evolutionary biologists across diverse fields of
specialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.