* 2323251
* Conference: 19th International Xenopus Conference
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Amy Sater, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 18,600.00

This proposal requests support for trainees, as well as faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs), to attend the 19th International Xenopus
Conference in August 2023. Held biennially, this conference is the primary
meeting for researchers using the African Clawed Frogs (Xenopus laevis and
Xenopus tropicalis). Researchers use these animals to investigate and make new
scientific discoveries in all aspects of biology, including, but not limited to,
regulation of cell division, embryonic development, cell movement and
communication, and the control of gene expression. The animals also offer
opportunities to study the biological processes underlying many human congenital
diseases, cancers, and neurodevelopmental disorders. The Xenopus conference
permits researchers from the USA, Canada, UK, Europe, Asia, and Latin America to
share new findings, learn new techniques, and develop collaborative projects.
This meeting is especially important for trainees, including graduate students
and postdoctoral research associates, as well as new independent researchers and
faculty from PUIs. Researchers and trainees will also learn about the services,
resources, and collaborative opportunities offered by the Xenopus Resource
Centers. The proposal requests support for travel awards for 30 domestic
trainees and 9 faculty from PUIs within the USA, which would reduce financial
barriers to their participation in the conference. This support will facilitate
the exchange of new findings in many scientific fields, advance the scientific
and professional development of numerous trainees, and help to integrate current
understanding in these areas for undergraduate instruction; moreover, it
strengthens the use of Xenopus for fundamental research.

This proposal requests support for trainees and faculty from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to attend the 19th International Xenopus
Conference in August 2023. Held biennially, this conference is the primary
meeting for investigators using African Clawed Frogs (Xenopus laevis and Xenopus
tropicalis). It offers a forum for integration of new findings across a broad
spectrum of cell and developmental biology. Featured topics will include
cellular scaling, cytoskeletal dynamics, cell cycle, the mechanobiology of cell
movement, ciliary biogenesis and function, genome organization, epigenetics of
early development, cell fate specification and translational control, along with
topics in regeneration, organogenesis, immunology, and neural development and
function. Additional talks will address the use of Xenopus as a model for
congenital disease, cancers, neurodevelopmental disorders, and neural injury.
The meeting will feature presentations on the resources, services, and
collaborative opportunities provided by the International Xenopus Resource
Centers in the USA, UK, and Japan. There will also be sessions dedicated to
mentoring for multiple career stages, professional development, and emerging
publication practices. This proposal requests support for travel awards for 30
domestic trainees and 9 faculty from PUIs within the USA, which would reduce
their financial barriers to participation in the conference. This support will
facilitate the exchange of new findings in cell biology, developmental biology,
molecular genetics, and neuroscience, advance the scientific and professional
development of numerous trainees, and help to integrate these new findings in
undergraduate curriculum; moreover, it strengthens and sustains the use of
Xenopus as a model system for fundamental research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.