* 2323023
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Probing Interfacial Instabilities in Flow Boiling and Condensation via Acoustic Signatures in Microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Yongfeng Xu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 274,086.00

Flow boiling and condensation are crucial to the efficient and safe operation of
electronics cooling, power generation, refrigeration, water purification,
chemical processing, and among others. Two-phase flows are also subject to a
wide range of instabilities at the liquid-vapor interface. These instabilities
can lead to significant thermal performance degradation, reducing heat transfer
coefficient, increasing pressure drop, and causing overheating. To prevent
process disruptions or thermal performance deterioration, it is of utmost
importance to enhance the understanding of instability mechanisms and
continually monitor them. This project seeks to probe the physical mechanisms
that dominate flow instabilities in microgravity using wideband acoustic
emission (AE) sensing that measures and analyzes dynamic behaviors through
acoustic waves. Two-phase flows are complex phenomena where many physical
mechanisms simultaneously contribute to the measured signals, resulting in
overlapping acoustic signatures and intrinsic noises during ground tests. The
long-term microgravity environment on the International Space Station (ISS)
inherently decouples the acoustic signatures of the physical mechanisms during
two-phase flows and enables the examination of the leading transport mechanisms.
The project team will also organize outreach events and create educational
materials such as posters, brochures, podcasts, and videos to explain the
advantages of research brought by the microgravity environment on ISS.

This project aims to advance the fundamental understanding of the transport
mechanisms that govern liquid-vapor interfacial instabilities in flow boiling
and condensation using wideband AE sensing, with a focus on both the critical
heat flux (CHF), the maximum achievable heat flux during flow boiling, and the
flow regime transition during flow condensation. The project will fill this
broad knowledge gap with three specific aims. First, a self-contained AE sensing
module will be developed and benchmarked for individual transport processes
including bubble departure, turbulence, and capillary flows in lab-scale tests
before its deployment on ISS. Second, the role of interfacial waves and
turbulent diffusion in flow condensation will be probed using both ground-based
and microgravity flow condensation tests. The latter will be performed using the
flow boiling and condensation experiment (FBCE) facility on ISS with the
deployed acoustic sensing module. Third, the dominant transport mechanism during
flow boiling flow regime transition and CHF will be examined. This project will
provide valuable insights into interfacial instabilities of flow boiling and
condensation, which are critical to the design and optimization of condensers
and boilers that maximize heat transfer and minimize energy consumption. This
project will make an impact on power generation, semiconductor manufacturing,
chemical processing, and decarbonization of transportation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.