* 2323010
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Colloidal Microflyers: Observation and Characterization of (Self-)Thermophoresis through Air in Microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Jeffrey Moran, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2027
* USD 303,524.00

Thermophoresis, the motion of small particles in response to temperature
gradients, is challenging to study in air on Earth because of the influence of
air currents and gravity. Temperature gradients abound in the atmosphere, and
accordingly thermophoresis affects the migration of atmospheric aerosols, which
influence Earth’s climate by reflecting or absorbing sunlight and effecting
cloud formation. However, the contributions of thermophoresis to these processes
are difficult to disentangle from other factors, including air currents,
gravity, evaporation, and electrical charge, exacerbating uncertainty
surrounding the role aerosols play in both driving and remediating climate
change. The objective of this work is to characterize thermophoresis of small
particles in microgravity, where these confounding factors are absent.
Microparticles will be packaged into specially-designed cuvettes on the ground
and launched to the International Space Station (ISS), where their motion will
be characterized visually. The temperature gradient may be externally imposed
via heating one face of the cuvette, or it could be self-generated by particles
that absorb light unevenly, a phenomenon known as “self-thermophoresis.” Self-
thermophoresis has been observed in water but never in air; this work will
reveal the extent to which asymmetric aerosols can undergo this same phenomenon.
By providing data for a range of relevant materials, this work will inform
climate models and be useful for other applications such as the use of
thermophoresis to collect aerosols from air, including bioaerosols that transmit
infectious diseases.

The research objective of this work is to observe and quantify thermophoresis
and self-thermophoresis through air in microgravity. The thermophoretic speeds
will be measured visually (via the KERMIT microscope on the ISS) using airtight
cuvettes designed, fabricated, and packaged on the ground. The particles
characterized will be silica, alumina, and kaolinite, all of which are found in
the atmosphere but whose thermophoretic properties have been incompletely
characterized. After launch, the ISS-based experiments will proceed in two
phases. First, in the thermophoresis experiments, the velocities of various
microparticles will be characterized as a function of size, shape, and air
pressure inside the cuvette (to simulate high altitudes). Second, the self-
thermophoresis experiments will expose silica microspheres half-coated in gold
to infrared and visible light, allowing the first-ever observation of self-
thermophoretic motion by particle-generated temperature gradients. This work
will provide the first-ever experimental demonstration of colloidal self-
propulsion through a gas. In addition, this research could inform geoengineering
proposals to release planet-cooling aerosols into the atmosphere, for which
there is ongoing investigation into both their benefits and side effects.
Finally, this work also provides a platform for future innovations in the
engineering of three-dimensional “microflyers” for defense, environmental, or
space applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.