* 2323803
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Hybrid Materials for Superfluorescent Quantum Emitters
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Volker Blum, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description: Particles interact at the smallest scale according to
the laws of quantum physics, exhibiting wave-like properties. However, when a
large number of particles cluster, their quantum characteristics are lost. Some
materials, show quantum properties at very low temperatures. Notable examples
are superconductors and superfluids. Unfortunately, the low temperature
requirement limits their practical use in technology. Superfluorescence, a
similar quantum effect involving light emission from a group of quantum
emitters, has potential applications in entangled photon sources and tunable
intense light sources. Surprisingly, superfluorescence has been achieved at room
temperature using hybrid materials made of inorganic lead halide perovskites and
organic molecules. This project aims to discover quantum materials that exhibit
room temperature superfluorescence tunable across the visible spectra in the
broader range of hybrid materials. The project serves the goals of the Materials
Genomics Initiative by collecting materials data and scientific understanding
and training an associated research and development workforce. The educational
activities involve field trips from high schools serving economically
disadvantaged communities to increase interest in STEM careers. Using research
experience for undergraduate programs and collaboration with historically black
colleges and universities in the vicinity, summer interns will be recruited.
Annually, theory and experiment workshops will be organized to train early-
career researchers on topics related to quantum phenomena in hybrid materials. A
major broader impact of the project is the addition of materials data that
relates macroscopic quantum properties to material properties in a general, open
database "HybriD3," which is dedicated to providing curated materials data for
the materials research and development community.

Technical Description: The research program will advance the current
understanding of quantum materials and will establish a design space for room-
temperature superfluorescent quantum emitters. The program brings together four
teams with expertise in material synthesis, quantum property characterization by
laser spectroscopies, first principles theory and computational materials
simulations to investigate superfluorescence in a range of hybrid metal halide
perovskite (HMHP) materials. In superfluorescence, the whole phase transition
process, from the initial excitation of electron-hole pairs to the formation of
a macroscopic coherence and its radiation, is measurable by spectroscopic tools
in real-time. As a result, superfluorescence provides a window into discovering
sophisticated interplay of material properties such as chemical, and mesoscopic
structure, quantum confinement, and electron-lattice interactions and their
impact on the collective behavior of dipoles. HMHP are ideal for this study
because they form a versatile platform that enables material tunability from
atomistic scale to mesoscale through solution processing. By systematically
studying superfluorescent emitting HMHP materials with tuned material properties
and calculating the fundamental electron-electron and electron-lattice
interactions, this program will produce reusable data that relates
characteristics, such as critical temperature, threshold excitation density,
color tunability, and spatial and temporal coherence of superfluorescence to
material characteristics. Ultimately, insights derived from this project may
make superfluorescence usable as a quantum optical effect in photonic devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.