* 2323159
* CAREER: Advancing Mathematical Models and Algorithms for Decentralized Optimization in Complex Multi-agent Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Farzad Yousefian, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The recent advances in artificial intelligence and wireless sensor technologies
have led to significant research in cooperative optimization. In this regime,
multiple agents (e.g., processors or sensors) communicate their information
locally with their neighbors to cooperatively optimize a global performance
metric. This decentralized paradigm plays a key role in the network domains
where communication with a centralized coordinator is either undesirable or
impossible. This also allows for preserving the privacy of the agents. It is for
these reasons that the design and performance analysis of decentralized
optimization methods have attracted a growing attention in several application
domains such as data science, wireless networks, and communication networks.
This project is aimed at development of new models, mathematical tools, and
computational algorithms to address emerging complex multi-agent systems. This
complexity arises in emerging applications such as remote sensing, economic
dispatch models with renewable energy, and efficiency estimation in
transportation networks. This project has the potential to substantially reduce
the gap between the theory and real-world practice of complex multi-agent
networks. Moreover, collaborations with the industrial partner will facilitate
effective knowledge transfer. This project is also aimed at increasing awareness
and interest among high school students, educators, and college students through
several fully integrated educational and outreach activities. These include
enhancing professional development of teachers of Stillwater High School,
engaging secondary students in after school activities, and promoting diversity
through involvement of underrepresented undergraduate students in research.

The long-term research goal is to advance the computational models and
algorithms for distributed constrained optimization in emerging complex multi-
agent networks. In pursuit of this goal, the research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to apply the theory of variational
inequalities and regularization in the field of distributed optimization to
design new algorithms with provable performance guarantees that can address
multi-agent networks with complex constraints. This complexity arises in several
application domains such as wireless sensor networks, transportation networks,
and machine learning, where the optimization model is complicated due to the
presence of: (1) uncertainty and nonlinearity in constraints; (2) an inner-level
large-scale optimization problem; or (3) equilibrium constraints. The state-of-
the-art approaches including weighted-averaging consensus, push-sum, and
alternate direction multiplier methods work often under the premise that
functional constraints are easy-to-project. These schemes rely significantly on
Lagrangian duality theory and do not lend themselves to asynchronous protocols
and communication delays. Accordingly, this research is expected to advance the
area of distributed optimization over complex networks by: (i) Development of an
enhanced mathematical modeling framework by utilizing the theory of variational
inequalities; (ii) Design and analysis of new classes of iteratively regularized
consensus-based algorithms with explicit performance bounds to address the
modeling framework; and (iii) Explore novel ways to address nonsmoothness in the
modeling framework. The long-term educational goal is to broaden the
participation of K-12 and college students (in particular women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM) in the fields of Operations Research and
Applied Mathematics. In pursuit of this goal, the educational objective of this
CAREER project is to inspire and engage young minds, formal and informal
educators, and undergraduate and graduate students in understanding the role of
optimization in tomorrow’s practice. This includes the following activities: (i)
provide four-week professional development workshops for secondary teachers;
(ii) develop an after school STEM program for Stillwater High School students;
(iii) involve underrepresented undergraduate students in the PI’s research in
collaboration with The Oklahoma Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation; and (iv) develop an undergraduate and an advanced doctoral
course.

This project is jointly funded by the Energy, Power, Control, and Networks
Program (EPCN), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Operations Engineering Program (OE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.