* 2323384
* CAREER: Safe and Efficient Robot Learning from Demonstration in the Real World
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Scott Niekum, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2025
* USD 221,878.00

General purpose robots are poised to enter the home and workplace in
unprecedented numbers in coming years, but face the significant challenge of
customization - the ability to perform user-specified tasks in many different
unstructured environments. In response to this need, robot learning from
demonstration (LfD) has emerged as a paradigm that allows users to quickly and
naturally program robots by simply showing them how to perform a task, rather
than by writing code. This methodology aims to allow non-expert users to program
robots, as well as communicate embodied knowledge that is difficult to translate
into formal code. However, current state-of-the-art LfD algorithms are not yet
ready for widespread deployment, as they are often unreliable, need too much
data, and are designed to learn in a single session in a laboratory setting.
This work addresses these issues to help enable future robots to perform
important tasks ranging from in-home elderly care to reconfigurable
manufacturing.

Specifically, this work identifies three significant technical improvements to
current LfD algorithms that are needed before they can be deployed in the real
world: the need for safety guarantees, the ability to learn from very limited
amounts of data, and the ability to continually improve in an ongoing, life-long
fashion. A formal theory of safe LfD is developed, along with practical
algorithms that provide strong probabilistic lower bounds on agent performance.
Algorithmic efficiency is addressed via a re-examining of common statistical
assumptions (such as independent and identically distributed data) and through
the use of multimodal side-information, such as natural language and gaze.
Finally, active learning strategies and modeling of human beliefs are used to
enable interactive, continual learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.