* 2323699
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Atomically precise catalyst design for selective bond activation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Ayman Karim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2027
* USD 625,184.00

The project develops a design methodology for supported single-atom catalysts
(SACs) â€“ an emerging class of supported single metal-atom catalysts that offer
exciting and emergent properties that can revolutionize many industrial
applications. The realization of their full potential is hindered by limited
understanding of how to control their stability and catalytic properties within
the complex material design space extending across the properties of the metal
atoms and supporting material, together with interactions between the two. To
overcome this challenge, the project embraces a highly-integrated,
computational-experimental methodology using machine learning techniques (ML) to
leverage the support material as a ligand to regulate the geometric and
electronic properties of the metal site and improve its stability. The model
predictions will guide the synthesis, characterization and catalytic
measurements to enable selective bond activation. The proposed methodology can
profoundly impact the discovery of complex materials for challenging chemical
reactions. The design of stable, active, and selective catalysts, while
maximizing the metal utilization at the single-atom level, can significantly
reduce capital costs and energy consumption, leading to lower CO2 emissions,
reduced production of harmful byproducts, and more responsible utilization of
hydrocarbon feedstocks. The interdisciplinary nature of this research and the
integration of research and education plans between the three institutions will
lead to a cadre of students obtaining a unique educational experience in
heterogeneous catalysis, multiscale modeling, and advanced lab- and synchrotron-
based characterization techniques. Furthermore, the project will develop
educational materials for outreach programs targeting K-12 students with focused
efforts to increase the participation of underrepresented students in STEM
fields.

The project incorporates a conceptual framework centered on artificial
intelligence (AI) and multiscale modeling-based methodologies to build guiding
principles that can be leveraged to predict highly active, stable, and selective
metal-support compositions. The model predictions will guide the synthesis of
single-metal atoms supported on novel, high-surface-area unconventional support
materials (perovskites and spinels) by atomic layer deposition, followed by
detailed characterization of their properties, catalyst evaluation, and model
assessment and refinement (thus enabling an efficient catalyst discovery/design
loop). By uncovering physics-inspired descriptors and harnessing the
capabilities of machine learning, the project aims to predict how the surface
composition of the oxide support and the local cation environment at the metal
site influence stability, activity, and selectivity. The developed methods and
models will be evaluated with respect to two complex industrially relevant
reactions: 1) water-gas shift, and 2) hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of cresol to
toluene. The former focuses primarily on maximizing reaction rate, while the
latter addresses both activity and selectivity challenges. The outcome of this
research will serve as a foundational methodology for designing new materials in
silico.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.