* 2323562
* Conference: Leveraging a Statewide Database for better Collaboration and Coordination of Observing efforts Across Alaska: A Stream Temperature Training in Interior Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Shaftel, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

The temperature of freshwater is important for fish growth, distribution, and
productivity. Alaska has many different types of freshwater habitats and
commercially and culturally important fisheries that depend on cold water.
However, until recently, state-wide freshwater temperature data was challenging
to access and use. A public database (AKTEMP) was recently developed to allow
people to upload and download freshwater temperature data across the state to
help inform research, conservation, and management actions. To help people use
this database, a training workshop in Fairbanks will be held for organizations
based in Interior Alaska, where temperature datasets are sparse. Outreach
efforts will include targeted invitations to Tribal organizations, federal
agencies, and state agencies in the region. The training will cover how to
collect stream temperature data and how to use the AKTEMP database, with time in
both the field and the classroom. The temperature training will facilitate the
creation of a new temperature observing network that will increase collaboration
and coordination among data collectors in Interior Alaska. One goal is improved
freshwater temperature coordination efforts in Alaska. The major anticipated
outcome from this work is a substantial increase in freshwater temperature
information from Interior Alaska, filling a crucial data gap in an area with
culturally important fisheries currently threatened by warming freshwater
habitats.

Stream temperature data are critical for understanding the impacts of climate
change in aquatic ecosystems and is an important input to stream temperature and
salmon growth models. As other data types, such as hydrographic, climatic, and
topographic datasets, have become more widely available, empirical stream
temperature datasets remain a crucial data gap to parameterize and validate
stream temperature models in many parts of Alaska. The Yukon-Kuskokwim basins of
Interior Alaska have experienced warming that threatens Chinook and chum salmon
populations that provide food resources for Alaska Native communities in the
region. This training will convene interested parties, including representatives
from Tribal organizations, and federal and state agencies, from across Interior
Alaska to learn how to select sites and deploy data loggers, perform recommended
quality assurance steps, download, and analyze stream temperature data, and use
the new statewide stream temperature database, AKTEMP. This training will result
in formation of a new temperature observing network in Interior Alaska, filling
a crucial data gap in our understanding of stream temperatures in this region of
the Arctic and empowering collection of stream temperature data by local
organizations in remote regions of Alaska.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.