* 2323766
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: AI-enabled Automated design of ultrastrong and ultraelastic metallic alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Feng Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 475,943.00

The traditional trial-and-error approach for discovering new alloys has become
increasingly expensive and time-consuming. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project aims to leverage the power
of artificial intelligence to enable the rapid and automated design of metallic
alloys capable of withstanding both extreme stress and recoverable elastic
deformation before permanent plastic deformation. The potential candidate alloys
are complex concentrated alloys that are consisted of multiple high-
concentration chemical elements. These alloys contain intricate fluctuations of
both chemical elements and atomic positions within metallic crystals. The
tremendous degrees of freedom in these fluctuations obstruct the efficient
search for alloys with peak strength and peak elastic deformation limit. To
overcome this barrier, the research team will employ artificial intelligence,
computational modeling, and experimental tools to design, synthesize, and test
ultrastrong and ultraelastic metallic alloys. A unique two-stage automated
research workflow that transits from a data-driven approach to a physics-based
approach will be constructed based on integrations of artificial intelligence
techniques and physical models. Such integrations will enhance the understanding
of deformation mechanisms in complex materials, enabling their use in structural
and functional applications. This research team with diverse backgrounds will
provide incorporative opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
learn both materials science and artificial intelligence. Moreover, this project
is committed to promoting diversity, equity, and inclusion in research and
education. The research team will actively engage underrepresented minority
students in research projects through education and outreach activities. The
innovative strategies developed through this research, enabled by artificial
intelligence, will have transformative impacts not only on metallic alloy design
but also on the development of multifunctional materials and manufacturing
processes.

The research team is devoted to developing an artificial intelligence-enabled
automated research workflow to revolutionize the design and manufacturing
processes of ultrastrong and ultraelastic metallic alloys, which have extremely
high yield strengths and elastic limits simultaneously. The general strategy is
to manipulate and precisely tailor the local lattice distortions and chemical
concentration fluctuations for impeding deformation defect motions in complex
concentrated alloys. To achieve this goal, the automated research workflow will
seamlessly integrate each step of material design aided by physical principles
and artificial intelligence. Specifically, iterative design steps will involve
atomistic simulations of deformation defects, depositing thin films of
refractory metals-based complex concentrated metallic alloys using automated co-
sputtering and in-situ characterization feedback, followed by comprehensive
mechanical and structural characterizations using advanced nanomechanical
measurements, spectroscopic techniques, and cutting-edge electron microscopy. By
leveraging low-rank matrix/tensor factorization and autoencoder neural networks,
key features of material structures and defect properties will be extracted from
simulations, deposition parameters, mechanical behaviors, spectra, and
chemical/structural characterization results. These key features facilitate the
construction of a two-stage automated research workflow that transitions from a
data-driven approach to a physics-based approach for designing and validating
alloy candidates. This project aims to advance both the scientific understanding
of deformation mechanisms under extreme loading conditions and manufacturing
technologies of complex concentrated alloys and other chemically complex
materials. The research team provides broad education opportunities for students
with diverse backgrounds, including those in materials science, computer
science, and mechanical engineering majors. Also, this project promotes
collaboration and innovation through the archiving and sharing of codes and data
on Materials Commons, a public repository and collaboration platform for
materials studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.