* 2323147
* Modelling extensional flow properties of solutions of polymers and thread-like micelles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 306,840.00

Just as spiders and silkworms make materials by spinning solutions of polymer
into long threads, humans spin such materials into filaments for textiles,
filters, and many other applications. The same kind of flow, namely “extensional
flow,” occurs in combination with shear flow when such materials are drawn into
fibers, forced into bottles, or when consumers apply shampoos and soaps to their
hair or bodies. Thus, the behavior of long polymers and long thread-like
aggregates of surfactant (i.e., “micelles”) in extensional flow is basic to the
design of many products. Yet their behavior in solution is still poorly
understood. This is due to the difficulty of controlling extensional flows of
these materials in the lab, and of modelling the complex interactions of their
fluid mechanical and molecular behavior. Therefore, a new method of analysis
will be used that combines a molecular simulation technique (“Brownian
dynamics”), a method of accounting for the entanglements of the polymers or
micelles (“slip-link simulations”) and proper treatment of the fluid mechanics
of filaments. This combination will finally allow experimental data to be
interpreted properly. The result will be that extensional flows of these
materials can be better predicted, and the materials can be better designed for
their intended applications. The importance of the area will be illustrated to
K-12 students through the example of how an inability to clear sticky polymeric
mucus from lungs is responsible for the severity of disease in cystic fibrosis.

The “slip-spring” and “pointer” simulation methods developed in our group will
be used to model extensional flow of polymeric solutions and threadlike micellar
solutions measured in “capillary break-up” (CaBER) and “drop-on-substrate” (DoS)
rheometers. These rheometers are the common ones used for extensional
measurements of mobile polymer and surfactant solutions. The modeling will
combine proper description of the flow kinematics in these measurements with
advanced simulations of ensembles of polymers and micelles. This will help
disentangle uncertainties created by the confounding effects of the non-ideal
flow kinematics in these devices from the complex rheology of these fluids,
leading to a breakthrough in understanding and more accurate modelling and
design of materials. The motivations and methods will inform a summer outreach
program to K-12 students at the University of Michigan and in Detroit-area
schools, using hands-on polymeric materials in extensional flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.