* 2323237
* I-Corps: COVID Detection System Using a DNA Cage-Embedded Microfluidics Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Yuan Tang, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a microfluidic sensor system has the potential to significantly
impact public health efforts to control the spread of viruses. It can be used
for rapid and reliable detection of viruses, including COVID-19, in home and
point-of-care settings, enabling early diagnosis and treatment of infected
individuals. This can help reduce the transmission of the virus and mitigate the
overall impact of the pandemic. Successful commercialization of the technology
will lead to significant market potential in disease surveillance and biomedical
research. Ultimately, the project aims to play a critical role in mitigating the
impact of COVID-19 and improving access to essential testing solutions for
people worldwide.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a microfluidic system for
detecting COVID-19. The gold electrode-covered microfluidic system is
immobilized with DNA nanocages installed with aptamers or surface enzymes on the
electrode surface that generates varying electrical impedance signals depending
on the number of virus particles in a saliva sample injected into the system.
The DNA origami nanocage technique, together with aptamer/ACE2 enzymes are able
to specifically capture the intact SARS-CoV-2 viruses. The immobilization of the
DNA nanocage installed with aptamer/enzyme in a microfluidic system allows for
easy, fast, and sensitive detection. The electrical impedance measurement
provides an accurate label-free means of detecting the presence of the virus at
nano-molar levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.