* 2323976
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Accelerated Discovery of Sustainable Bioplastics: Automated, Tunable, Integrated Design, Processing and Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Eleftheria Roumeli, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2027
* USD 455,000.00

Despite years of recycling efforts, only about 10 percent of polymer waste ends
up in recycling facilities, with the majority still accumulating in landfills or
oceans, emphasizing the need for eco-friendly materials combining renewable
sourcing, sustainable processing, and biodegradability. Thermoformable
biopolymer assemblies or bioplastics are eco-friendly materials that could be
sourced from biological cell or tissue (biomatter), without expensive and
wasteful extraction and pre-processing. The most significant limitation in the
ability to design these bioplastics is a poor understanding of the fundamental
mechanisms controlling the transformation of biomatter to cohesive bioplastics.
This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) grant
supports research that will combine high-throughput data capture, multiscale
modeling, and machine learning to understand the molecular and chemical
mechanisms controlling the transition from organism to bioplastic during
processing. With that understanding, design pathways will be developed to tailor
the processing and composition of the initial structure to control the
macroscopic properties, and degradation that occurs during and after use. The
broad impact of this work will be a new class of entirely biodegradable plastics
with performance comparable to commodity plastics but manufactured sustainably.
To support the next-generation sustainable materials workforce, the grant will
also support mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, active engagement
in outreach activities, and efforts to enhance diversity and inclusivity in
STEM.

An emerging transformative concept in developing eco-friendly materials is to
use biological matter without any extraction process to create bioplastics.
Significant challenges remain in understanding how mixtures of biopolymers
transform into thermoformable bioplastics and how the processing parameters
control structure and properties. To provide key insights, this project will use
high throughput methods to measure processing, spectroscopic, and morphology
features and apply machine learning methods to identify the key descriptors
controlling the transformation from organism to plastic. Molecular dynamics
simulations and high-fidelity experiments will augment the understanding of the
reactions towards bioplastic formation as well as biodegradation. Detailed
structure and property measurements will be used to validate a finite element
analysis tool that will enable the identification of the optimal structure to
achieve properties comparable to commercial plastics using high throughput
methods. Spirulina, an abundant photosynthetic microorganism that has been
demonstrated to produce bioplastics when processed with heat and pressure will
serve as a proof-of-concept system. The fundamental contribution of this project
will be a design approach that accounts for the complexities of the transition
of raw biomatter to bioplastics, exemplifying the Materials Genome Initiative's
emphasis on predictive materials design and data-driven approaches to foster
sustainable and innovative materials for a circular economy.

This project is supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS), and the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) of
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.