* 2323315
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: De Novo Proteins as Junctions in Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* David Baker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

Non-technical Description: Nature uses proteins to create biomaterials that
range from spider silk to human tissue. Synthetic materials that utilize
proteins have potential as biodegradable plastics and composites (protein-
polymer networks). It is critical to understand the protein design parameters
that determine the desired material outcomes in protein-polymer networks. In
addition to protein structure, the topology of the polymer network serves an
important role in the mechanical response of these materials. While the
mechanical properties of these materials can be experimentally determined,
computational simulations can provide critical insights into the mechanical
response of proteins as they unfold within a network structure. The
transformative scientific aspects of our proposal are (i) the synthesis and
computational simulations of de novo designed proteins and their respective
protein-polymer networks and (ii) techniques for mechanical characterization of
polymer-protein networks on the microscale that will accelerate the discovery
and deployment of proteins as junctions in polymer networks for biohybrid
plastics and engineering bioplastics. Additionally, 3D printing will enable the
distributed manufacturing of parts, as well as custom designs that can be
created by architects, engineers, and other users. This project addresses the
national need for advanced manufacturing methods that are more sustainable built
environments via reduced carbon footprint (reduced transport costs and greener
production) and chemical circularity (chemical recycling of protein-based
materials). This project also addresses the national need to develop the next
generation of a highly skilled and diverse future workforce.

Technical Description: The central objective of this proposal is to elucidate
the design principles for de novo designed proteins as mechano-responsive
junctions in protein-polymer networks. The convergence of computational de novo
protein design and materials science presents a unique opportunity to create
protein-based thermosets that are superior to conventional synthetic materials.
The structure and composition of designed proteins can be optimized to control
the processability of the proteins (via additive manufacturing) and the bulk
mechanical properties of the materials. In particular, proteins can serve as
mechanophores that respond to extrinsic mechanical forces to release their
stored length. The factors that determine the stored length include the nominal
length of the outstretched protein, the number of strands per protein junction
and the force required to mechanically unfold the protein. The topology of the
protein-polymer network also serves an important role in the mechanical response
of these materials. While the mechanical properties of these materials can be
experimentally determined, computational simulations can provide critical
insights into proteins unfolding and refolding in a network and ultimately
accelerate the discovery of proteins for advanced materials. This DMREF project
will (i) develop de novo designed proteins that can be readily transformed into
junctions within polymer networks, (ii) investigate de novo designed proteins as
mechano-responsive junctions that unfold within networks, and (iii) demonstrate
the additive manufacturing of intelligent protein-polymer networks that remodel
via protein unfolding and refolding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.