* 2323019
* ISS: The Influence of Microgravity on Bacterial Transport and Pellicle Morphogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 340,033.00

This award investigates the formation and growth of pellicles, which are
membrane-like bacterial communities that accumulate at liquid interfaces.
Pellicles are found in many settings and contribute to food spoilage, hospital
infections, and environmental contamination. Pellicles formed at air/water
interfaces exhibit distinct properties and formation dynamics compared to
biofilms formed on solid interfaces, e.g., they undergo complex changes in shape
over time and are strongly influenced by oxygen availability. Experiments in
microgravity provide a unique opportunity to investigate two unexplored aspects
of pellicle growth: (1) the role of gravity-driven mechanisms for bacteria and
oxygen transport near an interface, and (2) growth at a spherical interface.
Studying pellicle growth patterns at spherical interfaces can yield insights
into how soft living materials behave, which is valuable for tissue engineering
and biomaterials. By understanding the transport mechanisms underlying pellicle
growth, pellicles can be controlled for purposes such as food preservation,
infection control, and environmental remediation.

Experiments will be conducted using the Ring Shear Drop module aboard the
International Space Station, which enables deployment of centimeter-scale drops
constrained by surface tension. Drops in microgravity can be used as container-
less reactors for studying phenomena at air/liquid interfaces. Two facets of
pellicle formation will be investigated: (1) initial transport of bacteria and
oxygen to the interface in the absence of gravity-driven convection and
sedimentation over short timescales (2-6 hours), and (2) morphogenesis of
pellicles at a spherical drop interface over long timescales (48 hours).
Numerical modeling will supplement experiments to decipher the individual
contributions of specific transport processes responsible for pellicle
morphogenesis. By comparing results from microgravity experiments to Earth-based
controls, the effects of gravity on pellicle formation can be distinguished.
Microgravity is known to significantly affect bacterial biofilms at solid
surfaces, and it is expected that microgravity will exert an even greater
influence on pellicle growth at elastic fluid interfaces. Exploring this
influence will enable valuable insights into mechanisms responsible for initial
adhesion, growth, and proliferation of pellicles. This award will also
characterize pellicle morphogenesis at the drop air/water interface, focusing on
the out-of-plane buckling transitions that occur due to interfacial
instabilities and compressive stresses generated by growth. Pellicle dynamics on
three-dimensional curved shapes with approximately spherical boundaries can
serve as a model system that mimics natural transitions observed in soft living
materials. Because microgravity enables deployment of centimeter scale droplets,
this award will be the first to observe pellicle morphogenesis at spherical
interfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.