* 2323175
* Updating technical components to sustain XMAPortal and ZMAPortal for the comparative biomechanics research community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Brainerd, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 264,144.00

The X-ray Motion Analysis Portal (XMAPortal) and the Zoological Motion Analysis
Portal (ZMAPortal) provides a critical resource for a broad range of faculty and
students from diverse institutions including US universities, primarily
undergraduate colleges, international institutions, and small businesses. With
support from this award, the Portals will be updated to benefit research in the
field of comparative biomechanics through; (1) continued availability of video
data and metadata already deposited in the Portals; and (2) updating the Portals
to receive new data from the growing number of researchers using video to study
the biomechanics of movement in living animals. As scientific
cyberinfrastructure, the XMAPortal and ZMAPortal provide video data management
to increase the efficiency of lab groups and collaborations, and they also serve
as data archives for data re-use, validation, and transparency. Undergraduate
students will learn about cyberinfrastructure by participating in alpha and beta
testing. This project will advance scientific infrastructure and human STEM
workforce development in support of scientific innovation and long-term US
economic competitiveness.

A cyberinfrastructure update is needed because of external technology changes
that have occurred since the development of the XMA and ZMA Portals started
nearly 15 years ago. The proposed update will make it possible to continue to
sustain the Portals with user fees for the next 15-20 years. The XMA and
ZMAPortals will be refactored to leverage the latest modern Javascript web
development frameworks. Modern Javascript shifts focus away from specific
technologies to user facing functionality, and user experience is decoupled from
data. Modern Javascript is less prescriptive about how applications are
maintained and deployed, allowing the use of new deployment tools that can
dynamically scale with the incoming traffic to the XMAPortal and ZMAPortal. All
code will be containerized and deployed with Kubernetes, an open-source
container-orchestration tool. The code developed for this project will be open
source and available to the scientific community. By updating the technology
base of the existing Portals, the continuity of these video data management
platforms will be ensured for many years to come. The impact on the research
community will be to maintain the video data already stored in the portals while
enabling new research in the field of comparative biomechanics through
synthesis, data mining, and sharing of highly data-rich video files.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.