* 2323716
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Multi-material digital light processing of functional polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2027
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Description: Additive manufacturing, commonly referred to as 3D
printing, is a technology that could revolutionize a diverse array of
applications, from personalized products to medical implants. One of the most
powerful 3D printing techniques for making plastic objects uses patterned
illumination of a resin to define the shape of a printed part. While light-based
3D printing is currently limited to a single material, this project aims to
develop new resins that allow for printing multiple materials with varying
properties, such as stiffness or elasticity, in a single step. The research will
combine a feedback loop spanning materials chemistry, computational science,
machine learning (ML), and physical characterization aligning with principles of
the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). The primary target for materials
optimization will be the design of structured surfaces with varying mechanical
properties for directing cell growth. Such surfaces are essential for both
fundamental studies and practical applications. The integration of experiments,
data analytics, and manufacturing methods in the research will prepare graduate
and undergraduate students with diverse backgrounds for the future workforce.
Public outreach and K-12 outreach to improve awareness in the science and
engineering of advanced materials manufacturing methods will be carried out.

Technical Description: The project will develop methods and materials for
additive manufacturing that enable 3D printing of multi-material objects. The
research will be accomplished through three main objectives that enable a unique
ability to create multi-material objects with spatially defined mechanical
properties by digital light processing (DLP). In Objective 1, multi-material DLP
resins will be developed using machine learning methods to find chemistries that
enable patterns with extreme mechanical contrast (moduli from kPa to GPa) in
response to different wavelengths of light. In Objective 2, a multi-material DLP
process will be developed using photoswitches to control light exposure that
will be optimized by inverse design using digital twins of the DLP process. In
Objective 3, machine-learning accelerated topology optimization will be used to
define multi-material structures to direct cell behavior. This design tool will
translate the platform of materials and processing routes into substrates that
direct cell growth via spatially defined regions of topography and mechanical
contrast. All three objectives will leverage an MGI-driven feedback loop between
experiment and theory where advances in each area enhance the overall outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.