* 2323988
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Rational design of redox-responsive materials for critical element separations
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Prashant Jain, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,600,000.00

Non-technical Description: Rare-earth elements and platinum group metals are
critical elements for applications ranging from smartphones and light-emitting-
diode (LED) lights to green energy technologies. Other countries mine and
process most of the world’s REE supply. US mines can contribute to 15% of the
world’s annual supply of rare-earth elements. However, US mines produce mixtures
of these elements, which cannot be used in applications until they are separated
from one another. This program will develop sustainable strategies for
separating and recovering rare-earth elements and platinum group metals from
waste streams. This project will utilize electrically-driven separations to
separate these valuable elements. This approach is modular, reversible, minimize
waste, and can be driven by renewable sources. Electrode materials that bind
these elements will be developed from conductive polymers and carbon nanotubes.
Beyond contributing to the critical materials economy, the knowledge gained can
be applied to other challenging separations, like removing heavy metals and
toxic contaminants from water. This project will also help educate and cultivate
a diverse future workforce with key competencies in data science, computation,
and experiments. New educational content will be released, students will be
trained on advanced materials topics, and K-12 outreach programs will be
implemented.

Technical Description: Electrochemical charge-transfer materials have been
proposed as new-generation technologies for separation processes, including
water desalination, critical element recovery, and remediation of toxic
contaminants. Electrically-driven systems offer significant advantages such as
integration with renewable energy, elimination of secondary pollutants or
regeneration chemicals by being solely electrochemically regenerable, and
modularity. However, recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) and rare-earth
elements (REEs) is a significant challenge for separations science because these
elements are found as dilute ions in the presence of excess levels of competing
species and with complex speciation depending on pH and ion concentration – and
the applicability of electroseparations to REEs and PGMs is severely limited by
the fundamental lack of molecular selectivity. This program will develop and
implement efficient electrochemical systems for REE and PGM recovery by
discovering new polymer-based electrode materials with innovative adsorbate–ion
interaction modes, which provide highly selective yet reversible binding. Though
typical design approaches employ energy storage materials or use
trial­and­error, where machine learning (ML) trained on molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations and experimental data will guide chemical selection, synthesis, and
electrode ink creation to produce ion-selective yet processable redox­polymers.
The simultaneous design of molecular binding and polymer secondary structure in
a closed­loop can help accelerate downstream deployment of advanced
redox­materials. MD­guided selection of polymer backbones and solvents that
maximize ink stability, paired with advanced rheology and coating processes,
will enable the creation of electrosorbents with desired macroscopic properties
through scaleup, overcoming solubility and processing challenges typical of
redox­polymers. Iteration between computation and experiments will produce a
framework for rationally designing redox electrodes that, in addition to
addressing critical element mixtures of direct relevance to mining and critical
materials recycling, can be extended to address challenges in water desalination
and environmental remediation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.