* 2323006
* RAPID: Impact of Changing Death Penalty Unanimity Requirements on Case Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Hannah Gorman, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 80,000.00

Florida recently announced legislation that will revise jury death penalty
sentencing requirements. Specifically, while previously a jury had to be
unanimous to recommend a death sentence versus a sentence of life without
parole, the new rule requires only a majority eight of 12 jurors to vote for
death to recommend the death penalty. Although research has previously shown
that, predictably, death penalty decisions are more likely under a majority rule
than a unanimity rule, the relationship between the sentencing decision rule and
pre-trial decision-making (e.g., accepting a plea bargain) is less clear. One
might assume that lowering the number of jurors required for a recommendation of
death, thereby making a death sentence more likely, would increase the number of
plea bargains accepted. However, there are theoretical reasons to believe that
the opposite might happen.

Different theories of decision-making would argue for different impacts of a
shift to non-unanimity on pre-trial decisions, with some arguing for a decrease
in plea bargains accepted and some an increase in plea bargains accepted. Of
particular relevance here are Shadow of the Trial theory and Prospect Theory,
which make opposite predictions as the risk of a death sentence increases. The
proposed study seeks to clarify our theoretical and real-world understanding of
the impact of unanimity rules on pre-trial decisions. Specifically, we will
gather real-world data on first-degree murder cases in the state of Florida both
before and after the proposed change goes into effect in a few months. The
knowledge gained through this research directly informs decisions made by legal
actors, including defense attorneys and prosecutors. It is important to track
the impact of legislative changes on the legal system at all stages, as this can
inform decisions made in other jurisdictions that may be considering similar
changes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.