* 2323112
* Collaborative Research: Towards the Foundation of Approximate Sampling-Based Exploration in Sequential Decision Making
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pan Xu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Sequential decision-making problems, such as bandits and reinforcement learning,
play a crucial role in various AI applications, including recommendation
systems, robotics, games, and personalized healthcare. The main challenge lies
in finding the optimal exploration strategy that strikes a balance between
choosing actions with the best performance and choosing actions with high
uncertainties. However, existing exploration strategies heavily depend on
specific cases, requiring prior knowledge of reward distribution, function
approximation, and the task at hand. This creates computational obstacles and
hampers real-world applicability. This project aims to establish a theoretical
foundation for using approximate sampling-based techniques to unify exploration
strategies across different sequential decision problems. The goal is to develop
efficient and provable algorithms applicable to diverse learning problems under
a unified algorithmic framework based on approximate sampling. This project also
provides research training opportunities for graduate students. The project
consists of three tasks. Task one focuses on developing fast approximate
sampling-based exploration strategies for contextual bandit problems,
accompanied by theoretical guarantees. Task two involves implementing and
generalizing these exploration algorithms to more complex sequential decision-
making applications, leveraging deep neural networks. Task three aims to
establish efficient and provably effective exploration strategies for
reinforcement learning problems. These advancements will be translated into
accessible tools for various bandit and reinforcement learning applications,
providing verifiable guarantees. The open-source software and course materials
resulting from this project will be made publicly available, benefiting
research, education, and society at large.

This award by the Division of Mathematical Sciences is jointly supported by the
NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.