* 2323185
* RAPID: Eco-evolutionary dynamics of host-parasite interactions in a novel environment
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Marianna Szucs, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,011.00

Invasive insect pests are best controlled in the long term by parasitoid natural
enemies that lay their eggs inside the insect. The eggs hatch and develop into
larvae, which feed on the body of the insect host from the inside. Because this
is a life-and-death struggle, natural selection acts strongly on the host to
evolve to escape parasitism and on the parasitoid to overcome host defenses.
When insect pests invade a new region, they usually leave behind the parasitoids
that are adapted to attack them. It is expected that in this new, enemy-free
environment, evolution could result in an insect host with lower defenses. Host
evolution in response to parasites is important because host resistance impacts
biological control programs. In these programs, enemies from native ranges are
introduced intentionally to control invasive insect pests. When the insect host
is once again exposed to its parasitoids, natural selection will once again
respond. This study investigates how defense levels of the spotted wing
drosophila have changed following its invasion of North America and how those
defenses may change following the release of a specialist parasitoid from the
native range. In addition to broad implications for biological control, the
project promises to yield specific insights into control of spotted wing
drosophila, which is a major agricultural pest. Lower resistance of invasive
spotted wing drosophila could help biocontrol initially, while increased or
geographically variable levels of resistance could render biocontrol less
successful or less predictable regionally.

This project investigates eco-evolutionary dynamics of host-parasitoid
interactions following the release of a classical biocontrol agent, the
parasitoid wasp Ganaspis brasiliensis against the invasive spotted wing
drosophila (Drosophila suzukii). Contrary to expectations, the resistance of
spotted wing drosophila seems to have increased instead of decreased in the
invaded range in North America and Europe. This increased resistance may stem
from reduced competition and ample resources for spotted wing drosophila in the
exotic range, permitting maintenance of high levels of defensive compounds.
Preliminary data collected prior to the release of the biocontrol agent show
that spotted wing drosophila resistance to parasitism by G. brasiliensis is
relatively high but also that it is highly variable with 13-48% of parasitoid
larvae being killed by the host. In this project, G. brasiliensis will be
released at eight sites in Michigan where there is already baseline data about
resistance levels of spotted wing drosophila. Subsequent surveys will permit
assessment of any changes in resistance following this release of a co-evolved
specialist natural enemy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.