* 2323203
* Field Measurements for Understanding Atmospheric Oxidation Generated by Electrical Discharges
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2026
* USD 651,324.00

The goal of this project is to use UV radiation flux measurements to determine
the production of hydrogen oxide radicals (HOx) from sources such as corona on
trees under thunderstorms and on high voltage electrical power transmission
lines. Because direct HOx measurements are difficult to obtain, the use of
coronal UV radiation as a surrogate for HOx production can help build an
understanding of the contribution of electrically generated HOx to atmospheric
oxidation. Hydrogen oxide radicals (especially the hydroxyl radical OH) are
important oxidizing species that control the concentrations of toxic gases like
carbon monoxide and climate relevant gases like methane.

Previously, the project team conducted laboratory studies to measure HOx
emissions from electrical and corona discharges on metal objects and on
different types of tree leaves. In this project, they will explore field
measurements of UV emissions from and in thunderstorms and associated
electrified anvils. They plan to use the following two approaches: (1) ground-
based measurements using a solar-blind UV camera and a Corona Observing
Telescope System recently built by the team; and (2) balloon-borne measurements
of UV radiation in the 180-195 nm band and the 240-280 nm band using small
solar-blind detectors accompanied by a video camera, and measurements of
pressure, temperature, dewpoint temperature, sound, and GPS location. The UV
radiation measured from electrical discharges from balloons will quantify the UV
radiation field, and thus HOx production, in thunderstorm cells and anvils. The
project team aims to: (1) ensure that all significant atmospheric HOx-producing
electrical discharges have been identified; and (2) substantially reduce the
uncertainties in calculating atmospheric electrical discharge impacts on
atmospheric oxidation.

The project includes support for an undergraduate and graduate student, and a
postdoc, who will be trained to participate in the planned research. This effort
has great potential for new interdisciplinary research efforts that bridge
between atmospheric chemistry and physical meteorology, forestry, plant biology,
and electrical engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.