* 2323050
* SCC-PG: Sustainable Vertiports for Bringing Autonomous Drone Swarm Inspection to Oil and Gas Industry Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Xiang Sun, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 149,999.00

This NSF Smart and Connected Community (S&CC) planning grant will set the
groundwork for exploring a sustainable vertiport system capable of deploying
autonomous drone swarms for methane emission measurements over orphaned wells.
The planning grant will also scrutinize the responses of regulators and
operators to the potential technological changes. These abandoned oil or gas
wells, typically left behind by the fossil fuel extraction industry when
operating expenses outstrip production rates, contribute significantly to
greenhouse gas emissions. Given the high costs associated with the plugging,
remediation, and restoration of these wells, robust, data-driven evidence is
required to justify and prioritize the allocation of state and federal funds.
Traditional methane emission measurements, involving flux chamber installation
at each open wellhead, carry high capital and operational costs and are
challenging to deploy in hard-to-reach areas. While primarily targeting the oil
and gas industry community, the research outcomes could offer valuable insights
applicable to diverse areas such as wildlife monitoring, anti-poaching
initiatives, infrastructure and aircraft inspections, construction site
surveillance, and water pollution monitoring.

The research aims to create a new cross-domain framework for an integrated,
sustainable vertiport that aids an autonomous drone swarm inspection system. The
project revolves around three technical objectives: 1) Developing a low-cost,
portable, and sustainable vertiport to facilitate precision landing and housing,
protection, and recharging of multiple drones; 2) Constructing a safe federated
deep reinforcement learning algorithm to enable drone swarm landing and takeoff
in harsh environments; 3) Examining three-dimensional drone swarm path planning
for efficient methane plume localization and emission quantification.
Simultaneously, the project will pursue two social science objectives: 1)
Quantitative assessment of potential efficiency and equity improvements in
federal funds allocated for cleaning up orphaned wells; 2) Encouraging operators
to adopt this cost-effective monitoring system by enhancing equity in carbon
dioxide sequestration tax incentives. The research outcomes will revolutionize
measurement and monitoring technologies, enabling the oil and gas industry to
identify economically viable and sustainable solutions to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, while providing valuable insights and tools applicable to high-impact
areas such as airborne wireless edge computing and autonomous drone swarm
defense.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.