* 2323546
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Data-Driven Prediction of Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Seth Marder, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 870,000.00

Non-technical Description: Hybrid Organic Inorganic Structures (HOIS),
specifically in the form of metal-halide perovskites, have recently attracted
much attention due to unprecedented performance advancements in solar cells,
light emitting diodes, as well as emerging applications in transistors, sensors,
spintronics and catalysts. The extremely wide chemical and structural space
engendered by hybrid organic-inorganic systems presents both exciting
opportunities for property tunability, but also substantial challenges
associated with the laborious process of exploring this wide space for suitable
structures for a given application. This project aims to strongly accelerate
structure prediction within the HOIS space through exploitation of recently
curated X-ray structure databases, molecular dynamics simulation, machine
learning (ML), synthetic and structural studies in an iterative feedback loop.
The research will provide critical insights into composition-structure
relationships, including the preferred structural dimensionality, distortions in
the inorganic lattice, relative stabilities of different perovskite-like
structures, and the underlying molecular features. The outcome will be the rapid
prediction of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite-type structures from the
starting materials, which is essential to optimize optical, electronic and spin
properties for a wide range of applications. Approximately one thousand new HOIS
will be explored, more than doubling the range of known structures. External
collaborations with federal partners at the Air Force Research Laboratory and at
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory will test applications of newly
synthesized structures and theoretical models. The team includes four Principal
Investigators at three universities, including New Mexico Highlands University,
a Hispanic-serving institution. The project will train undergraduate, graduate,
and PhD-level researchers, including under-represented minorities and females.
The PIs also plan to organize symposia at national meetings to disseminate the
results and engage further experts in this activity.

Technical Description: This research will utilize approximately 1000 reported
crystal structures in multiple HOIS databases and molecular dynamics simulations
with the INTERFACE force field to inform descriptors and train ML algorithms to
predict the relative stability and dimensionality of crystal structures,
structural features such as distortions between adjoining octahedra, and lattice
parameters. The tools will then be applied to predict the structure of ~1000 yet
unknown perovskite compositions in an iterative feedback loop with synthesis and
characterization, expecting at least 10 times acceleration relative to serial
experimental discovery. Iterations in synthesis, characterization, modeling, and
database development will significantly increase the number of known HOIS and
elucidate the role of critical intermolecular interactions such as multipolar
charge distributions, atomic radii, Ï€-stacking, unusual hydrogen bonds, and
chirality of building blocks for the crystal structure and relative stability of
HOIS polymorphs. The activity will address a grand challenge in materials
science, which consists in obtaining weighted descriptors for precise structural
control of HOIS and relationships to crystal growth. The effort will bring
together experts and co-advised students across the fields of materials science,
chemistry, computation, and data science for accelerated creation of knowledge
by Harnessing the Data Revolution and convergent multidisciplinary research. The
descriptors, ML algorithms, and training data for structure prediction will be
openly shared, taking multiple structure databases, cyberinfrastructure tools,
and computing resources to the next level. New database entries, ML algorithms,
iteratively improved force field parameters, and experimental techniques can be
used for HOIS beyond the scope of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.