* 2323344
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Iterative Design and Fabrication of Hyperuniform-Inspired Materials for Targeted Mechanical and Transport Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2027
* Ryan Hurley, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2027
* USD 323,000.00

Micro-lattice and nano-lattice structures are an exciting class of materials
with better strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios than bulk solids.
Many designs and additive-manufacturing approaches (i.e., 3D printing) have
emerged recently for creating such materials, with the goal of fabricating
commercially available products with optimized mechanical, thermal, acoustic,
and electrical properties for biomedical, aerospace, and several other
applications. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) grant will support development of novel approaches to design a new class
of disordered lattice materials that are inspired by the special transport
properties, e.g., heat transfer and diffusion, of the so-called “hyperuniform”
structures. Hyperuniform materials may nominally be described as materials with
minimal density variation as the length scale increases. They arise naturally in
biological and chemical systems and can be designed through numerical methods.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that such systems facilitate efficient
transport behavior with minimal attenuation while also possessing nearly optimal
effective elastic stiffness and material fracture suppression. The grant will
also provide effective workforce development for a diverse group of
undergraduates, PhD students, and postdoctoral researchers in the
multidisciplinary areas of engineering, materials science, mathematics, and
physics. It will contribute to the public understanding of materials research
via publications, outreach, and internship programs for high-school students and
teachers. Additionally, there will be an effort to develop entrepreneurship and
trainees will be supported in pursuing commercialization of their ideas.

The objective of this project is to engineer a new class of ultralight,
manufacturable materials with jointly optimized mechanical (stiffness and
strength) and transport (thermal, acoustic, and electrical) properties. To
achieve this, the approach includes (1) characterization and understanding of
the benefits of exploiting local uniformity and hyperuniformity; (2) measurement
of mechanical and transport properties to create and understand the
structure–process–property diagram for these materials, including the influence
of heterogeneity and defects; and (3) development of new computational tools
that allow optimization throughout the integrated theory, synthesis, and
experiment loop of material development. The research activities will pursue
three routes for property co-optimization: (1) adjustments to the initial
configuration, including connectivity (theory); (2) material selection and
control of microscale heterogeneity that is created by the additive-
manufacturing process (synthesis); (3) designing time-varying signals that
create specified spatial correlations when applied to structures (experiment).
The approach will also include new modeling approaches, such as network analysis
to create design heuristics and higher-order stochastic spatial-averaging
techniques to account for microscale heterogeneity. These models will
efficiently feed back into the design process by allowing the creation of
random-network models that generate specific features that also remain
manufacturable. The design cycle that forms the basis of the research aims draws
heavily on building a shared Configuration Library and Code Library; these will
be published for use by other research groups.

This project is supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) and the Division of Materials Research (DMR) of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.