* 2323312
* SAI: Enhancing Flood Resilience in Coastal Urban Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Dominic Boyer, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

Coastal cities across the world face new frequencies and intensities of risk
associated with storms and flooding because of a changing climate. This is
particularly true in the United States, which is expected to face above-average
risks for damage to coastal property and infrastructure driven by sea level rise
and storm surge. Coastal cities need to prepare for these challenges by boosting
the resilience of both physical and social infrastructures. This SAI project
investigates how engaging communities directly in stormwater management could
help to make property and infrastructures more resilient. A special focus of the
research is how coastal communities can make the best use of green stormwater
infrastructure, where natural processes help communities to manage stormwater
more effectively.

The research explores two interventions to improve upon conventional stormwater
infrastructure approaches. One is to increase civic engagement in
infrastructural design, implementation, and maintenance processes
(infrastructural citizenship). This improves stormwater infrastructure design by
harnessing local knowledge of flood risks and engaging a broader range of
stakeholders in the imagination of possible social solutions. The other is to
utilize the potential of green stormwater infrastructure techniques, such as
rain gardens, bioswales, and green detention/retention basins. This creates more
frequent, affordable, and substantive opportunities for civic engagement than
conventional stormwater infrastructure. With a convergence of expertise in
anthropology, urban design, and civil engineering, the project includes field
research, participatory design work and hydrological impact analysis in three
demographically distinct, flood prone Houston, TX neighborhoods. The project
aims to produce innovative portable and actionable urban designs that can guide
stormwater infrastructure development processes in Houston, TX and beyond.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences, the Directorate for Geosciences, and the Directorate for
Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.