* 2323300
* Collaborative Research: SpecEES:  Designing A Spectrally Efficient and Energy Efficient Data Aided Demand Driven Elastic Architecture for future Networks (SpiderNET)
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Sabit Ekin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 163,018.00

Radio spectrum useable by mobile cellular networks is finite but cellular
traffic continues to grow rampantly. This calls on scientific community to
design networks that can push spectrum efficiency to its limits. On the other
hand, making cellular networks energy efficient is a goal that is becoming more
pressing than ever not only for operational cost reduction but also for
minimizing the carbon foot print of the bulging information and communications
technology industry. Recent studies show that unless new degrees of freedom and
artificial intelligence based dynamic adaptability is added in the cellular
architecture, any significant gain in spectral efficiency must come at cost of
energy efficiency. The overarching goal of this project is to design,
characterize, optimize and validate through a state-of-the-art testbed a new
architecture that enables the additional degrees of freedom and intelligence to
dynamically exploit these new degrees of freedom in the design and operation of
the mobile network to yield substantial gains in both spectrum efficiency and
energy efficiency, simultaneously. This proposed architecture is named as
SpiderNET: Spectrally Efficient and Energy Efficient Data Aided Demand Driven
Elastic Architecture for Future Networks. The key idea behind SpiderNET is to
introduce additional degrees of freedom to relax the rigid spectrum efficiency-
energy efficiency tradeoff and thus enable simultaneous enhancement of both. In
wake of the internet of everything, as a key enabler of network resource
efficiency, enhanced battery life and service level improvement, SpiderNET is
bound to have a broad impact on nearly every aspect of evolving digital society
that counts on wireless connectivity. In addition, as diminishing revenue per
bit is already pushing cellular operators to reduce energy bills, huge energy
savings enabled by SpiderNET can substantially reduce OPEX. Reducing the carbon
foot print of cellular industry is also a key benefit of the proposed research.
This project offers workforce training in a highly sought-after multi-
disciplinary skill set while ensuring the participation of women and other
underrepresented groups, and K-12 outreach. Compared to only theoretical or
simulation-based research, a key distinction of the proposed research is the
experimental research on a cutting-edge cellular testbed that is expected to
cast a much broader impact. This project is collaborative undertaking with key
national and international stakeholders in cellular eco-systems to ensure timely
adaptation of the project outcomes by respective industry and government bodies.

The simultaneous enhancement of both spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency
is achieved by shifting the pivot of operation from the rigid always-on base-
station-centric cells to user-centric on-demand cells. To enable this, SpiderNET
consists of a layer of low-density large footprint control base station
underlaid by high-density switchable data base stations. The switching on/off
the data base station, the size of user-centric cells (S-Zones) and other
parameters are orchestrated proactively by a machine learning based self-
organizing network (SON) engine that leverages a database of selected
measurements at data and control base stations. Preliminary studies show that
intelligent orchestration of the both, the size of the S-Zone and active data
base station density, along with optimal design of the contents and
spatiotemporal resolution of the database can substantially enhance both
spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency without compromising quality of
experience. The research will transform SpiderNET form an idea into a functional
architecture by pursuing the following three research thrusts: 1) Developing
analytical and simulation models to fully characterize the spectrum efficiency
and energy efficiency of SpiderNET to determine the key design parameters that
can be optimized to maximize its spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency
gains. These models will then be leveraged to design algorithms for maximizing
spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency in dynamic traffic conditions. 2)
Designing the database of measurements and leveraging this data at control and
data base stations to develop algorithms for proactive cell discovery and
selection and radio resource allocation for jointly maximizing both spectrum
efficiency and energy efficiency without compromising quality of experience. 3)
Proof of concept of SpiderNET on TurboRAN (an NSF-funded end-to-end programmable
testbed). This research leverages tools from domains of fluid modelling,
stochastic geometry, game theory, machine learning and stochastic and multi-
objective optimization to achieve its goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.