* 2323137
* IMR: MT: Tools for Measuring Route Origin Validation in Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Taejoong Chung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 11/30/2025
* USD 299,998.00

The initial design of the Internet's global routing lacked security mechanisms,
leaving it vulnerable to various attacks, including BGP (Border Gateway
Protocol) hijacking. To address this issue, a security protocol called RPKI
(Resource Public Key Infrastructure) was introduced. At its core, RPKI aims to
enhance security by enabling routers to verify the legitimacy of the route and
its authorized owner through a process known as Route Origin Validation (ROV).
By implementing ROV, routers can ensure that the routes they receive originate
from legitimate sources, thereby mitigating the risks associated with
unauthorized route hijacking.

This proposal aims to develop and enhance a dedicated tool, designed to measure
and evaluate the Route Origin Validation (ROV) status of network operators. The
project will involve implementing automated processes to collect measurable
hosts within Autonomous Systems (ASes) and assess the ROV status of ASes on a
large scale by leveraging the in-the-wild RPKI-invalid prefixes and applying IP-
ID side-channel technique. A significant challenge lies in obtaining accurate
ground truth datasets from network operators. To overcome this challenge, we
will utilize periodic surveys and manual efforts to gather ground truth
information from network operators, ensuring reliable and comprehensive data for
analysis.

This project's significance lies in its ability to facilitate valuable research.
By providing reliable sources of information regarding network operators, it
will enable a deeper understanding of the overall security level of Internet
routing. Additionally, the project's findings can be utilized to estimate the
adoption and deployment of potential new standards like ASPA (Autonomous System
Provider Authorization). Through these insights, the project will contribute to
advancing the understanding and development of secure Internet routing
practices.

The tools, datasets, and source codes will be thoroughly documented and
accessible for download as well. Furthermore, there are plans to maintain the
tools for the foreseeable future, ensuring continued availability and support
for users interested in leveraging its capabilities.

This award is jointly supported by the Networking Technology and Systems (NeTS)
Program and the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) Program in the Computer
and Network Systems Division, and by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.