* 2323189
* IMR: MT: AirScope: A Versatile and Programmable UAV Platform for End-to-End Cellular Network Measurements in Rural Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Shawn Keshmiri, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 310,000.00

Collecting accurate data on cellular network performance in rural areas is
challenging due to several factors. Firstly, rural areas have a more dispersed
population and a lower population density, which makes it difficult and
expensive for cellular providers to establish and maintain sufficient
infrastructure, resulting in variations in performance across different rural
areas. Secondly, the limited number of people using network performance apps in
rural areas makes the collected data less representative. Lastly, Large
measurement areas with difficult terrains (agricultural fields, hills, etc.)
complicates at-scale cellular measurement using existing tools. Despite these
challenges, it is crucial to collect reliable and comprehensive measurement data
at scale in rural areas, particularly with the emergence of novel use cases such
as precision-ag, remote work, tele-health, online education, etc. Using unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) opens new possibilities to perform measurements more
efficiently. The goal of this project is to design, build, and publicly release
hardware and software components for UAV-aided cellular radio access network
(RAN) and end-to-end network measurements in rural areas.

This project is aimed at designing and building several versatile and
programmable UAV-based measurement platforms (dubbed AirScope) with integrated
cellular modems and automatic flight controller for beyond-visual-line-of-sight
(BVLOS) scenarios. Through an integrated hardware and software design, command
and control (C2), telemetry, and payload data are communicated through the
commercial cellular network, thereby enabling both radio access and end-to-end
cellular network measurements in rural areas. Furthermore, to enhance the
efficiency of the data collection tool, a novel concept of measurement-aware
trajectory design will be developed and implemented. Extensive evaluation
campaign and data curation effort will result in an unprecedented dataset of
cellular measurement data that can be used for a wide range of data-driven
research projects.

This project will introduce a unique symbiosis between the wireless
communication and the aerospace engineering communities by creating a set of
hardware and software tools that unify the knowledge and practical expertise of
these two fields. As a result, this project will (i) enhance the undergraduate
and graduate curriculum at the University of Kansas, (ii) involve undergraduate
and underrepresented students in research, and (iii) introduce engineering
fields to schoolchildren. Furthermore, a major outcome of this project will be
software implementations and hardware development, which will be publicly
released to the broader research community. This project will result in a
systematic cellular measurement methodology for rural areas that be used for
policy makers and the broader user community.

All project outcomes, including software and hardware designs, integration
steps, algorithms, and collected measurement data, will be made publicly
available on the project website: https://hashemi.ku.edu/airscope

This project is jointly funded by the Networking Technology and Systems (NeTS)
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.