* 2323994
* Conference: AGU Chapman Conference on Hydrothermal Circulation and Seawater Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

AGU is convening a Chapman Conference in May 2023 to bring together experts
studying hydrothermal circulation to provide a better understanding of these
processes and their influence both on current and past ocean chemistry. This
grant is to provide support to allow students and early career researchers who
would usually not be able to attend and/or travel to the conference to
participate. This support is important in expanding the diversity of attended
and developing and mentoring future research around this important topic.

The largest groundwater systems on Earth are under the oceans. The most vigorous
systems are driven by heat from magmas under the long ocean ridges, which form
new ocean crust; other systems move through older crust and sediment, and other
submarine or island volcanic systems. Ocean water moves through these systems
and reacts with the crust and sediments, influencing the chemistry of the ocean
over time. This process also produces key mineral deposits on the ocean floor.
Understanding these systems is important, for example, in considering the role
of the ocean for long term storage of captured carbon dioxide and thus
addressing climate change. This award is co-funded by the Geobiology and Low-
Temperature Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth Sciences with the
Marine Geology and Geophysics and Chemical Oceanography Programs in the Division
of Ocean Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.