* 2323013
* GOALI: ISS Engineered Heart Tissue Chip to Assess Nanomedicine Strategies in a Spaceflight Model of Cardiac Aging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Deok-Ho Kim, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Heart disease accounts for one in every five deaths in the United States, with
age being a major contributing factor. Intriguingly, the unique environmental
conditions of spaceflight, such as microgravity and exposure to galactic cosmic
radiation, have been associated with cardiovascular deterioration in astronauts
similar to that found in older individuals. In fact, cardiac arrhythmias
(erratic heartbeats) have been noted in astronauts aboard the International
Space Station with no prior history of abnormal heartbeats. Thus, spaceflight
has been proposed to model cardiovascular aging. Previous studies found that a
direct determinant of spaceflight-induced heart dysfunction is an increase in
highly reactive chemicals known as reactive oxygen species (ROS) caused by
exposure to radiation and microgravity. High levels of ROS target the
mitochondria and nuclei in cells throughout the body inducing cellular
dysfunction and DNA damage – hallmarks of spaceflight and age-induced heart
disease. This research team aims to investigate if nanoparticles designed to
scavenge ROS can prevent dysfunction in mitochondria, thereby protecting against
spaceflight-induced cardiac abnormalities. In this project, the research team
will deploy an engineered heart tissue chip in both space and Earth-bound
experiments to test the therapeutic effects of nanoparticles in functioning
heart tissues. If such a therapy is found to be efficacious in improving cardiac
function during spaceflight, it may be used to treat age-related heart disease
among the general population. This is the first project to test nanomedicines in
space. This project also incorporates the training of young scientists and
students and provides the opportunity to gain first-hand experience in
bioengineering research.

This project aims to determine if reactive oxygen species (ROS)-scavenging
nanoparticles can prevent spaceflight-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, thus
protecting against spaceflight-induced cardiomyopathies. Human induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) will be generated on
Earth and matured into physiologically relevant, functional 3D engineered heart
tissues (EHTs). ROS-scavenging nanoparticles with surface targeting motifs for
both mitochondria and the nucleus will be synthesized and optimized to treat the
EHTs. Ground-based experiments using x-ray radiation and a simulated-
microgravity random positioning machine platform will aid in optimizing
conditions and protocols for the spaceflight experiment. Aboard the
International Space Station (ISS), EHTs will be maintained for one month, during
which time they will be treated with the ROS-scavenging nanoparticles. Real-time
force measurements will be available during spaceflight to provide continuous
functional assessment of the EHTs' condition with complete analyses to be
conducted post-flight in the laboratory. The experimental outcomes include
contractile function, DNA damage, mitochondrial health, total cellular ROS, and
calcium handling. This project will advance our understanding of the role of ROS
in spaceflight-induced cardiovascular dysfunction and the potential of ROS-
scavenging nanoparticles as a countermeasure. Moreover, these results will
provide a basis for developing effective countermeasures against cardiovascular
dysfunction in both astronauts and the Earth-bound aging population. (Project
integration and operation on the ISS will be provided by the Center for the
Advancement of Science in Space’s implementation partner, BioServe).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.