* 2323533
* RII Track-4:NSF: DyG-MAP: Fast Algorithms for Mining and Analysis of Evolving Patterns in Large Dynamic Graphs
* O/D,OIA
* 03/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Shaikh Arifuzzaman, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 225,884.00

Graphs (networks) are a versatile scientific framework to represent and analyze
biological, social, and human-made complex systems. Such complex systems are
inherently dynamic—for example, social interactions and human activities are
intermittent; links appear and disappear in functional brain networks. Despite
“time” playing a central role in those systems, most of the classic studies on
graphs are based on the topological properties of static graphs (graphs that do
not change over time). The existing works on dynamic graphs show only limited
scalability for large-scale practical datasets. This proposed research aims at
designing fast, scalable methods for revealing dynamic behaviors of a socio-
technical system by developing innovative algorithmic and computing techniques.
The host site, Berkeley Lab, will provide unique expertise and mentoring and
facilitate access to leading supercomputer facilities to achieve the proposed
research goals. The project will generate new algorithmic techniques and
scalable software tools to advance graph-based data science and high-performance
scientific computing. The PI includes an underrepresented graduate student in
this research. Educational and training modules will also be developed for PI’s
institution from the techniques and results emerging from this project. Thus,
the project will enhance the scientific research, training, and education
capacity of the PI’s jurisdiction.

The goal of this EPSCoR proposal is to develop fast and scalable methods for
mining and analyzing large dynamic graphs. Examples of such graphs include
social networks, human contact networks, web graphs, and functional brain
networks. The proposal addresses substructure-based problems such as finding
evolving communities and enumerating interesting temporal subgraphs or motifs
with applications in neuroscience, bioinformatics, infrastructure, and social
domains. Even though there exists a rich literature for static graphs, the
literature for dynamic graphs is very nascent. Existing parallel algorithms for
dynamic graphs demonstrate limited scalability due to their low ratio of compute
to memory operations and the irregular memory access patterns. Consequently,
such algorithms show weak spatial and temporal locality, leading to poor cache
utilization and high communication volume. The proposed research will utilize a
unique collaboration with the Performance and Algorithms Group of Berkeley Lab
to avail the most advanced user facilities and leading expertise to tackle the
above technical challenges. The proposal aims at developing scalable parallel
methods with efficient load-balancing and communication-avoidance techniques,
data reduction approaches with sampling and sparsification, and efficient
formalization of temporal metrics. Algorithmic methods generated from this
proposal will be applicable in understanding dynamic properties of various real-
world systems—for instance, locating key neurons in cortical (brain) networks,
route-planning for time-varying traffic in infrastructure networks, modeling
disease/virus or information propagation in social/contact networks. Therefore,
the project will expand the PI’s research capacity to build impactful
software/technology tools and also enhance his ability to serve a diverse
student population at his host institution as both a research mentor and an
educator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.