* 2323033
* I-Corps: Ligament Tension Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Joshua Roth, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to measure the tension in ligaments. Ligaments are
tissues that connect bones together at joints and help guide the motion of the
joint. Despite the critical importance of understanding ligament tension for a
wide range of clinical applications (e.g., ligament repair and total knee
replacement), there are no devices to directly and non-invasively measure
ligament tension in vivo. Measuring ligament tension using the proposed device
may help surgeons to better personalize treatments, which may reduce the need
for costly follow-up procedures to correct improperly tensioned ligaments that
often cause pain, stiffness, and/or instability. In addition, the proposed
device may be used as a diagnostic and pre-operative planning tool as well as in
orthopedic and rehabilitation clinics.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a device to determine
ligament tension based on the propagation speed of shear waves in the ligament.
This phenomenon is similar to the variation in a guitar stringâ€™s vibration
frequency with tension (i.e., a tighter string has a higher shear wave speed and
frequency). Alternative technologies (e.g., buckle transducers and optical
fibers) measure ligament tension, but require invasive implantations preventing
their translation into the clinic. The proposed sensor technology, called a
ligament tensiometer, is placed against the skin superficial to the ligament of
interest and the device excites a shear wave and tracks its propagation through
the skin and subcutaneous tissues. It has been shown that the speed that the
wave travels along the ligament accurately predicts the tension in the ligament.
The proposed initial target application is total knee arthroplasty because the
technology may enable surgeons to identify and correct individual structures
that may be improperly tensioned, which could mitigate post-operative pain,
stiffness, and instability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.