* 2323058
* Mechanistic roles of DNA polymerase delta subunit 1 in resistance to DNA geminiviruses
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nigel Taylor, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,094,620.00

Cassava is an important crop for small, medium, and large-scale farmers. It is a
hardy plant that can be grown without irrigation, fertilizer or pesticides and
is highly productive even when grown on marginal land. As such, it is likely to
become an even more important crop in the face of global climate change. Cassava
Mosaic Disease (CMD) is a devastating disease of cassava across the African
continent and has recently spread to Asia. Some varieties of cassava have
natural genetic resistance to CMD and the gene responsible for this resistance
was recently identified. However, it is not yet understood how the resistance
works. With hundreds of millions of people depending on this one source of
resistance to a devastating pathogen, a deeper understanding of the mechanism
behind the resistance is desired. This research will reveal the molecular
mechanisms of resistance and test whether this type of resistance can protect
diverse and important crops from other virus pathogens. If successful, this
research will lead to sustainable and effective disease control strategies for
many important crops such as tomato and cotton. Throughout the research,
training will be provided for undergraduate and graduate students and the
importance of this research will be shared with society through a variety of
public lectures, outreach events and YouTube videos explaining the importance of
this specific project targeted at non-scientist audiences.

CMD is caused by species of DNA geminiviruses. The CMD resistance was tracked to
specific amino acid changes within the DNA polymerase delta subunit 1 (POLD1)
protein. Viruses are fantastically effective at overcoming host resistance
mechanisms and yet this resistance trait has been stable for decades. Further,
several resistant cultivars of cassava are periclinal chimeras with the
resistance allele present in only specific cell layers. Why this resistance is
so stable and how it can function in the context of a periclinal chimera, is not
yet clear. While some of the identified POLD1 mutations are novel, others have
been observed in yeast and result in decreased DNA replication fidelity,
pointing towards a possible functional mechanism. Transient assays will be used
to test this and other candidate mechanistic hypotheses. These include
characterizing viral replication rates and fidelity of the different POLD1
alleles, interaction with candidate viral and host co-factors and protein
crystallography. Beyond cassava, this research may yield new resistance
strategies for other important crops. A resistant POLD1 allele will be
transformed into the model system Arabidopsis, to directly test if this
resistance mechanism is effective in a distinct pathosystem. In addition,
exploration of publicly available genomic data suggests that similar alleles
exist in germplasm collections from tomato, cotton, and several other important
crops. The relevant germplasm has been obtained and will be challenged with the
respective viral pathogens

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.