* 2323307
* IMR:MT: Internet Routing Experiments for the Cloud Era
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ethan Katz-Bassett, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 306,314.00

Emerging applications will stress the Internetâ€™s latency, reliability,
throughput, and jitter more and more, from video conferencing, to AR/VR
(augmented reality/virtual reality), to self-driving vehicles and traffic
control, to remote health monitoring and health care. These applications are
increasingly concentrated on a small number of large cloud and content
providers. They deploy servers around the world to serve clients over short
distances; and they peer directly with many edge networks to directly deliver
services. Academic researchers lack realistic experimentation environments for
this important setting. Existing testbeds lack the global footprint and rich
interconnectivity of large modern providers, and they cannot support the low-
latency and high-throughput traffic that emerging applications demand. This
project will build a platform that enables researchers to conduct Internet
routing experiments in an environment that is faithful to real-world cloud
providers.

To democratize research in this important setting, this project will build a new
software router for existing PEERING testbed capable of supporting high
performance; the routers will be deployed at 30 cloud sites across six
continents, with nearly 10,000 BGP peers, dramatically expanding PEERING's
footprint; and the project will build and make available tools for researchers
to conduct experiments in this setting, controlling the routes and traffic
exchanged between the cloud sites and the peers, and measuring and archiving the
results.

The primary impact of this project will be in democratizing access to research
in the setting of a globally deployed, highly interconnected cloud network with
granular control, one which is critical and central to today's Internet and
hence society. By opening this research area to researchers without privileged
access to hypergiants and cloud providers, the project will enable cutting-edge
research that can shape the Internet and Internet applications of the future,
benefiting society. The high-performance software router we build will also be
useful in many other settings. The project will also develop class projects that
involve real-world experiments in this setting, helping to train students in
this critical area.

The project will extend the PEERING testbed, and the extensions will be
documented on the PEERING website: https://peering.ee.columbia.edu/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.