* 2323971
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Discovery of unconventional superconductors by design
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Antia Botana, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 499,995.00

Non-technical abstract: Superconductivity is a quantum phenomenon where
electricity flows with zero resistance below a critical temperature. High
temperature superconductivity has the promise to revolutionize energy
generation, storage, and distribution. Despite the discoveries of
unconventional, high-temperature superconductivity in copper and iron-based
materials, known superconductors cannot be widely exploited as they become
superconducting at very low temperatures. Discovering new superconductors and
increasing their transition temperatures has been limited by the lack of
consensus about the necessary ingredients that give rise to superconductivity in
these families of materials. This DMREF project seeks to exploit the
characteristics (descriptors) of the known copper- and iron-based
superconductors as design criteria in the search for new ambient-pressure
superconducting materials. Promising materials will be synthesized in a tight
feedback loop between theory and experiment. This project will also provide
educational opportunities for students in high school and at the beginning of
their undergraduate studies.

Technical Abstract: This DMREF project will accelerate the discovery of new
superconducting materials through a multi-disciplinary team that unites
experience in materials synthesis, local probes, and computation. To design and
simulate the new superconductors this research will use computational tools
including density functional theory (DFT) and dynamical mean field theory (DMFT)
to predict both the crystal and electronic structures of candidate correlated
electron materials. The most promising predicted materials will then be
synthesized by combining two traditionally disparate forms of materials
synthesis -- advanced thin film deposition by reactive oxide molecular beam
epitaxy and low-temperature soft chemistry -- to make metastable materials that
could not previously be realized. The materials will then be interrogated by
bulk and local probes to map resistivity, structure, orbital
polarization/hybridization, phonons, and spin interactions. Our approach closes
the loop between the prediction of materials with our high temperature
superconductivity descriptors and direct measurement of these properties. The
resulting large datasets will be Artificial Intelligence-ready and can be
correlated to build structure-property relationships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.