* 2323424
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Accelerating the Commercial Readiness  of Organic Semiconductor Systems (ACROSS)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Yueh-Lin (Lynn) Loo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 440,000.00

Non-technical Description: The future of electronics, displays and lighting,
large-area power generation and storage, and sensors for medical and national
security applications requires the continued development of new materials to
meet the ever more complex scientific and engineering challenges presented by
these technologies. Carbon-based (organic) semiconductors offer opportunities to
meet and even exceed the performance metrics required for these applications.
However, many questions remain as to which organic semiconductors best fit each
of these applications and how best to make them, as they themselves can be
complex. To tackle these challenges and accelerate the commercial readiness of
organic semiconductors, the ACROSS (Accelerating the Commercial Readiness of
Organic Semiconductor Systems) team brings together expertise from chemistry,
physics, device engineering, materials science, and modeling and data science to
speed up applications-specific materials design. Notably, ACROSS provides a
distinct, multidisciplinary environment to train the next generation of diverse
and inquisitive scientists and engineers, where computers and machines will be
vital to drive discovery.

Technical Description: The multi-scale and multi-parameter natures of electronic
and optical processes in carbon-based organic semiconductors are critical
features that determine successful function of these materials in a diverse
array of technologies. These characteristics, coupled with the need for material
uniformity over large areas and environmental and operational stability when
incorporated in devices, inhibit the widespread adoption of organic
semiconductors in commercial applications. To confront this challenge, the
ACROSS (Accelerating the Commercial Readiness of Organic Semiconductor Systems)
team brings together expertise, in the context of the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI), in materials synthesis and characterization, machine-informed
and data-driven materials design, theory, and device development and deployment
to accelerate the commercial readiness of organic semiconductors. The ACROSS
research objectives are to: 1) Expand machine-informed organic semiconductor-
design tools and access through extension of an already-comprehensive data
infrastructure and associated machine-learning (ML) infrastructure; 2) Co-design
molecular and crystal/material structures and processing parameters to
facilitate the development of organic semiconductors spreadable over large areas
with uniform and stable prescribed properties; and, 3) Apply optimized organic
semiconductor and process conditions to create X-ray detectors and thin-film
transistor (TFT) arrays across large areas. Key outcomes of ACROSS will be: 1)
An expanded data infrastructure and tools for materials discovery with a focus
on democratizing global data and tool access; 2) Software developed to capture
organic semiconductor characterization and device data into structured formats
to enable the creation of ML models for organic semiconductor property
prediction; 3) Organic semiconductors optimized for high charge-carrier
mobility, radiation sensitivity, and environmental and operational stability;
and, 4) Co-designed molecular and processing parameters to produce organic
semiconductors for large-area applications that span prototype TFTs and
radiation dosimeters (mm scale) to TFT arrays and high-resolution radiation
imagers (cm to m scale). Further, ACROSS will build on and establish pipelines
to recruit and mentor undergraduate and graduate researchers who are
underrepresented in STEM from our nearby communities and institutions to equip
them with the technical skills required to enter a broad, interdisciplinary
technical and data-driven workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.