* 2323969
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Architecting DNA Nanodevices into Metamaterials, Transducing Materials, and Assembling Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Gaurav Arya, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2027
* USD 550,000.00

Soft architected materials self-assembled from nanoscale building blocks could
have far-reaching applications in sensing, soft-robotics, energy, information
storage, and medicine. Materials constructed from biological building blocks are
attractive because they can integrate the advantages of biomolecular systems
such as adaptability in response to external stimuli, capacity to dynamically
interact with other materials, and ability to self-heal after chemical or
mechanical degradation. DNA self-assembly provides a promising approach for
creating such nano-architected materials due to its ability to produce precise
nanostructures of unprecedented geometric complexity, tunable mechanical
properties, and dynamic reconfiguration. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports fundamental
research focused on developing self-assembled materials constructed from DNA
with adaptable structures and unique mechanical properties, signal processing
capabilities, and the ability to form a variety of materials from a single
reconfigurable building block. The research is closely aligned with the
Materials Genome Initiative, which seeks to accelerate materials discovery and
deployment through integration of computational, experimental, and data-driven
advances. In addition, the award will provide unique training for graduate and
undergraduate students in DNA nanotechnology, biochemistry, molecular
simulations, machine learning, and multi-scale modeling. All training
opportunities will be leveraged to benefit students from underrepresented
groups. Additionally, the results of the project will be disseminated through
workshops that will engage broader research communities.

This research project will advance the functional properties of architected DNA
materials by integrating unique mechanical, signal-transducing, and shape-
morphing properties. These materials will be constructed from nanoscale DNA
building blocks with precisely designed structure and tailored mechanical and
dynamic properties. These units will be assembled into larger materials
consisting of many devices that interact with each other to coordinate the
structure and mechanical response of the materials and achieve functions like
transducing signals. Design principles will be established for these materials
using molecular simulation and machine learning approaches to rapidly identify
nanodevice and assembly designs for on-demand material properties. The team has
a highly collaborative approach that combines expertise in DNA nanomaterials,
single-molecule measurements, molecular and mesoscopic modeling, and machine
learning. Using these capabilities, the team will focus on three goals: design,
construct and implement (i) mechanical metamaterials self-assembled from
compliant DNA origami nanostructures, (ii) signal transducing materials based on
dynamic DNA devices, and (iii) polymorphic networks from assembly of
reconfigurable multi-arm DNA origami nanodevices.

This project is supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) of the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.