* 2323100
* CSR: Small: Learning and Management in Tiered Memory Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Janki Bhimani, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 514,704.00

Tiered memory systems are important for companies and organizations that need to
manage vast amounts of data while keeping costs under control. They help to
improve performance and efficiency by reducing the time it takes to access data,
and also reduce the overall cost of computing systems by providing a more cost-
effective solution for storing large amounts of data. The research objective of
this proposed project is to design new tiered memory management techniques for
in-memory databases and analytic frameworks. We will explore the power of
machine learning (ML) as well as its limits and overheads as a more general,
adaptable solution in improving many aspects such as scanning, migration,
allocation, parameter tuning, and task scheduling to optimize the performance,
QoS, and resource utilization. This research will allow designing better tiered
memory systems for rapidly changing workloads. The proposed comprehensive
approach to applying ML to tiered memories will generate new guidelines and
leave a significant impact on many areas that are dependent on processing a
large amount of data. This project will share the findings with undergraduate
and graduate students through computer science programs and open up career
opportunities to students from underrepresented groups and first-generation
college students. This project will disseminate the proposed techniques into the
industry and foster technology transfer through new industrial collaborations.
The developed infrastructure will be available to the research community through
a web-based portal.

This research makes empirical contributions to the system-ML co-design space by
tackling major challenges posed by evolving large-scale memory-intensive
applications. Specifically, it advances the state of knowledge regarding, (1)
how to design and develop a machine learning-based dynamic memory tiering system
that is designed to ensure that the right data is in the right tier at the right
time?; (2) how to use expert domain knowledge for each ML design decision such
that the efficiency and the overhead of the final model are manageable and
useful in real systems?; (3) how to design interactive frameworks that allow the
user to modify the internal resources and parameters of the tiered memory
system?; (4) how to enable novices to configure tiered memory systems with
respect to their workloads and data processing requirements to obtain high
performance and resource utilization?; and (5) how to derive ML models to
predict the future workload patterns and accordingly configure the tiered memory
systems in advance for better performance?; and Thus, to design sustainable ML-
based tiered memory systems, exploring the trade-off between performance, QoS,
and resource utilization by using different ML models for various design
decisions is very important.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.