* 2323936
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Data-Driven Discovery of the Processing Genome for Heterogenous Superalloy Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Andrea Hodge, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) funded
project aims to revolutionize the creation of novel engineering alloys by
focusing on the relationship between the process of production and the
material's resultant microstructure - the internal structure invisible to the
naked eye. This relationship is a crucial but less-explored segment of the
material science lifecycle, yet directly connects processing to performance.
Using cutting-edge machine learning and data science, the project team will
build a platform, named as DRAGONS (Data-driven Recursive AI-powered Generator
of Optimized Nanostructured Superalloys), to discover these connections,
enabling more nuanced control over material production. DRAGONS will prescribe
ideal processing conditions to achieve a specific material microstructure. This
project carries broad significance, with the potential to drive advancements in
diverse sectors that rely on novel materials including electronics, healthcare,
energy, and transportation. Additionally, the project's educational outreach
activities aim to inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers by
providing a more diverse, inclusive, and sustainable pathway into these fields.
Hence, this research carries potential to catalyze scientific advancement,
foster economic growth, and enhance educational outcomes.

This DMREF project focuses on harnessing machine learning and data science to
advance understanding of the processing-microstructure relationships in the
production of novel materials, a key, yet underexplored facet of the Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI). The research team will develop a data-driven platform,
named as Data-driven Recursive AI-powered Generator of Optimized Nanostructured
Superalloys (DRAGONS), to demystify the complex relationships inherent in the
creation of multi-phase, heterogeneous nanostructured materials (HNMs). DRAGONS
will utilize predictive models to interpret microstructure attributes based on
given processing conditions and, in a reciprocal manner, provide processing
parameters required to generate a predefined microstructure. Capitalizing on
expertise in magnetron sputtering and heat treatment (MS+HT), the research team
aims to engineer intricate heterogeneous designs in Ni-based superalloys. An
iterative research framework encompasses synthesis and microstructural design,
microstructure characterization, atomistic simulation, and mesoscale modeling,
and each cycle will refine DRAGONS, fostering stronger links between processing
descriptors and microstructure features. The broader impacts of this work span
the potential to reshape engineered alloy development and to foster
collaborations with NIST scientists. Furthermore, educational programs targeted
at developing a diverse, skilled workforce in materials engineering underscore
the project's commitment to society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.