* 2323102
* Constructing a 1.5-million-year time series of magmatic and hydrothermal activity at the Juan de Fuca ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Peter Huybers, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 16,900.00

Ocean ridges are the sites of 80% of Earth’s volcanism. These features emit
carbon dioxide and exert an important control on the chemical composition of the
oceans through deep sea hot springs. The volcanoes are aligned along the 60,000
kilometer long ocean ridge system, where plates spread apart to create the sea
floor. Studies of these volcanoes have been restricted to recent volcanic
activity, because as the plates spread apart the volcanoes are covered by
sediment and become inaccessible. For this reason, there is a present day
snapshot of ocean ridge volcanism, but little possibility to study how it varies
with one of the most important parameters of Earth science—time. Many aspects of
geological phenomena cannot be understood without knowledge of their variations
through time, called “time series”. For example, time series of climate show
that that Earth passes into and out of ice ages, and that global warming is
happening. New discoveries now permit the construction time series for ocean
ridges by taking sediment cores along transects perpendicular to ocean ridges.
The cores will be used to study volcanic glass that is preserved in the
sediment. In particular, the time series will allow tests of the hypothesis that
ice age cycles may influence cycles of ocean ridge volcanism and associated
hydrothermal activity. Cruises to the Juan de Fuca ridge just off the coasts of
Oregon and Washington will permit time series of one million years or more to be
obtained for the first time. This project will provide support for undergraduate
students to participate in the research cruise. In addition, the project will
support an international conference and contribute to a museum exhibit at the
Harvard Museum of Natural History.

The European Research Council (ERC) has awarded a research grant for the
scientific analyses to investigate time-series of ridge processes through a
systematic coring program along transects perpendicular to the Juan de Fuca
Ridge. The ERC grant to four principle investigators (three at GEOMAR in Germany
and one at Harvard) did not include funding for collecting the sediment cores at
sea. This proposal funds the ship time to obtain the necessary samples. A
preliminary 11 day leg with the AUV SENTRY will obtain sediment thickness as
well as high resolution bathymetry to guide the coring. Then, a 21 day leg will
carry out 70 cores on three transects, two to the west of the ridge at different
distances from the ridge transform intersection, and one to the east. The cruise
would produce the first continuous, co-registered time series of glass
compositions, hydrothermal activity and bathymetry over the 0 to 1Ma time
scales. Time-series of basalt and sediment compositions at ocean ridges have
been inaccessible because sea floor is rapidly covered by sediment and basalts
are altered or have low potassium contents, making dating problematic. The
104-106 year time scale in particular is central for testing a host of
hypotheses for mid-ocean ridges, from the existence and time scales of
tectonic/magmatic cycles, to the continuity of magma chambers and hydrothermal
systems, to possible relationships between glacial cycles and ridge processes
since the Pleistocene. Preliminary data from cores near the ridge axis show that
each core is likely to preserve 50-100ka time series of fresh glasses with
interesting variations. Closely spaced cores will be used to obtain overlapping
time series with the aim of constructing a long a continuous time series back to
one million years. The Juan de Fuca region has the benefit of previous cores
that show robust age models are possible. The program includes sediment
geochemistry for age models and hydrothermal activity, major and trace elements
of glasses, radiogenic isotope analyses, volcanological evaluation, modeling of
mantle melting, and quantitative statistical and time-series modeling. This
program holds the promise of opening new frontiers of time and methodology that
may have far-reaching implications for the investigation and understanding of
ocean ridges. Broader impacts include training multiple graduate students and
post-docs in state of the art techniques, education and participation of Harvard
undergraduates on the cruises, an international conference on interactions
between glacial cycles and solid earth processes, and an exhibit at the Harvard
Natural History Museum which receives more than 250,000 visitors per year
including many K-12 students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.