* 2323331
* RUI: Probing the interplay between magnetism and relativistic fermions in the Weyl semimetals PrAlGe1-xSix with infrared spectroscopy and magneto-spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Catalin Martin, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 130,645.00

Non-technical Abstract: Creating more efficient electronic devices, renewable
and sustainable energy sources, or increasing computational speed and
information storage capabilities rely on discovering and exploiting novel
properties of materials. In recent years, a new class of semiconductors have
emerged, featuring “massless” charge carriers, i.e. Dirac fermions, with large
electronic mobility, and hence allowing transport of electricity with low power
losses. In addition, topological particularities make it possible to also
control the magnetic property (spin) of electrical charges. This project aims to
probe and characterize the properties of Dirac fermions with topologically
protected spin in a recently discovered class of semiconductors, by means of
low-temperature and broad-band magneto-optical spectroscopy. Exposing the
samples to electromagnetic radiation with frequency spanning three orders of
magnitude (from terahertz to ultraviolet), cooling them to negative 450 F, and
in the presence of external magnetic field, the intrinsic electronic and
magnetic properties of Dirac fermions, and possibly their potential for
technological applications are explored. In addition to its scientific
relevance, this project provides summer research opportunities and hands-on
experimental skills to a significant number of college students from a
predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI). It also allows the principal
investigator to continue involvement in outreach and mentor high school students
from underrepresented groups during summer programs.

Technical Abstract: In Weyl semimetals, breaking of inversion and/or time-
reversal symmetries give rise to bulk massless (Dirac) electrons with protected
spin chirality (Weyl fermions), making them promising candidates for emerging
technological applications, such as quantum computing or spin-based devices
(spintronics). This project involves low temperature infrared magneto-
spectroscopy measurements, combined with density functional calculations, in
order to probe and characterize Weyl fermions in a particularly relevant system,
the REAlX semimetals (where RE is one of the rare earth elements Pr, La or Ce
and X is Si or Ge). Touching of Dirac (linear) electronic bands gives rise to
both point (type-I Weyl) and line nodes (type-II Weyl), and depending on the
rare earth element, both non-magnetic and magnetic ground states can be realized
in REAlX. Hallmarks of these so-called Weyl cones can be found in the intra and
inter-band transition spectrum between electronic branches, as well as in the
energy scaling of quantized Landau levels with applied magnetic field, thus
making infrared magneto- spectroscopy a particularly relevant tool. The primary
motivation of this research is to investigate the coupling between massless
carriers and magnetic interactions, as it can generate novel electronic states
and hold promises for technological applications. Specifically, the aim is to
probe the existence of Weyl cones in REAlX, and to characterize their extent,
shape and position in momentum space. In addition, by studying the effects of
magnetic ordering on Weyl cones, the goal is to answer some open questions in
the field, such as the origins of magnetic coupling between the rare earth ions,
or the role of Berry curvature on the realization of the anomalous Hall effect,
observed in this system. These are important fundamental problems and at the
same time, may provide new practical venues for spin manipulation without
application of external magnetic field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.