* 2323219
* IMR: MT: RABBITS: A measurement toolkit for Reproducible Assessment of BroadBand Internet Topology and Speed
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ka Pui Mok, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 175,365.00

During the COVID-19 pandemic, accelerated adoption and use of online
applications, such as video streaming and conferencing, amplified concerns
regarding how residential and mobile broadband performance affects the user's
quality of experience. Identifying underserved communities and improving their
broadband performance is a crucial step to bridge the digital divide in the
United States. However, the existing speed test ecosystem, which plays a vital
role in measuring broadband performance, lacks standard approaches in terms of
deployment, implementation, configuration, and measurement metrics. These
inconsistencies can result in unreliable test results.

This project aims to design, implement and deploy a measurement toolkit for
Reproducible Assessment of BroadBand Internet Topology and Speed (RABBITS). This
toolkit offers comprehensive and longitudinal datasets to facilitate scientific
studies on topology and performance of evolving speed test infrastructure. The
software included in RABBITS enables reproducible speed tests by supporting the
use of consistent test parameters, even across different test platforms. The
project seeks to provide rigorous Internet measurement capabilities that can
support broadband consumer protection efforts, and identify opportunities to
improve coverage in unserved/under-served communities. Additional information
about this project can be found at https://rabbits.caida.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.