* 2323298
* Institute for Research and Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* G.J. Peter Elmer, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2028
* USD 8,300,000.00

The quest to understand the fundamental building blocks of matter in the
Universe and their interactions is one of the oldest and most ambitious of human
scientific endeavors. In Elementary Particles Physics, the most successful
theory to date is known as the "Standard Model" of particle physics.
Experimental facilities such as CERN's Large Hadron Collider (LHC) represent a
huge step forward in this quest as evidenced by the discovery of the Higgs
boson. The next phase of this global scientific project will be the High-
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC), which will collect data starting circa 2029 and
continue into the 2030's. The primary science goal at the HL-LHC is to search
for physics beyond the Standard Model. While the Standard Model has been
successful in explaining experimental evidence to date, scientists know that it
is not be complete, because it does not account for Dark Matter or neutrino
masses, for example. In the HL-LHC era, the ATLAS and CMS experiments will
record 10 times as much data from 100 times as many collisions as were used to
discover the Higgs boson. As such, significant R&D advances must be achieved in
the software for acquiring, managing, processing and analyzing HL-LHC data to
realize the scientific potential of the upgraded accelerator and detectors and
the planned LHC science program. In this context, the Institute for Research and
Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP) will play a leading
role to deliver the software and computing systems required to meet the
challenges posed by the LHC in the High Luminosity era.

This project addresses key elements of the international "Roadmap for HEP
Software and Computing R&D for the 2020s" and implements the updated "IRIS-HEP
Strategic Plan for the Next Phase of Software Upgrades for HL-LHC Physics"
published in December 2022. IRIS-HEP will advance R&D in three high-impact
areas: (1) development of innovative algorithms for data reconstruction and
triggering; (2) development of highly performant analysis systems that reduce
`time-to-insight' and maximize the HL-LHC scientific potential; and (3)
development of data organization, management and access (DOMA) systems for the
community's upcoming Exabyte era. IRIS-HEP will sustain investments in today's
distributed high-throughput computing (DHTC) and build an integration path to
deliver its Facilities R&D activities into the distributed production
infrastructure. As an intellectual hub, IRIS-HEP will lead efforts to (1) build
convergence research between HEP and the Cyberinfrastructure, Data Science and
Computer Science communities for novel approaches to address the compelling
software and computing challenges of HL-LHC era HEP experiments, (2) engage
broadly with researchers and students from U.S. Universities and labs
emphasizing professional development and training, and (3) sustain HEP software
and underlying knowledge related to the algorithms and their implementations
over the two decades required. In addition to enabling the best possible HL-LHC
science, IRIS-HEP will bring together the larger Cyberinfrastructure and HEP
communities to address the complex issues at the intersection of Exascale high-
throughput computing and Exabyte-scale datasets in ways broadly relevant to many
research domains with emerging data-intensive needs. The education and training
provided by the Institute in the form of summer schools and a fellows program
will contribute to a highly qualified STEM workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.