* 2323134
* Conference: INTERNATIONAL SUMMER SCHOOL ON DATA SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING IN HEALTHCARE, MEDICINE AND BIOLOGY, JUNE 4 -10, 2023, CRETE, GREECE:
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 22,501.00

Innovations in engineering and technology have significantly promoted and
advanced scientific discoveries over the last few decades. These innovations
have not only been rapid, but have also increased the quality and reduced the
cost of healthcare and inspired new research areas, such as precision medicine.
Additionally, these scientific discoveries reveal the importance of increased
collaboration between researchers in medicine and engineering to address the
problems and obstacles that arise in health care, and, most notably, for the
development of new education directions to translate medical science and
engineering concepts into curriculums and clinical research for the preparation
of the next generation global healthcare workforce. The annual International
Summer School BIO-X series, which was initiated in 2001, was designed to expose
undergraduate and graduate students to these new research areas in an exciting
international, collaborative, and interdisciplinary setting. In keeping with
this plan, the focus of this year’s/the 20th summer school, which will be held
June 4-10, 2023, Crete, Greece, with the participation of 30 undergraduate and
graduate students and 10 faculty members, is on Data Science, which has the
power to move the needle on critical issues in healthcare and medicine and shed
light on the biological basis of health and disease using the tools, techniques,
and theoretical underpinnings for enabling machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence (AI) to extract “knowledge” from large and complex data sets. NSF
funds will be used to support lodging, meal, and flight costs of U.S. students
attending the conference.

In recent decades, engineering and technological innovations have been rapid,
increased the quality and reduced the cost of health and inspired new research
areas to further contribute to global health care. This international summer
school will focus on Data Science, sometimes defined as “a field of study that
combines domain expertise, programming skills, and knowledge of mathematics and
statistics to extract meaningful insights from data." Machine Learning (ML) and
Artificial intelligence (AI) have already led to significant successes in many
health-related fields, including medical image classification, segmentation,
prediction, and decision making. The summer school aims to highlight and discuss
the challenges and opportunities of Data Science innovations in healthcare,
medicine, and biology and how these innovations can be translated into cutting-
edge healthcare and biomedical engineering curricula. An international group of
10 faculty members (U.S., Germany, Israel, Singapore, and England) with diverse
backgrounds (Data Science, biology, engineering, math, computer science, etc.)
will give lectures and take part in panel discussions in which students are
active participants. To illustrate their own research, student participants will
provide posters that can be reviewed and discussed throughout the meeting. The
panels will also focus on the challenges of making a career in the rapidly
growing, interdisciplinary fields of Data Science in healthcare, medicine, and
biology, from being hired as part of a team and finding exciting new research
opportunities all the way up to becoming a team leader and what to look for when
organizing that team and choosing its members. Options will be discussed for
senior undergraduate and graduate studies and research internationally as well
as within the U.S. and for collaboration among researchers and students
internationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.