* 2323131
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Coastal, Ocean, and Marine Enterprise Inclusion  and Network-building (COME IN)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Samuel Lake, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 09/30/2024
* USD 69,553.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this award is to
create the Coastal, Ocean, and Marine Enterprise Inclusion and Network-building
(COME IN). The project includes a series of facilitated virtual and in-person
engagement opportunities that bring together scientists, stakeholders, and
partners from various coastal, ocean and marine (COM) disciplines to understand
the dynamic needs of students from underrepresented and under-resourced
communities, establish a collaborative infrastructure to enhance and expand
internship programs for underrepresented minorities (URM) based on Sea Grant’s
Community-Engaged Internship program, and estimate resource needs to
successfully form new and expanded frameworks that will ensure the persistence
and success of URM students in the COM workforce. In addition to facilitating
participant learning and relationship building, COME IN promotes enhanced
communication and collaboration among various COM organizations, institutions,
and businesses. The project utilizes multiple ways of capturing diverse
perspectives, including the lived personal and professional experiences of
individuals from underserved and underrepresented communities who may not be
able to participate in virtual or in-person COME IN meetings.

This planning project focuses on developing a shared vision among partners,
partnerships, goals and metrics, and developing robust mechanisms of
collaborative infrastructure for sharing lessons learned and best practices. The
broadening participation challenge proposed by COME IN is based on two
foundational questions: (i) how can COM focused professional societies,
government and non-governmental organizations, businesses, and academia engender
justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion principles, and (ii) how can
partnering organizations effectively support, measure, and replicate URM success
in COM science disciplines at the undergraduate level and beyond. To address
this challenge, COME IN fosters discussions around the following questions: what
are the unique needs and challenges that either facilitate or prevent students
from underrepresented and under-resourced communities from pursuing a degree in
COM science fields; which tools, methods and practices are most effective in
terms of supporting the participation, persistence, and success of these
students in COM fields; how does integration of traditional and local knowledge
with western approaches of doing science contribute to the development of
students’ identity as scientists; in what ways can professional societies,
government and non-governmental organizations, businesses, and academia create
more inclusive and safe working environments that foster students’ sense of
belonging; what is the impact of long-term cohort building, professional
development, and access to culturally-responsive mentors and role models on
student retention and success; and lastly, what measures and metrics can be used
to assess the effectiveness of mentorship and role models in COM science fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.