* 2323752
* DMREF: Magneto-electro-optically coupled hybrid metamaterial thin film platform for photonic integrated circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Minghao Qi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,999,884.00

Non-technical Description: Unlike electronic circuits, photonic integrated
circuits (PICs) use photons (small, discrete packets of light), rather than
electrons, to transmit and process information. While photons provide higher
transmission speeds and information capacity, achieving directed signal
transmission, optical isolation, and switching remain critical challenges with
current weakly-nonlinear materials. Despite silicon providing an established
platform for low-cost, high-volume manufacturing, integrating many dissimilar
materials on top poses significant processing and materials compatibility
challenges. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) award supports research to develop a class of novel hybrid materials
(consisting of two constituents at the nanoscale), which will ultimately form
several key building blocks for universal, large-scale PICs. These new hybrid
materials provide tailorable optical properties, well-coupled functionalities,
easy integration at the device level, and compatibility with semiconductor
manufacturing. The scope of the work provides the foundation for a PIC platform
that can be manufactured at scale, actualizing the benefits of photon-based
circuits, which include: higher speed, lower temperature sensitivity, large
integration capacity, and lower costs and carbon footprint, compared to typical
integrated circuit (IC) devices. These advances will provide vital new
capabilities in telecommunications, healthcare, sensing, etc., to address
critical needs in the Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors
(CHIPS) and Science Act through highly efficient device concepts and
manufacturing approaches. Furthermore, the research findings will be
incorporated into student research training at both graduate and undergraduate
levels and education modules for a co-developed course and summer research
programs for high school teachers and students.

Technical Description: The scientific goal of the DMREF project is to advance
understanding of electro-optical and magneto-optical coupling effects in complex
nanoscale hybrid metamaterials with a two-phase hybrid thin film platform to
harness the coupling mechanisms between charges, spins, and photons. The
technological goal is to demonstrate several key building blocks for future
large-scale PICs, including highly efficient and integrated optical switches,
nonreciprocal devices, and magneto-optic sensors for PICs, as a proof of concept
for this new hetero-integration paradigm. Specifically, the project will develop
a novel hybrid thin film platform with alloyed nanopillars in a dielectric
(e.g., BaTiO3) matrix that simultaneously exhibits a magneto-optic effect, an
electro-optic effect, and a plasmonic effect, potentially offering the
versatility in achieving optical switching and one-way transmission enhanced by
plasmonic effects. Echoing the Materials Genome Initiative’s call for
“integrating experiment, computation, and theory,” the project creates an
effective feedback loop platform by combining experimental efforts (hybrid
materials growth, optical property characterization, and device integration and
demonstration), theory and modeling (CALculation of PHAse Diagrams (CALPHAD) +
phase field modeling (PFM) and mesoscale electromagnetic modeling), and
expedited materials prediction and model properties estimation to accelerate the
hybrid metamaterial design process. Major research tasks include: (1) to explore
alloyed metallic phase designs for enhanced magneto-optical coupling in metal-
oxide hybrid systems and measure on-chip coupling properties; (2) to implement
strain engineering for enhanced electro-optical coupling in oxide-based hybrid
systems and demonstrate on-chip modulation and device trimming; and (3) to
characterize and integrate hybrid systems to form optical devices for potential
optical isolation, switching and sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.