* 2323303
* Unraveling Solar Wind Variations in the Last Solar Cycle Using Global Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Nishtha Sachdeva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 660,242.00

Understanding solar wind variations is one of the most important topics in
heliophysics. The solar wind is a driver of space weather, which impacts space-
based technology. This project will investigate whether Alfven wave turbulence-
based models can consistently explain the coronal heating and solar wind
acceleration throughout the solar cycle. The Global 3-D numerical model Alfven
Wave Solar atmosphere Model (AWSoM) will be used and further developed by
incorporating additional physics. The work also supports an early career woman
scientist, graduate student, and undergraduate students.

This project uses the state-of-the-art physics-based magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
model, AWSoM within the Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) to investigate
if the physics within AWSoM is sufficient to explain solar wind variations
observed in the last solar cycle. The science objective will be achieved by
comparing the simulated solar wind with various in-situ solar wind observations
in the last solar cycle. The team will investigate whether the simulated Alfven
wave energy densities agree with the observations during different phases of the
solar cycle. The Poynting flux and transverse correlation length parameters will
be varied and the AWSoM simulated data generated from these runs will be
compared to in-situ data at various locations in the heliosphere, as measured by
NASA missions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.