* 2323077
* I-Corps:  Hardware Acceleration of Scientific Computing and Intelligent Instrumentation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Dwaipayan Chakraborty, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of faster microprocessors for scientific computing applications.
Currently, scientific computing relies heavily on supercomputers comprised of
large clusters of general-purpose microprocessors. Such an approach is
expensive, and does not deliver the optimal performance for scientific computing
applications. In the proposed technology, the hardware-software framework under
development may provide a faster way for physicists, biologists, chemists,
environmental scientists, and interdisciplinary researchers to run their
simulations faster, and with greater ease. In addition, the proposed technology
may provide for more enriched computing systems integrated with multiple types
of microprocessors, not simply general-purpose microprocessors or graphics-
focused graphics processing units. Specialized microprocessor designs may be
suitable for low-power applications in portable instrumentation devices. It is
anticipated that customized chips to be integrated into a broad array of
application areas such as aerospace, pharmaceutical and multi-physics systems
with a need for real-time and predictive control.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of application-specific
microprocessors including a robust programming framework. The proposed
technology addresses the development of relevant algorithms to analyze the
computational behavior of targeted software applications. The application-
specific microprocessors developed for this project will focus primarily on
accelerating the numerical solution of differential equations. Differential
equations form the mathematical basis for many computational dynamics systems,
and it is important to solve them in a rapid and efficient manner. The
popularization of open-source instruction set architectures has enabled new
microprocessor design while the advancement of field programmable gate array
(FPGA) technology has enabled rapid prototyping and evaluation. The intersection
of these developments has facilitated development of target application-specific
microprocessor designs at low cost. Initial results have shown that the designed
hardware accelerator attains up to 4.8x speedup, at the cost of merely 13.3%
more hardware resources and 8.1% additional power dissipation. In the future, it
also may be possible to design low-power microprocessors that can perform signal
analysis on-board measurement instruments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.