* 2323170
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling biological and environmental drivers of diversification in the Andean flora
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Rosana Zenil-Ferguson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 431,424.00

The tropical Andes of South America is one of the worldâ€™s richest biodiversity
hotspots. This diversity likely evolved due to the complex environmental and
geological history of this region. However, exactly how plant diversity arose
from the combination of mountain uplift, the development of new habitats, and
species interactions is unclear. This research aims to understand how these
factors led to plant diversity in cloud forests and high-elevation grasslands.
The researchers will develop new software to compare plant genomes to understand
the ancestry of four groups of flowering plants in the Andes. The project will
also result in new mathematical models to test the importance of different
factors in shaping diversity in these plant groups. These new methods will have
broad application to studies of biodiversity in the Andes and beyond.
Additionally, this project aims to train the next generation of scientists in
the study of biodiversity through a variety of interrelated activities,
including: (1) a course for undergraduates to do guided genomic research; (2)
collaborative training for students; and (3) computational training for diverse
students.

The project will first establish well-supported phylogenetic hypotheses for each
of the four focal clades of Andean plants using low-coverage and targeted genome
sequence data. Samples will be collected from Colombia as well as museums. This
work highlights the importance of natural history collections in cutting-edge
biological research, and new fieldwork will add to those collections. A
component of the research will be to develop new approaches to address
complexities common in plant genomes, including polyploidy and paralogy, that
can affect estimates of evolutionary relationships. These methods will be made
available through open-source software such that other researchers can easily
estimate phylogenies and examine support for phylogenetic hypotheses using
sequence data. Second, the project will develop new models that jointly infer
the roles of dispersal and trait evolution in species diversification. These
methods will be applied to phylogenomic, morphological, and distribution data
collected for this project. These methods will also be made publicly available
for widespread use. Finally, by comparing the roles of biogeographic and
ecological processes in generating diversity in these clades, the research will
address the generality or idiosyncrasy of the processes facilitating rapid
radiation in tropical Andean plants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.