* 2323750
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Informed Design of Epitaxial Organic Electronics and Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Noel Giebink, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 499,892.00

Non-technical Description: A molecular interface is a space where two different
regions of molecular matter meet. Molecular interfaces form the active regions
of organic electronic devices, such as light-emitting diodes, solar cells, and
transistors. The structure and resulting properties of these interfaces
determine their functionality and, thus, device performance. For decades,
organic electronic devices have been based on disordered films. The opposite is
true for inorganic devices, which are based on highly ordered crystalline films
with epitaxial interfaces, where the crystal matrix is continuous across the
interface because of their superior electronic properties. This research will
explore organic epitaxial interfaces as a new paradigm for high-performance
organic electronic and photonic devices. This project will develop computational
tools to predict molecular interface structure and properties. Simulations will
inform the selection of candidate materials for epitaxial growth and device
fabrication. This work will open up a new direction in the field of organic
electronics and deliver a new materials platform for more efficient devices and
hybrid organic-on-inorganic integrated photonics. It will go beyond today’s
trial-and-error approach to organic epitaxy by integrating first principles of
quantum mechanical simulations, predictive machine learning algorithms, and
experiments to validate and inform the models in a tightly coupled feedback
loop.

Technical Description: This research aims to fill a void in organic electronics
where experimental understanding is scant and computational tools are virtually
non-existent. It will advance a fundamental understanding of intermolecular
interactions that govern the epitaxial growth of molecular crystals on both
organic and inorganic substrates. This knowledge will inform the development of
models that can predict experimentally-feasible hetero-structures with targeted
optical and/or electronic properties based on first principles simulations
combined with machine learning. A new approach will be implemented to predict
the outcomes of low-throughput experiments by machine-learned models trained on
data for surrogate descriptors measured by high-throughput experiments at
Carnegie Mellon University’s Cloud Lab facility. The predicted hetero-structures
will be grown via vacuum thermal evaporation and used for device fabrication.
The results of the experiments will feed back into the ab initio modeling and
machine learning algorithms to hone their accuracy. The project will culminate
with the demonstration of new device technologies based on epitaxial organic
interfaces, including more efficient organic solar cells, high-performance
transistors, and integrated photonics. The PIs propose to make algorithms
developed within this project to be implemented in open source, parallel codes
compatible with next-generation supercomputing architectures, and the resulting
datasets made publicly available. In addition, the team will create educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and outreach opportunities
for K-12 students. This project intends to promote US competitiveness in the
global semiconductor industry through technology and workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.