* 2323953
* Conference: Increasing STEM Grant Capacity Across West Virginia
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Suzanne Strait, Higher Education Policy Commission
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 10/31/2024
* USD 99,001.00

The goal of this project is to understand the barriers to research grant
proposal submission and award management success at West Virginia’s four-year
colleges and universities.

As research grant administration has become increasingly complex, the submission
of competitive research grant proposals and management of research grant funding
has become challenging for under-resourced institutions. This project will
create solutions to address these challenges by developing a culture of
grantsmanship and the necessary support mechanisms to ensure sponsored research
success. The project has the potential to be scaled and utilized as a national
model that may be especially applicable to other cohorts of under-resourced
institutions. The project will identify the specific barriers to grant success
by convening regional meetings, followed by a state-wide conference in which
participants from West Virginia’s four-year institutions will identify and
document research grant project successes and barriers. A diverse group of
stakeholders from primarily undergraduate institutions, research universities,
and historically black colleges and universities, including emerging research
institutions, will work collaboratively in this project. In addition, this
project also addresses the need for developing the research enterprise workforce
in West Virginia and activities are included that will grow partnerships with
professional societies to address this issue.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.