* 2323045
* Collaborative Research: Unlocking the Potential of Active Lipid Vesicles for Directed Delivery and Controlled Release of Therapeutic Payloads
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jie Feng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 234,000.00

Directed delivery and controlled release of therapeutic payloads at targeted
locations present substantial opportunities for developing the next generation
of therapeutic delivery systems. Lipid vesicles offer a versatile platform to
accomplish both functionalities in a compatible and integrated manner. These
lipid vesicles are closed structures with a membrane that separates the interior
of the vesicle from the outside environment, similar to the membrane of a
biological cell. This award will leverage the innate encapsulation capacity of
lipid vesicles to enclose both therapeutic payloads and self-propelled
particles, enabling the vesicles to undergo directed motion to targeted
locations and controlled release of the encapsulated payloads. Successful
development of this active vesicle-based drug delivery system will benefit
future healthcare. The award will also provide outreach to K-12 students,
especially students from underrepresented groups, to enhance public
understanding of the challenges and potential biomedical applications of the
project.

The proposed research fuses emerging developments of self-propelled (or active)
particles with newly discovered vesicle responses to light-induced reactions to
create an integrated therapeutic delivery system based on lipid vesicles. By
combining experimental and theoretical investigations, this award aims to
accomplish three specific objectives. The first objective is to examine the
motion of lipid vesicles driven internally by encapsulated active particles,
realizing the directed delivery of lipid vesicles to targeted locations.
Secondly, a non-contact mechanism triggered by photoreactions will be developed
to induce the rupture of a vesicle and thereby the rapid release of its
encapsulated content. Finally, the functionalities achieved in the
aforementioned objectives will be combined in an in-vitro platform to
demonstrate directed delivery and controlled release of therapeutics at targeted
locations for relevant biomedical applications via the use of active vesicles.
Successful completion of this project will advance fundamental understanding of
the complex dynamics of lipid vesicles in these non-equilibrium processes,
identifying key physical parameters and design principles to guide subsequent
developments of active vesicle-based therapeutic delivery systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.