* 2323455
* Training STEM Educators on the Use of Virtual Reality for Teaching Biomolecular Visualization
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Melanie Berkmen, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,669.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding the use of virtual
reality (VR) in biochemistry and molecular biology instruction for undergraduate
chemistry and biology students. VR is a burgeoning field with promise in any
area that involves three-dimensional (3D) object viewing. VR has been used in
medicine to simulate surgical procedures, to provide virtual field experiences
for geology and engineering students and practitioners, and to visualize
molecular structure in drug design and development. Biochemistry and molecular
biology, which are taught as part of undergraduate biology and chemistry
curricula, also require an understanding of 3D shapes, for example through
visualizing how enzymes interact with substrates to catalyze reactions or how
signaling molecules bind to their receptors. The use of VR can help students
understand the 3D nature of these molecular interactions. Adoption of VR in
education has been limited despite strong interest in the field. This workshop
plans to provide training to biochemistry and molecular biology instructors in
the use of VR to visualize molecular structures. Once educators are trained to
use this technology, they will be able to bring it back to their classrooms.
Teaching VR skills to students can contribute to a more highly skilled and
competitive workforce.

The four-part workshop will be conducted in parallel with the 2023 American
Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Transforming Undergraduate
Education in the Molecular Life Sciences conference. The workshop goals are to
provide instruction in contemporary VR hardware and software to visualize
macromolecules, to advance knowledge about the implementation of VR in life
science classrooms, and to develop a community of practice for instructors
interested in using VR in their classrooms. Workshop participants will be
recruited from primarily undergraduate institutions, community colleges,
minority-serving institutions, and research-intensive universities. Project
evaluation will center on faculty perceptions, experience, and attitudes toward
VR, along with follow-up evaluation to gauge the extent of VR integration into
biochemistry and molecular biology classes. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.