* 2323118
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: High-Throughput Screening of Electrolytes for the Next Generation of Rechargeable Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Yang Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2027
* USD 570,000.00

Rechargeable batteries have become one of the most popular energy storage
devices for electric vehicles, electronics, and grid energy storage. Developing
novel electrolytes for the next generation of rechargeable batteries require
more understanding of transport properties, microstructures, and the impact of
microstructure on transport property. In this project, the investigators will
systematically vary the composition and concentration of the electrolytes to
determine the optimum solution for advanced rechargeable batteries. The success
of the proposed research will provide high throughput
experimentation/characterization and machine learning platforms. Moreover, the
integrated research and educational programs will broadly impact the university,
secondary education, and the general public. The research results will be into
the investigators' courses and be used to train undergraduate and graduate
students in the interdisciplinary research areas. New educational outreach
initiatives include having an Electrolyte for Energy Storage workshop for local
high school students and teachers each fall to enhance the broader impact of
this NSF project.

The fundamental interactions in the electrolyte directly determine the solvation
structures, kinetics, and battery performance of the bulk electrolytes.
Understanding the complex interactions and their correlation with electrolyte
performance is significant for exploring their working mechanisms and realizing
the rational design of battery electrolytes. The novelty of this proposal lies
in the use of advanced high-throughput characterization with the help of MD
simulation and machine learning to determine the link between molecular
interactions and the macroscopic properties of battery electrolytes. The
proposal aims to (1) gain a good understanding of the solvation structure
through multimodal characterization methods Raman and X-ray for high throughput
experimentation/characterization. High-throughput X-ray scattering techniques
(USAXS/SAXS/WAXS for APS) will be used to characterize solution organization as
a function of ion composition, ion concentration, and temperature; (2) to
correlate the structure-property relationship by studying transport properties
through high-throughput computational screening studies. A computational
platform will be developed to screen structure/property relationships by AIMD
and MD; (3) A machine learning-based data analysis platform will be created to
predict and identify battery properties by analyzing high-throughput structural
and simulation data.

This project is supported by the Division of Materials Research and the
Chemical, Biological, Environmental Engineering and Transport Systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.