* 2323078
* Extracurricular Instrument Training Experience for Students at a Two-Year College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Virginia Falkenberg, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2027
* USD 649,751.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, implementing,
and studying the effectiveness of early research experiences for two-year
college chemistry and biology students at Georgia State University, Perimeter
College, a predominantly Black institution. Perimeter College (PC) is and an
associate degree granting institution within Georgia State University (GSU) that
functions as a typical community college. The new approach will be of broad
importance as it is intended to engage students in authentic mentored research
activities that connect chemistry and biology learning to students’ lived
experiences. Importantly, this project aims to use readily available
instrumentation combined with student stipends to engage students in a multi-
year research experience. On-going research opportunities will be made available
to students on their home campus and will utilize the collective expertise of
college faculty to guide projects. The project team plans to measure the impact
of the research experiences on students’ development of identity and self-
efficacy in STEM and aims to widely share project materials and study results.
Ultimately, the project will transform the way the institution prepares students
to transfer to a four-year university and is likely to build the confidence that
students need to successfully engage in more rigorous research experiences.

The overall goal of this project is to strengthen student STEM identities and
interest in STEM careers by engaging two-year college chemistry and biology
students in research experiences during their first and second year of the
college experience. The specific objectives of the project are to: 1) create
adaptable research opportunities using resources typically found at two-year
institutions; 2) utilize stipends to incentivize participation in STEM research;
3) provide resources and opportunities for participation in undergraduate
research symposiums; and 4) explore how participation in research may impact
STEM identity among two-year college students from a wide variety of
backgrounds. The project team will partner with an external evaluator to capture
the student experience and assess the impact of early research experiences on
students’ interest in STEM, their readiness to engage in other research
experiences, and their development of STEM identity over time. The results of
the project will be disseminated broadly to the 2-year college STEM community.
The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate
STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects
that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program
description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate
STEM education at two-year colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.