* 2323065
* Enabling Sulfur-Based Beyond-Lithium Metal Batteries via a Mechanistic Understanding of Advanced Hybrid Cathodes and Borate Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* CHUNMEI BAN, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2026
* USD 518,111.00

Using fossil fuels to generate electricity and power transportation is the
primary source of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions that lead to climate
change. The utilization of batteries to store renewable energy, such as solar
and wind, is critical to lessen dependence on nonrenewable resources. However,
lithium-ion batteries used in handheld devices and electric vehicles currently
use expensive and rare materials that are not produced domestically, limiting
affordability and domestic supply chain security. Developing batteries with low-
cost, sustainable, and domestically-sourced materials such as sodium, magnesium,
or calcium could overcome these challenges, but new chemistries are needed to
increase the performance of batteries based on these materials. This research
aims to lead the development of next-generation battery chemistries based on
these elements to support the domestic production of low-cost battery solutions
that increase the competitiveness and independence of the U.S. in the renewable
energy sector. Moreover, this effort promotes inclusivity and fosters the growth
of future scientists and engineers in this field.

Currently, beyond Li-ion batteries have limitations due to their low-capacity
cathodes and poor electrolyte stability. This makes them less competitive in
high-energy density applications. The aim of this project is to create
affordable and high-performance beyond Li-ion batteries that can compete in the
market by researching reversible electrolytes and high-capacity cathodes for
these batteries. The strategy for accomplishing this ambitious goal is to
leverage a combined computational and experimental approach to: 1) investigate a
set of high-energy density hybrid cathodes where sulfur is chemically bound to a
catalytic substrate material, 2) discover advanced electrolytes based on the
tunable borate chemistry, and 3) map the various reaction mechanisms based on
novel cathodes and electrolytes to their macroscopic performance, which will
inform the rational discovery of superior Na, Mg, and Ca anode chemistries. This
mechanistic map will be iteratively applied and refined by computationally
predicting superior hybrid cathodes and borate electrolytes, characterizing
their performance, and revising the mechanistic understanding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.