* 2323231
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel development of a pediatric Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Efrain Torres, ADIALANTE L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
development of techniques that will facilitate the design and development of
affordable, compact, and patient-friendly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
systems. MRI systems are the preferred modality for a range of imaging types,
notably pediatrics, due to their superior diagnostic capabilities, high
resolution, and minimal side effects. However, traditional MRI experiences can
be daunting for children due to the confined and noisy environment, often
leading to alternatives such as the use of anesthesia for an MRI scan or the use
of computerized tomography (CT), which exposes them to high levels of ionizing
radiation. The objective of this project is to innovate novel techniques for
developing a new generation of scanners, with a focus on creating child-friendly
imaging experiences. These groundbreaking techniques have the potential to
introduce new classes of MRI scanners, expand the imaging market, and
democratize MRI systems to communities in need worldwide.

The intellectual merit of this project focuses on the development of B1 imaging
approaches. While traditional MRI scanners rely on B0 gradient coils for spatial
encoding, B1 coils have previously been shown to spatially encode, but they
remain widely under-used and under-developed. The goal of this effort is to
demonstrate the viability and expand upon the B1 imaging approach known as
Frequency-modulated Rabi-Encoded Echoes (aka, FREE), specifically, frequency-
encoded and phase-encoded FREE. FREE is unique from other B1 imaging approaches
because of its high immunity to magnetic imperfections. FREE, unlike other
approaches, can appropriately image in highly inhomogeneous (and inexpensive)
magnets. A scanner built around FREE would take advantage of the cost savings
that come with removing B0 gradient coils and from reducing the homogeneity of a
magnet. An MRI scanner utilizing FREE would be more affordable, compact, and
silent. This project will focus on demonstrating two- and three-dimensional
imaging on a compact, affordable, and inhomogeneous 0.5 Tesla system, thereby
demonstrating the capability of B1 imaging approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.