* 2323096
* Modeling, Control, and Motion Planning of Magnetic-screw Microrobots in Soft Tissue
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 740,283.00

This project promotes the progress of science and advances the national health,
prosperity, and welfare by investigating magnetically-controlled microrobots.
These millimeter-scale microrobots are able to steer through delicate human
tissue and may revolutionize many medical procedures. By steering around
anatomical obstacles, the microrobots have the potential to deliver targeted
medical treatment, such as drugs, diagnostic materials, and/or thermal ablation
to sites in the body that are currently difficult or impossible to reach safely.
These microrobots move through the body via the use of an external rotating
magnetic field, such as a permanent magnet held and rotated by a robot arm on
the outside of the body. However, the way in which these microrobots precisely
move through tissue as a function of the external magnetic field’s motion is not
currently sufficiently understood for use in any clinical application. The
research team will pursue fundamental research to provide needed knowledge in
how these microrobots move through soft tissue, how to precisely control them
along desired paths, and how to plan paths that safely and accurately reach
desired targets in the body. This research involves several disciplines
including computer science, mechanical engineering, mathematical modeling,
control theory, and robot motion planning. The research approach and associated
outreach and educational activities will help to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in robotics, computer science, and mechanical
engineering, as well as positively impact computer-science and engineering
education.

The technical aims of the project are divided into two thrusts. Improving
understanding of magneticscrew microrobots’ mechanics is the focus of the first
research thrust of this project. Prior work has significantly simplified the
mechanics of these devices, resulting in high modeling uncertainty as well as
operating regimes that were deemed unstable due to lack of a complete
understanding. The project will instead pursue a paradigm shift in mechanical
modeling, gathering a fully accurate and principled understanding of the
steering behavior of these robots. Specifically, the research team will
investigate a sequence of increasingly complex modeling methods, fitting to
experimentally gathered data, based on magnetic interaction principles. For the
external magnetic field, the project will consider both uniform fields and
dipole fields. Beyond modeling, how to accurately control and plan motions for
these microrobots is not yet understood; this is the focus of the second
research thrust. The project will first investigate iterative nonlinear control
methods to create path-following algorithms for these robots that are adaptive
and robust to actuation noise and model inaccuracies. Additionally, the project
will investigate motion-planning methods for these robots that account for their
capabilities, leverage learned state sampling, and reason about uncertainty in
their mechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.