* 2323037
* Expanding Geoscience Research Access For Historically Excluded Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elizabeth Long, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2026
* USD 895,841.00

This project supports the Geological Society of America (GSA) Graduate Student
Research Grants (GSRG) program and its three primary goals: 1) Increase
opportunities for students of historically excluded communities to achieve
success in research; 2) Build career skills of students through gainful
experience with grant writing, project management, and research; and 3) Support
graduate student research in the geosciences and strengthen the geoscience
workforce. Geoscience research is highly relevant to society throughout the
United States and the world, impacting important matters such as natural
resources, energy production, climate change, natural hazards, environmental
quality, and more. However, geoscience is one of the least diverse scientific
fields in the United States. Members of racial/ethnic groups that have been
historically excluded from the geosciences make up only ~23% of all U.S.
graduate students enrolled in the geosciences, compared to ~38% of U.S. graduate
students in other STEM subjects, and ~43% of the overall U.S. population. To
address these gaps, GSA aims to enhance its GSRG program with a new Module aimed
at increasing the number of students from these historically excluded
communities who apply for and receive geoscience research grants. The student
grant recipients will use their funding to generate concrete scientific results
in a variety of geoscience disciplines, such as paleontology, geophysics,
volcanology, and more.

This new Module is part of GSA’s longstanding Graduate Student Research Grant
(GSRG) program, which has provided over 20 million dollars to more than 12,000
geoscientists throughout the last 92 years. The key elements of this Module are:
1) Funding the research of an increasing number of graduate students from
historically excluded communities; 2) Further leveraging of GSA’s On To the
Future (OTF) program, which provides travel funds and mentoring to students from
historically excluded communities to help them attend and participate in GSA
Connects (GSA’s annual conference); 3) Enhanced outreach to GSA’s student
members from historically excluded communities and campus representatives at
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs); 4) Continued outreach outside of GSA; and
5) Changes to the GSRG application and scoring process. Over a three-year
period, GSA seeks to provide research grants to approximately 1,000 students,
with funding through the NSF award as well as from the Geological Society of
America (GSA) and the Geological Society of America Foundation (GSAF). GSA plans
to provide roughly one quarter of these students with supplemental funding to
enable them to travel to scientific conferences to present the results of their
research to the broader geoscience community, network with other students and
professionals in their field, and participate in professional development
activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.