* 2323167
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2023 Consortium for the Science of Sociotechnical Systems Summer Research Institute (CSST 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Stephen Voida, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2024
* USD 19,982.00

The researchers, data scientists, and designers who will solve humanity’s most
difficult problems need training in interdisciplinary thinking and boundary
spanning. For example, finding solutions to climate change requires
understanding the economics of energy production systems, the possibilities of
emerging technologies, and methods for building social and political acceptance.
Improving cybersecurity and privacy requires deep technical knowledge of
encryption and trust models, as well as philosophical and anthropological
understandings of values like safety and autonomy. All of these problems are
fundamentally sociotechnical, demanding both social and technical knowledge.
However, researchers who span boundaries too often are trained at the margins of
their fields. Trans-disciplinary researchers infrequently find models of
success, mentorship, or support in their home institutions and fields. Without
such support, interdisciplinary efforts cannot be expected to thrive. The
Consortium for the Science of Sociotechnical Systems Summer Research Institute
provides this support by bringing together senior Ph.D. students, post-docs,
industry researchers, and early career faculty with experienced, senior
boundary-spanning researchers, providing a critical intellectual and
professional support system that enables boundary-spanning researchers to
succeed.

The central function of the yearly summer research institute is to sustain and
develop a densely connected research community of scholars. An initial cohort of
approximately 10 mentors are recruited each fall, with additional mentors
recruited as needed to support the particular needs of mentees in the spring.
The call for participants is released in early spring each year. Approximately
30 participants (senior Ph.D. students, post-docs, industry researchers, and
early career faculty) are chosen by a review committee comprised of mentors,
organizers, and other senior reviewers as necessary to conduct a well-informed
review of the submissions; these reviewers will make their decisions based on
materials submitted by applicants in response to the Call for Participation.
Disciplinary, methodological, institutional, topical, and personal diversity
will all be considered in final acceptance decisions. The 5-day, 4-night event
will include a welcome reception on Monday evening; three days of small-group
mentoring sessions, panels, and workshops; and a plenary closing session on
Friday morning. Participants will be invited to join informal social activities
outside of the institute’s formal sessions and participate in a Slack workspace
intended to support cohort and community beyond the conclusion of the in-person
event.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.