* 2323110
* CAS-Climate: National Science Foundation (NSF) Confluence Workshop on Climate Science to Climate Action Across Global Cities; San Francisco, California; December 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Luis Bettencourt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,998.00

This award funds an urban climate-focused workshop at the 2023 American
Geophysical Union Annual Meeting in San Francisco. The intent of the workshop is
to bring together researchers that are working on urban climate with individuals
that are implementing climate solutions in global cities. The impact of the
workshop should be felt through the improved ability of the climate community to
develop actionable strategies that will lead to use-inspired urban research, the
results of which can be applied to real-world problems. The workshop will
represent a diverse range of viewpoints from across the globe.

The conference leaders make the case that there is a substantial disconnect
between basic and applied climate research and climate action in terms of
language gaps, the lack of direct impact of published research, and the lack of
understanding of the solutions that climate actors are implementing. The
workshop will serve the following objectives: (i) identify key dimensions along
which urban sustainability solutions related to water, energy, heat, air
quality, and climate adaptation vary across global cities, (ii) identify how
research on urban sustainability solutions is enhanced by integrating
researchers with an international community of practitioners, (ii) exchange
knowledge to accelerate climate action to adapt and mitigate existing and future
climate stressors, and (iv) bridge the gaps between urban climate research,
climate action plans, and implementing them on a city or neighborhood scales.

This workshop is co-funded by the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology, Climate and
Large-scale Dynamics, and Environmental Sustainability programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.