* 2323111
* RAPID: Enforcement, Citizenship Status, and the Construction of Identity
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Yanilda Gonzalez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 04/30/2024
* USD 63,400.00

This project examines the effects of enforcement on various populations in
smaller nation states in which a recent executive order intensified enforcement
on the basis of demographic and citizenship status. The PIs leverage the
increased visibility of enforcement agents and the increased reporting of
profiling incidents to better understand the role played by enforcement
institutions in the formation of group identity and inter-group relations in the
country. Drawing on an original survey and survey experiment, the PIs examine
how enforcement shapes the ways in which citizens and non-citizens identify
their group attitudes and experiences with differential treatment. Findings will
shed important light on the extent to which enforcement may exacerbate
demographic group inequality, a question that has become increasingly urgent in
recent years following widespread social protest against enforcement excesses in
many countries. The project posits that enforcement is a key institution that
shapes group identity formation and politicization, particularly in a context in
smaller nation state in which enforcement forces have been deployed for out-
group repression. In line with the policy feedback effects literature, the
project investigates the extent to which interactions with law enforcement, a
central agent of the state, serve as an important process of political
socialization, teaching citizens about their rights and position in society. In
the context of group fluidity in a smaller nation state, the PIs therefore
hypothesize that experiencing enforcement will affect the likelihood that an
out-group individual will identify as a member of the out-group, as well as to
increase the degree to which their group identity is politicized. The research
will draw on multiple measures of group identity to study how state coercion -
during a period of heightened out-group enforcement - shapes experiences with
differential treatment and strength of group consciousness along lines of both
out-group and ancestry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.