* 2323732
* SAI: Large-scale Planning for Electric Vehicle Public Charging Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Jones, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 749,902.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

The United States is investing heavily in its electric vehicle infrastructure.
Public charging stations represent an important part of that infrastructure.
Achieving national goals will require the addition of 500,000 new public
charging stations by 2030. This expansion is expected to yield significant
economic benefits and to promote the adoption of electric vehicles. It will also
reshape the way Americans travel and access opportunities. To fully leverage
this investment requires attention to human and social considerations, and to
anticipate unintended negative consequences. This SAI project develops a human-
centered planning framework for public charging stations. It integrates human
cognitive processes and social impacts into engineering models, with the goal of
ensuring long-term community benefits. The research contributes to sustainable
and fair nationwide public charging networks by gaining a better understanding
of how people make choices about public charging station use and by considering
the equitable distribution of those stations across the country.

Bringing a convergence of expertise from psychology, sociology, and engineering,
this project creates an integrated public charging station framework. Using
survey data and laboratory experiments, a cognitive framework is developed to
account for choices in the use of public charging stations. Equity and community
impacts are investigated for both electric vehicle and non-electric vehicle
users. Public charging station deployment decisions are modeled, and the
outcomes are validated using an agent-based simulator with realistic social
cognition dynamics and real-world data. By using an integrative and
interdisciplinary research approach, this project establishes new theories and
models of social decision-making for public charging station choices. It
promotes new human-centered thinking of deploying public charging
infrastructure, supporting the achievement of national electric vehicle goals.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences, the Directorate for Engineering, and the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.