* 2323132
* Magnetic garnet thin films: novel properties through interface and site occupancy engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 480,014.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Iron garnets are a class of oxide material with a wide
range of useful magnetic properties, making them candidates for next generation
solid-state memory and logic devices in which data is stored and manipulated by
changing the magnetization direction of the garnet. The development of processes
to grow thin films of iron garnets has led to an explosion of interest, but the
great majority of this work involves single layer garnet films of simple
compositions. This leaves several interesting questions unanswered, which form
the core of this proposal. First, the proposal will address what magnetic
properties can emerge from a multilayer garnet film made up of layers of
different composition each a few atoms thick. Second, whether the type of atoms
in the crystal can be controlled and arranged on the atomic scale, and what
magnetic properties emerge from this ordering. An intriguing third question is
whether iron garnets, which are naturally insulators, can be grown with
electrical conductivity, which would facilitate electrical reading and writing
of a data storage device made of garnet. The technical findings and the new
material capabilities developed in this project will contribute to the
development of magnetic memory, logic and other thin film devices and will be
published and communicated to industrial researchers. Graduate and undergraduate
students, including from a local community college, will be trained in materials
design, growth and characterization. Results from the research will be
incorporated into coursework and free online subjects, a public outreach
activity, and into summer programs designed to increase diversity.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Engineering of site occupancy and interfaces in oxide
heterostructures presents a tremendous opportunity to manipulate the properties
of complex oxide thin films and to reveal new thin film phenomena. However, most
work on oxide heterostructures has focused on perovskites, and there is little
work on garnet oxide heterostructures. This proposal develops thin film magnetic
garnet superlattices, garnet films with ordering of two or more rare earth
cations within the unit cell, and conductive garnet films. These thin film
structures will facilitate the introduction of electrically-controlled magnetic
properties, multiferroic stacks, charge and ion conduction pathways, and new
magnetic behavior promoted by symmetry breaking. The new material capabilities
could form the basis of magnetic memory, logic and other thin film devices.
Broader impacts include training of graduate and undergraduate students,
industrial and public outreach, online teaching, and participation in summer
programs designed to increase diversity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.