* 2323717
* GOALI: / DMREF: Multimodal design of revolutionary additive-enabled oxide dispersion strengthened superalloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,957,843.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project will develop
new knowledge and strategies for creating metallic materials for ultra-high
temperature applications. These applications are critical for improving the
efficiency of jet engines in aerospace and turbines for land-based power plants,
and will also lead to reduction of harmful carbon emissions. The new materials
to be created and studied are based on the concept that metals can be reinforced
by uniformly distributing a small amount of ceramic oxide phases throughout the
metallic matrix. The presence of the oxide reinforcements can provide
significant enhancement in strength and help protect the material against attack
under harsh, high temperature environments. A new way to create these oxide-
dispersion-strengthened (ODS) metal alloys will be pursued, using an approach
pioneered by our collaborators at NASA Glenn Research Center (GRC). In this
“additive manufacturing” approach, a moving laser melts and solidifies the metal
and oxide powder, building up the material layer-by-layer. The project will
further improve these materials by using additional strategies for strengthening
the metals. New knowledge about the interaction between this new processing
strategy, the resultant internal structure of the alloy, and mechanical behavior
of these new materials will be generated in the project, and this knowledge will
be made accessible using a new artificial-intelligence framework. This framework
will enable the team to the optimize these additive ODS alloys for design
objectives of interest to our partners at GE Aerospace and the Air Force
Research Laboratory. The DMREF team includes 3 women and 1 black faculty member
and will offer multiple opportunities for student research experiences targeting
under-represented groups and veterans.

This project will develop new knowledge and strategies for creating a new class
of metallic materials for a wide range of demanding applications in aerospace
and power generation. A novel additive-processing route for creating oxide
dispersion strengthened (ODS) metallic alloys, recently developed by
collaborators at NASA GRC, will be utilized to design superalloys with
exceptional high temperature properties. This new additive ODS process enables
the synthesis of ODS alloys in a single, additive processing step, thereby
bypassing the conventional mechanical alloying process that is time-intensive
and inconsistent with scale-up manufacturing. The team also includes
collaborators at GE Aerospace and the Air Force Research Laboratory, and seeks
to meld the new additive ODS process with superalloy design principles by
employing precipitate strengthening in order to enhance strength and oxidation
resistance across multiple temperature regimes. A novel microstructure based
machine learning (ML) framework, will be utilized to: (a) represent multiscale
microstructure in a comprehensive manner, (b) develop property/processing
linkages, and (c) accelerate the iterative design of new additive ODS alloys.
The ML framework will be informed by an extensive suite of experiments used to
generate multiscale multimodal microstructure quantification, evaluate the
mechanical and oxidation behavior, and develop a fundamental understanding of
the mechanisms behind the unique properties of these alloys. This approach will
enable optimization of the additive ODS alloys across two design objectives of
interest to our partners, including (1) intermediate/high temperatures for long
lifetime applications where strength and microstructure stability are of utmost
importance, and (2) extreme temperature applications where maintaining strength
and structural integrity of rapidly evolving microstructures is only required
for short time scales. The additive ODS processing route opens the door to rapid
assessment of alloy behavior, enabling for the first time the use of effective
ML approaches for alloy-microstructure-property optimization of novel ODS
alloys.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.