* 2323820
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type I: SEEDED: Sustainability-aware Reliable and Reusable AI Hardware Design
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Carrion Schaefer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 259,741.00

Deep Neural Network (DNN) accelerators are hardware designed for compute-
intensive applications like deep learning algorithms. DNN accelerators are
quickly becoming common place as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning are used in many electronic systems today. Some of these include
safety-critical applications such as automotive, healthcare, and aerospace.
However, many of the high-precision DNN accelerators consume a lot of energy,
making their use limited for energy-constrained devices. A popular solution to
this issue has been hardware approximation, where an approximate design of the
accelerator is considered to be sufficient for purposes of energy efficiency.
The use of hardware approximation can make the outcome up to 3X more vulnerable
to permanent faults compared to their accurate counterparts. Permanent faults
usually lead to discarding in the post-fabrication phase. Such permanent faults
can also appear in the post-deployment phase when the chip is in use. Both cases
are environmentally costly and not sustainable. The main objective of this
research is to develop a new sustainability-aware design flow for approximate
deep neural networks - DNNs that can prolong their lifetime by enabling reuse
and self-repair while also optimizing performance and sustainability metrics.

A sustainability-aware design flow in the early design phases and augmenting
approximate hardware-based DNN accelerators (AxDNNs) with lightweight fault
detection and self-repair capability allows their reuse and re-purpose with
operating capability close to the original baseline accuracy. Motivated by this
goal, this project aims to transform the state-of-the-art in designing and
deploying AxDNNs with three proposed research objectives: (i) investigating
methods for designing reliable and sustainable AxDNNs with the help of a novel
and efficient neural architecture search methods; (ii) investigating methods for
post-fabrication and post-deployment fault mitigation in AxDNNs with the help of
bypass circuitry, approximate retraining, hybrid built-in-self-test, and self-
repair through weight swapping; and, (iii) developing a simulation and field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) demonstration platform to evaluate and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the resulting AxDNNs compared against user-
defined first-order metrics and novel sustainability-aware dimensions. The
project outcomes (i.e., new theories, tools, codes, benchmarks, and case
studies) will be publicly made available to the broader machine learning and
cyber-physical system (CPS) communities through open-source software and peer-
reviewed publications. In addition, the project outcomes will create a new
curriculum and hands-on laboratory exercises for computer and electrical
engineering undergraduate and graduate courses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.