* 2323727
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Closed-Loop Design of Polymers with Adaptive Networks for Extreme Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Chenfeng Ke, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2027
* USD 421,114.00

Non-technical Description: Polymer materials such as thermoplastics, thermosets,
elastomers, and gels, were produced on a massive scale of 367 million tons
globally in 2020. However, due to their construction at the molecular level,
current polymer designs must strike a balance between being hard, durable, and
easy to shape or mold. Recent advancements in polymer design take advantage of
more flexible molecular connections to open up opportunities for more robust,
long-lasting materials. Despite these achievements, making polymers with
advanced properties remains a grand challenge because current designs largely
depend on the researcher's intuition, and there is limited understanding of how
the structure of a polymer determines its properties and how easy it is to
process. This collaborative project seeks to use a systematic, data-driven
approach to overcome these challenges by developing polymers with adaptive
molecular structures that can withstand extreme conditions where they must
survive exposure to large mechanical forces and repair themselves when damaged.
This research aims to establish a comprehensive, accelerated materials discovery
loop that includes multiscale computational simulations, rapid polymer
synthesis, automated fabrication with tandem mechanical characterization, and
machine learning-guided design. This project aligns with the objectives of the
Materials Genome Initiative, using automation, simulations, rapid synthesis,
machine learning, and 3D printing to speed up the design and discovery of high-
performance polymers. The successful outcome of this collaboration will lead to
the creation of polymers with unprecedented mechanical properties and
processibility that are suitable for producing wearable sensors, soft actuators,
and energy harvesting devices and be compatible with future manufacturing
processes.

Technical Description: This DMREF project endeavors to create an integrated
experimental and computational database of adaptive polymer networks, showcasing
exceptional stretchability, high resilience, and impressive self-healing
abilities. The primary focus lies in the development of novel double-threaded
slide-ring polymers, macromolecules with dynamic covalent chemical linkages, and
double networks with both. The aim is to transcend the conventional rigidity-
toughness-processibility paradigm in polymer design and weave this into an
automated discovery loop to explore new areas of materials space. High-
throughput synthesis and automated experiments will accelerate the discovery of
polymers and be informed by molecular dynamics simulations along the way. The
data generated from these experiments will be harnessed to refine a machine
learning-based active learning process for property optimization. Moreover, the
project introduces 3D printing into the design workflow as a unique platform to
validate mechanical properties while refining their manufacturability. This
collaborative research overall aspires to deliver several key advancements: (1)
pioneering the use of double-threaded polymers to fabricate slide-ring polymers
for enhanced stretchability; (2) integrating dynamic covalent polymer design
with extrusion-based 3D printing to enhance self-healing properties from the
nano-to-macroscales; and (3) realizing high toughness, high rigidity, and high
processibility via double network polymers construction using both slide-ring
and dynamic covalent polymers. This project creates cross-discipline learning
opportunities to enrich the research experiences of K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students, including a freely accessible online "polymer design
playlist."

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.