* 2323318
* Eclogitization of continental lithosphere from subduction zone devolatilization
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Shi Sim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 10/31/2025
* USD 382,307.00

Subduction zones are regions where one tectonic plate slides and sinks beneath
another, and they have been a major focus of research in the field of Earth
Science due to their association with mountain-building and with natural hazards
like earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Improving the understanding of
processes involving the sinking of these rocks into the Earth's interior, known
as foundering, holds valuable insights for subduction zones and continental
crust research. The foundering process requires the rocks are of greater density
than their surroundings. This project will explore the processes controlling the
transformation of rocks in the lower continental crust to greater density
resulting from mineral transformations and the degree to which the process
requires fluid-mediated reactions common in subduction zones. The results of
this modeling study will be compared to rocks found in Norway that are thought
to have returned to the surface after undergoing this densification process. The
research project is led by an early career investigator, who will gain valuable
experience by spearheading this study and mentoring a postdoctoral scholar. To
ensure transparency and encourage collaboration beyond this project, all the
project's data and results will be made publicly accessible, and their findings
will be presented at conferences both nationally and internationally to a
variety of audiences. This project will contribute to the training of
undergraduate researchers, K-12 science teachers, and high school students from
diverse backgrounds. This will be accomplished through providing hands-on
research experience in Georgia Techâ€™s Summer Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program, and collaboration with the Center for Education
integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing (CEISMC) to introduce coding and
Earth Science concepts to K-12 students in the Atlanta Metro area. The Georgia
Intern Fellowships for Teachers (GIFT) program will provide funding to support a
K-12 teacher and high school students, enabling them to develop grade-
appropriate teaching materials and science projects. These educational resources
will be showcased at local science fairs, with the goal to inspire young minds
and foster an early interest in Earth Science and coding.

This project seeks to address a notable knowledge gap concerning the mechanisms
behind mountain-building processes beneath the Earth's surface, known as
orogenesis. The primary focus of this project is on understanding the role of
reactive fluids and the thermodynamics of eclogitization in the deep crust. To
accomplish this, the project aims to develop advanced models that integrate the
thermodynamics of eclogitization with simulations of fluid flow. These models
will enable researchers to investigate the interactions between fluids and the
eclogitization process and determine the timescales associated with metamorphism
and the sinking of the lithosphere. The project will consist of two
interconnected numerical modeling studies. First, models of disequilibrium
thermodynamics will be developed to capture the behavior of key mineral phases
and reactions. These models will then be coupled with simulations of fluid flow
and rock deformation. To validate and gain insights from the models, the
researchers will compare the model outputs with the grain-scale to regional-
scale structures observed in well-documented eclogites from Norway. This
analysis will allow them to test the hypothesis that lithospheric foundering is
a global phenomenon and a consequence of orogenesis. Moreover, the models will
provide valuable information about the specific conditions under which
eclogitization becomes thermodynamically favorable and the timescales required
for significant accumulations of eclogite in the lower crust. The researchers
will explore these processes across a diverse range of initial rock
compositions, representing the wide variety found in the Earth's continental
crust. Ultimately, the project aims to enhance our overall understanding of the
complex metamorphic and metasomatic processes that occurs during mountain
formation.

This project was supported by both the Geophysics and the Petrology and
Geochemistry programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.