* 2323917
* Maneuvering Bioinspired Soft Microrobots in Anisotropic Complex Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Tong Gao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Microrobots have the potential to reach deep organs to deliver drugs or perform
minimally invasive surgeries. But to realize such a vision, several scientific
and technological challenges need to be resolved, key among them is the design
of robotic systems tailored for efficient swimming and maneuvering in biological
fluids. These fluids have unique physical and rheological properties that can
facilitate or hinder cell movement. Inspired by the swimming motions of sperm
cells, this project aims to develop, control, and analyze the motion of
magnetically driven, sperm-like soft microrobots in nanofiber fluid suspensions
with properties analogous to cervical mucus. Research thrusts of this NSF funded
project will be tightly coupled with comprehensive educational and outreach
activities, and are designed to educate and train future scientists and
engineers from diverse backgrounds in interdisciplinary research at the
intersection of dynamics and control, robotics, biomaterials, and fluid
mechanics.

The research activities will combine experimental and computational efforts to:
(a) study fluid-structure interactions of magnetoelastic undulatory microrobots
in artificial cervical mucus (ACM); (b) seek optimal swimming gaits and minimal
feedback controllers; (c) exploit orientation-dependent swimming behavior to
detect fluid properties and steer to the microrobot to specific sites. High-
resolution 3D printing will be used to fabricate soft microrobots with larger
number of degrees of freedom than their rigid counterparts, leading to greater
motility as they negotiate obstacles in gel-like ACMs. Remote magnetic control
will drive complex flagellum beating patterns to generate straight and turning
motions. In accompanying computer simulations, Immersed Boundary methods will be
used to resolve fluid-structure interactions of single and multiple microrobots
in ACMs, and uncover their orientation-dependent swimming mechanisms. The data
will then be used with state-of-the-art multi-objective optimization tools, to
construct a minimal model-free control strategy. Successful completion of these
research tasks will result in a new paradigm for microrobot design, analysis,
optimization, and evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.