* 2323442
* I-Corps:  A point-of-care diagnostic sensor for tuberculosis
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Chengpeng Chen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of point-of-care diagnostic sensor to support health agencies
globally in overcoming tuberculosis (TB). Current laminar-flow diagnostic tests
do not target the pathogen directly, but instead detect macromolecules produced
by the bacteria, mainly lipoarabinomannan (LAM) in urine. However, not all TB
patients excrete this molecule into the urine, and LAM concentrations can be
affected significantly by the infection sites. This may explain the low
sensitivity (~50%) of such assays. TB is the world’s second leading cause of
death from a single infectious agent. In 2020, 10 million people were infected,
and 1.8 million died. It is recognized that the high mortality is attributed to
lack of TB testing affecting 3-6 million people per year, as well as
misdiagnoses, late diagnoses, co-infection with HIV and malaria, and lack of
adherence to treatment strategy. The proposed technology may overcome the
limitations of current tests, especially for developing areas where medical
resources are limited.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a point-of-care sensor for
bacteria detection in biological fluids. The proposed sensor is built on the
interactions of silver (Ag+) and bacteria. It is established that Ag+ can enter
various bacterial species through outer membrane proteins, particularly the
OmpF—a 39 kD transmembrane protein with a trimeric β-barrel structure, and binds
to cytoplasm components, including proteins and nucleic acid. The proposed
method is based on detecting the loss of free [Ag+] added to a sample with
bacteria, and determining the bacteria number. The detection limit may be as low
as 80 bacteria per milliliter sample. Moreover, an open-source potentiometer
provides a low-cost and customizable opportunity for such sensor development and
translation, especially in under-developed areas with limited budgets. The
sensor also allows for wireless data transfer and storage in smartphones, which
may allow for large-scale screening and remote healthcare. For TB detection,
antibodies that are specific to m. tuberculosis will be integrated in the sensor
for selective diagnosis of the presence of the bacteria.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.