* 2323482
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Designing Linked Gel Networks with Tunable Valence
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Delia Milliron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,550,000.00

The goal of the research supported by this Designing Materials to Revolutionize
and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award is to design gel materials with controlled
mechanical and optical properties. Colloidal gels are bonded, three-dimensional
networks of tiny particles (colloids) whose spatial organization and
connectivity result in distinctive combinations of properties useful for wide-
ranging applications. The project will result in new ways to use computers to
simulate and design materials based on their component colloids and their
interactions. The investigators will develop soft, processable gels that
interact with light in ways typically associated with hard solids and materials
that could emulate the mechanical function of natural protein networks to
stabilize synthetic cells. Simulation software developed by the team will be
shared as open-source code. The award will support the transition of community
college students to four-year STEM degree programs through mentorship and summer
research experiences.

The dynamic connectivity and organization of gel networks across length scales
determine their physical properties, motivating the development of structural
design principles applicable to diverse gel compositions. Gels will be assembled
from well-defined star-polymers and ligand-functionalized nanocrystals, for
which a unified coarse-grained modeling scheme that treats the building blocks
as patchy colloids with discrete binding sites will be developed and validated.
A linker strategy, in which macromers or nanocrystals are reversibly connected
by bifunctional molecules, offers macroscopic control over the number of nearest
neighbors and modular tunability of composition, structure, and resulting
properties. This strategy and the associated design principles will be advanced
to direct the mechanical properties of hydrogels, optical properties of
plasmonic nanocrystal gels, and the mechano-optical response of hybrid networks
by controlling the phase behavior through modulating linker-to-colloid ratio and
properties of the components. The project will leverage recent progress in
making and modeling networks with dynamic covalent bonding and in computing the
optical response of structurally complex assemblies by considering the mutual
polarization of nanoparticle dipoles under resonant excitation. Tight
integration of synthesis, assembly, and characterization with theory and
modeling will give a full picture of the range of behaviors that can be achieved
through use of these hybrid structural motifs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.