* 2323041
* ARTS: Deploying integrative systematics to untangle Lucidota, the Gordian knot of Neotropical firefly taxonomy.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Kathrin Stanger-Hall, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will document the major firefly groups across South America.
Documenting and understanding the diversity of life on Earth is an essential
step towards preserving biodiversity in the face of global threats, especially
for organisms that are poorly known. This is true even for fireflies,
charismatic beetles that have inspired childhood memories and poetry for
centuries, and contributed to advances in biotechnology and medicine. The
firefly family Lampyridae includes about 2200 named species from all over the
world, but twice as many species are thought to exist. About 25% of known
species occur in South America, and it is likely that an equal number still
remain to be discovered there. This project will document firefly diversity in
South America by discovering new species, revealing their evolutionary
relationships with other fireflies worldwide, and creating tools to facilitate
future research on fireflies and other beetles. Students at all stages will be
broadly trained to be capable of leading biodiversity exploration in the future.
A series of educational videos for the public will allow a glimpse behind the
scenes into the research life of scientists, insight into how species are
described, and how biodiversity is documented.

This project will significantly advance the state of taxonomy for Lampyridae by
attacking the biggest barriers to research on the South American fauna.
Specimens in museum collections and newly available material provided by a
network of Brazilian and Colombian collaborators will be used to conduct
phylogenetic analysis of novel and confusing groups of South American fireflies
using DNA squences and morphological data. The researchers will rectify the
confusing taxonomy of Lucidota, the most vexing South American firefly genus,
using integrative taxonomic approaches. The researchers will develop powerful
identification tools for all South American genera and targeted groups of
species. They will generate a rich variety of biodiversity data that can be
easily and freely used by other researchers, citizen scientists, and the public
via a convenient, internet-based, central resource for South American lampyrid
taxonomy. By assessing lampyrid diversity across all major neotropical regions,
this project will highlight geographical areas that deserve additional
attention, and identify higher-level groups with a large proportion of
undescribed species that will be the target of future taxonomic studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.