* 2323474
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental understanding of interface dynamics in solid electrolyte batteries with liquid metal anode
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Likun Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 274,464.00

Solid-state lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) present a safer alternative to their
commercially available counterparts that utilize liquid electrolytes, due to the
substantial safety risks associated with solvent leakage and flammability. Such
batteries could even support smaller and more powerful battery packs by
diminishing the necessity for extra safety features. However, despite the
benefits of these highly ionic conductive solid electrolytes, achieving
comparable specific capacity, rate capability, and cycle life to that of liquid
electrolyte LIBs remains challenging. Research indicates a major obstacle being
inadequate interfacing between solid electrolytes and solid electrodes.
Contrarily, the liquid-solid interface in liquid electrolytes permits full
electrode infiltration, fostering comprehensive lithium-ion transport across the
surface of active material particles. To leverage the benefits of the liquid-
solid interface in solid-state batteries, the research team proposes a
transition from the solid-solid interface to a liquid-solid interface. This
could be achieved by replacing the solid electrode with a liquid metal electrode
within solid-state LIBs. During the processes of lithium-ion insertion and
removal, both the electrode-electrolyte interface and the interior of the liquid
metal particle experience continuous alterations due to the shift between liquid
and solid states. It is essential to understand these dynamic changes to fully
investigate the potential of liquid metal solid electrolyte LIBs. The objective
of this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of the interface dynamics
between the liquid metal anode and the solid electrolyte during lithium-ion
insertion and removal processes. The project will cultivate a diverse and
inclusive team, encompassing graduate students, undergraduate students,
precollege students, and K-12 teachers, with special emphasis on encouraging the
participation of underrepresented populations. The project aims to provide
interdisciplinary training to students, bridging the gap between theoretical
understanding and experimentation.

In this project, the team proposes an innovative approach to study a novel solid
electrolyte LIB, the first to utilize a liquid metal electrode and a solid
electrolyte, forming a liquid-solid interface at room temperature. Their
objective is to understand how the transition between this liquid-solid
interface and the solid-solid interface occurs during lithium-ion insertion and
removal processes. Insight gained from this investigation will foster the
development of new techniques that incorporate liquid metal electrodes in solid
electrolyte batteries. The team will utilize in situ and operando focused ion
beam-scanning electron microscopy (FIB-SEM) to analyze dynamic changes in
morphology and monitor the advancement of the liquid-solid reaction front in
liquid metal particles during cycling processes. Furthermore, the researchers
aim to investigate the influence of dopants by studying dynamic phase changes
obtained through operando X-ray diffraction (XRD). To understand the development
of stress and strain, along with its effect on phases and morphologies within a
liquid metal particle during lithium-ion insertion and removal, numerical
simulations based on a phase field model, incorporating fluid-structure
interaction, electrochemical reaction, species diffusion, and interfacial
effects, will be conducted.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.