* 2323492
* Travel: Student Support for the 2023 ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Agoritsa Polyzou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 11/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This project provides support for 25 U.S.-based graduate students to participate
in the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
2023), to be held in Long Beach, California, August 6-10, 2023. KDD is one of
the premier conference in data mining, data science, and knowledge discovery in
the world. It is a prestigious interdisciplinary conference that brings together
researchers and practitioners every year, over 3,000 in recent years. KDD covers
topics in the data mining lifecycle (including algorithms, software, systems,
and applications), as well as artificial intelligence, machine learning, data
management, and information retrieval. Students participating in the conference
are exposed to the latest research developments and can attend hands-on
workshops, tutorials, eye-opening keynotes, and presentations. A strong
representation of U.S. students and researchers is essential in maintaining U.S.
competitiveness in these important areas today and into the future. As in
various STEM fields, increasing the diversity of participants in KDD research
areas is an important goal. Since 2013, the KDD conference includes a Broadening
Participation in Data Mining workshop. The selection committee will select
recipients of the support based on merit and need while striving for diversity
in the selection process.

As an interdisciplinary conference, KDD attracts researchers and practitioners
from academia, industry, and governments who work on all aspects of data mining
and data science problems. It includes a highly competitive technical program,
with regular peer-reviewed papers in the form of oral and poster presentations,
as well as panel discussions and invited talks by leading experts in academia
and industry. The conference places special emphasis on supporting students
through training and mentoring by offering both undergraduate and doctoral
student consortiums. These will provide a comprehensive multi-facet learning
experience for students at all levels. This grant aims to help U.S.-based
students overcome financial barriers that may prevent them from attending the
conference. The award will be advertised on different sites and social media
platforms, and the results will be announced on the KDD 2023 website
(https://www.kdd.org/kdd2023/).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.