* 2323720
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Simulation-Informed Models for Amorphous Metal Additive Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Katharine Flores, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 475,000.00

Additive manufacturing of amorphous metals is a potentially transformative
technology for printing three-dimensional parts with superior strength and
toughness. Since amorphous metals solidify without adopting a crystal structure,
they do not form crystalline defects that can limit part performance. While the
high cooling rates associated with using a laser to deposit metal on a surface
are favorable for avoiding crystallization, the scanning of the laser can lead
to subsequent crystallization and variations in properties from one location to
another. These issues currently limit the technique to small scale and specialty
parts. To overcome this limitation, machine learning approaches will derive
meaningful measures of material structure from electron nanodiffraction and
simulation data. Upon this foundation, the research team will build simulation-
informed models, tools that will predict how processing gives rise to the
strength and toughness of the resulting materials. These models will be tested
by direct comparison to experiment, laying the scientific groundwork for
computational design tools for additive manufacturing of amorphous metals.
Concurrently, the three universities engaged in this Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) research will form a learning
community to support graduate student professional development in online
communication. This community will distill and disseminate the investigators'
experiences developing online content for courses, engaging in public
communication, and building outreach programs for underserved communities. The
modules developed will teach tomorrowâ€™s researchers how to effectively engage
diverse audiences of various ages. Taken together, this work supports national
priorities in advanced manufacturing technology and workforce development,
particularly at the intersection with mathematical methods and data science.

This DMREF project will develop the underlying materials science and
computational tools to enable design of additively manufactured amorphous metals
with desired mechanical properties, including strength and toughness. Amorphous
metals, also termed metallic glasses, have potential as a transformative
material for additive manufacturing applications. Unlike crystalline materials
that solidify through the growth of anisotropic grains, typically resulting in
grain boundaries and complex textures, rapid cooling causes metallic glasses to
solidify without crystal structure. Amorphous metal additive manufacturing is
promising both for superior structural homogeneity compared to crystals and for
overcoming cooling-rate limitations for casting larger structures. However,
reheating associated with layer-by-layer processing results in material with a
complex thermal history and spatially varying mechanical properties. The
simulation-informed modeling undertaken by the research team is the first step
toward a simultaneous design approach for achieving target materials properties
and performance. This approach will couple processing by direct laser deposition
with high-fidelity physical models. Machine learning will be used to quantify
key order parameters suitable for predicting mechanical properties from
nanometer-resolution electron nanodiffraction and atomistic simulation data.
Solving this data fusion and inference problem will relate experimental and
simulation data on differing scales to structural order parameters in robust
ways. From these, the researchers will build simulation-informed models,
continuum numerical tools that will capture how processing gives rise to the
strength and toughness of the resulting materials. Validation will be achieved
by direct comparison to ex situ and in situ mechanical testing. Uncertainty
quantification will be included in these models a priori.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.