* 2323927
* Dynamics and Control of a Novel Wave-Augmented Floating Offshore Wind Turbine
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 386,389.00

This grant will fund research that enables innovation in the controlled use of
combined aero- and hydrodynamic loading on floating offshore wind turbines to
increase energy extraction and reduce platform mass -- resulting in a reduction
in the levelized cost of electric power harvested for a key renewable energy
generation technology -- thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing
the national prosperity. To operate stably under extreme wind and wave
conditions, floating offshore wind turbines are designed to be large and heavy.
The floating platform alone occupies a significant portion of the overall
capital expenditures. This project investigates a novel physical design and
innovative control architecture that leverages the coupling between wind and
wave power to allow stability requirements to be satisfied by a lighter floating
platform, while also enhancing the energy-capturing efficiency. By integrating a
wave-augmented control authority with the floating platform, the project aims to
establish a foundational paradigm for leveraging wave power rather than
mitigating its influence. An integrated outreach program for high school
students and development of web-based resources on wind and wave energy for high
school teachers aim to broaden participation in STEM, including to individuals
from currently underrepresented groups.

This research aims to develop the theoretical foundations for an innovative
physical design and associated control logic that allows wave-driven pressure in
closed-air chambers inside the foundation of a floating offshore wind turbine to
both attenuate its motion and drive an auxiliary turbine. It accomplishes this
outcome through a synergistic analytical, computational, and experimental study
of the coupled hydro-, aero-, and thermodynamic behavior of the wave-augmented
physical system, as well as the development of a control architecture rooted in
sliding mode control, which ensures optimal performance also under environmental
uncertainty. A robust aerodynamic time-domain load formulation is developed
using a scaled-aeroelastic, boundary-layer wind-tunnel model of the turbine
superstructure on a dynamic platform that simulates wave-induced base motion.
System and control parameters are optimized concurrently using a stochastic
search strategy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.