* 2323241
* Collaborative Research: Neural computational rules of robust and generalizable learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Maksim Bazhenov, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2026
* USD 394,347.00

Living organisms can learn from a few examples and apply that knowledge to new
situations. For instance, humans can learn about trees from a few instances and
recognize trees of different shapes and sizes, as well as can identify trees
during different seasons, times of day, and scenes. This ability to learn fast
and generalize to broader situations is unique to biological systems. In
contrast, current artificial intelligence models can only attain close to human-
level performance if they are trained on all possible scenarios they would
encounter in each use case. This level of training is impractical, inefficient,
and unrealistic. This project aims to learn directly from biological brains to
identify new learning rules and apply them to artificial intelligence. The
investigators train live insects, record neuronal signals from their brains, and
employ computational models to identify key learning rules for fast, reliable
and efficient learning. These biological principles inform the development of
novel powerful algorithms for AI systems that can learn quickly, transfer
knowledge to new tasks, and be robust and efficient. AI is essential in modern
society, from healthcare to national security. This project leads to fundamental
basic science discoveries as well as significant societal impacts. Additionally,
the researchers establish summer workshops for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, providing hands-on research experience. Both investigators
are committed to training underrepresented minority students through this
project.

Associative learning is a crucial adaptive mechanism that influences behavioral
outcomes in human and animal life. Biological systems exhibit the ability to
generalize learned stimuli to diverse contexts, even from a small number of
examples. However, the fundamental neural computations underlying fast, robust,
and generalizable learning in biological systems are not fully understood. There
exists a knowledge gap regarding the contribution of upstream neural circuits to
system-level learning and the extension of biophysical learning rules for the
development of new artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms. The invertebrate
olfactory system shares organizational and functional similarities with the
human olfactory system, making it an ideal model for investigating generalizable
associative learning rules. In this study, the investigators uncover the neural
computational rules governing generalizable associative learning in the central
circuitry of the locust olfactory pathway and their connection to behavioral
outcomes. Specific objectives are as follows: (a) Determine changes in neural
responses and neural correlates of generalizable learning in the locust antennal
lobe induced by associative learning; (b) Identify potential learning rules for
generalization using a novel computational machine learning approach; (c)
Validate the derived learning rules from the computer model through behavioral
experiments. Findings from these objectives enhance understanding of the
fundamental principles underlying generalizable associative learning and
identify canonical AI algorithms for robust and generalizable learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.