* 2323857
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Discovery of novel magnetic materials through pseudospin control
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Michael Weinert, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,010,056.00

Non-technical Description: Materials discovery requires new tools that enable
design principles. The properties of many technologically relevant materials,
such as perfect conductivity in superconductors and electric current control of
magnets, arise from the spin of electrons. This project will use pseudospin - a
quantum mechanical degree of freedom analogous to electron spin - as a new tool
for materials discovery. The research will follow the collaborative and
iterative closed-loop Materials Genome Initiative approach by combining analytic
and predictive computational theory, together with epitaxial growth of materials
one atomic layer at a time, and characterization using advanced microscopy and
spectroscopy techniques. This project will develop new guiding principles based
on controlling pseudospin in materials design, a paradigm shift in quantum
materials discovery that will enable both superconductors that can sustain high
magnetic fields and novel magnets. This activity will provide training for the
next-generation quantum workforce.

Technical Description: This project aims to develop pseudospin control as a
materials design tool for discovering new magnetic states and superconductivity.
The concept of pseudospin derives from the two-fold Kramers degeneracy of Bloch
electrons when time-reversal and inversion symmetries are present. Normally,
pseudospin behaves as spin-1/2 under rotations, driving much of our
understanding of Cooper pairing in superconductors, Stoner ferromagnetism, and
spin control by Zeeman fields. However, for crystals with non-symmorphic space
group symmetry, pseudospin can behave very differently than normal spin-1/2.
This can lead to novel magnetic states, including altermagnets and odd-parity
multipole magnets, and qualitatively alter the superconducting response to
magnetic fields. This project will initially develop a new and comprehensive
theory of this novel pseudospin. Then density functional calculations will be
used to guide the search for materials with desirable properties driven by non-
spin-1/2 pseudospin, including high-field superconductors and novel magnets.
Thin films of candidate materials will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy on
various perovskite oxide substrates, which offer tunability of magnetic and
superconducting properties by tailoring lattice strain, proximity effects,
charge doping, and electric and optical gating. The experimental demonstration
of, for example, crystal Hall effects in altermagnets and the nonlinear Hall
effect in odd-parity magnets will provide both a means to validate the
theoretical predictions and a path to synthesize new magnetic phases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.