* 2323757
* I-Corps: Privacy-Responsive Artificial Intelligence-Based Solution for Smart Video Surveillance
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Hamed Tabkhi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is exploring
societal needs, market prospects, and obstacles in harnessing the latest
artificial intelligence breakthroughs to tackle public safety challenges. This
project uncovers and adopts optimal practices to maximize the advantages of
intelligent video surveillance technologies while addressing the associated
privacy and ethical considerations. This project seeks to create a responsible
and privacy-responsive artificial intelligence that various stakeholders,
business owners, local communities, and the public can accept, adopt, and use.
By using advanced technologies ethically and responsibly, this project aims to
create a buffer between authorities and civilians, minimizing unnecessary
conflicts and eliminating biases based on race, ethnicity, gender, age, and
socioeconomic status.

This I-Corps project is based on developing artificial intelligence-based
computer vision and video analytic technologies to perform complex cognitive
tasks to identify potentially threatening anomalous behaviors in community
spaces. Furthermore, it will equip end-users to view meta-analyses based on
temporal events and statistics by providing a mobile application and a web
portal to notify the residents, commuters, and responsible security personnel.
The entire intelligent processing will perform next to the cameras without
saving or sending the actual videos to an external server. For anomaly
detection, the proposed technology will not use personally identifiable
information or facial recognition and only relies on behaviors and activities
within community spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.