* 2323193
* IMR: MT: A Tool for Passively Measuring Internet Censorship
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* David Levin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2025
* USD 527,295.00

Billions of people worldwide live in regions that perform automated censorship
of Internet traffic and other forms of traffic tampering. Understanding how
users are affected by such censorship is of critical importance in developing
technologies and policies that promote more free and open access to information.
Prior efforts to measure Internet censorship have focused on active
measurements, which involve procuring vantage points and then issuing queries
from a test-list of domain names or keywords to determine what is being censored
where. While these efforts have proven invaluable, relying on active
measurements alone imposes several limitations, chief among them being that they
can only measure what could be censored, not what users are actively
experiencing. This project's novelties are a collection of measurement tools
that passively detect censorship as it occurs with real users' Internet traffic.
The project's broader significance and importance are that it allows datasets to
be collected that are not possible with active measurements alone; the proposed
project's passive techniques can rapidly detect newly censored content, and they
capture what users are actively experiencing.

The central insight behind the project is that censorship can be detected
through "tamper signatures": tell-tale signs of traffic tampering by a third
party, such as suspiciously timed connection tear-down packets or duplicate
responses to unencrypted queries. The project is organized along different
deployment scenarios that each raise unique technical challenges when detecting
tamper signatures: a customized measurement tool for server-side deployments,
one for client-side deployments, and one for in-network deployments (such as at
an Internet Service Provider). This collection of measurement tools is expected
to permit censorship measurements at many disparate vantage points around the
world. The project is thus also developing techniques that will allow multiple
networks to share their data safely and responsibly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.