* 2324364
* Neural Network Approximation of PDEs - Efficiency, Reliability and Quantifiable Accuracy
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mark Ainsworth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 09/30/2026
* USD 494,628.00

Machine learning and neural networks (NN) are impacting everyday our lives in a
way that few, if any, other mathematical tool has ever done before. Machine
learning is also attracting fevered interest in the scientific computing
community where neural network techniques have been applied to all manner of
applications in scientific computing including the numerical solution of
differential equations (PDEs). However, the bar is set much higher when it comes
to applying neural networks to scientific applications, where there is an
expectation that numerical methods are capable of producing high accuracy
approximations, supported by a solid theoretical foundation, give results that
make sense, are reproducible, intelligible to the analyst, and (ideally) come
with reliable numerical bounds on the accuracy. Numerical simulation is
routinely used in science and engineering applications to form the basis for a
critical decision for which certain minimal levels of confidence in the
numerical results are required. Machine learning and neural network techniques
will not be accepted until and unless methods are developed that address these
minimal requirements. Current machine learning and neural network methods for
scientific applications in general, and numerical solution of PDEs in
particular, are not at this level. The project includes graduate student
training on the fundamental research questions relating to the project and
implementation of numerical algorithms that verify the theoretical analysis.

This project builds on foundations in machine learning and neural network
approximation with the overall objective of developing effective computational
tools supported by rigorous theory that provide the analyst with the confidence
to apply neural network based techniques to scientific applications. A key
feature of the current project is the importance attached to developing rigorous
theoretical foundations for the approach including a priori results on the
convergence and accuracy of the methods. In addition, the proposal aims to
provide quantitative estimates for the accuracy and fidelity of the resulting
approximations through the provision of computable a posteriori estimators for
the error. The techniques developed in this project will be applicable to a
broad class of PDEs arising across a wide range of disciplines. The tools that
will be developed will find immediate application in these areas. An important
feature of the project is the development of effective training algorithms for
neural networks that will have impact beyond the numerical approximation of PDEs
that are the focus of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.