* 2324839
* Textured organic ferroelectric-based transistors as neuromorphic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gavin King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 418,604.00

Synapses and neurons are the fundamental information processing units of the
human brain. Mimicking the human brain provides a vast platform for the
development of energy-efficient neuromorphic computers, which could solve
complex problems faster than todayâ€™s computers with very low energy consumption.
This project supports research and educational activities for developing high
performing transistors based on organic semiconductors and applying them in
artificial synaptic devices. Organic semiconductors are extremely versatile for
absorbing wavelengths from the ultraviolet to the near infrared and combining
them with ferroelectric dielectrics in transistor architecture allows for both
electrical and photonic synapses to emulate important functions of biological
synapses. The project involves both fundamental and applied research by bringing
together a team with expertise in device physics, engineering, materials, and
biophysics. A broad range of students will be trained during the project, which
involves conducting hands-on projects on electronics and nanopore experiments
for high school students. A new biophysics experiment will be developed as part
of the Advanced Laboratory, where undergraduate students will be exposed to a
Nobel Prize winning single-molecule methodology that was instrumental in
uncovering activities underlying neuron function.

The scientific objective of the project is to develop organic ferroelectric
transistor based neuromorphic devices. Combined with polymer ferroelectric
dielectrics, organic field-effect transistors (FETs) are promising candidates
for both electrical and photonic synapses to emulate important functions of
biological synapses. The project takes an integrated approach of developing new
architectures for manipulating the ferroelectric phase including the concept of
negative capacitance for lowering the subthreshold swing and operating voltage
in organic ferroelectric FETs, using novel lithography techniques for patterning
and barrier modification of the metal contacts, and investigating both
electrical and photonic synapses. Thus far, FET based photonic synapses have
mainly relied on oxide semiconductors, which are less versatile in terms of
tunable bandgap energies. Along with the range of suitable bandgap energies and
effective exciton dissociation mechanisms in organic semiconductors, texture-
poled ferroelectric dielectrics in organic FET architectures are promising for
increasing the dynamic range for neuromorphic computing. The relaxation
characteristics of organic semiconductors may be controlled by the polarization
state of the ferroelectric dielectric. Furthermore, the potential of negative
capacitance organic FETs opens an exciting avenue for low energy consumption
neuromorphic devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.