* 2324909
* Optogenetic selection for dynamic phenotypes in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mary Dunlop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 796,158.00

The goal of this project is to develop methods for screening and selecting
individual bacteria based on dynamic, time-varying traits, such as identifying
cells that exhibit a rapid response to an environmental change. Screening and
selection are powerful tools that enable efficient identification and isolation
of cells with specific properties, however most current approaches, such as
those based on flow cytometry, only observe cells at a single time point. This
"snapshot" view precludes assessment and selection based on dynamic features,
such as the speed of a response, the ability of a cell to adapt, or a cell's
growth rate. To achieve the goal of developing selection methods suited for
isolating cells with dynamic traits, the researchers will use light-inducible
constructs and spatially patterned light illumination to activate expression of
antibiotic resistance genes in targeted cells. The researchers will demonstrate
the potential of screening for dynamic phenotypes by conducting comprehensive
experiments to assess temporal responses in promoters that are activated under
nutrient stress. These scientific activities are complemented by educational
outreach initiatives. These include partnering with the STEM Pathways program to
host events for high school students including a coding hackathon on image
processing and a mini-jamboree about synthetic biology design. In addition, the
project provides training opportunities for undergraduate students.

The primary source of technical innovation in this project is the development of
tools for optogenetic selection of cells. Specifically, the researchers will
develop and optimize genetic constructs where light can be used to trigger
expression of an antibiotic resistance gene. Two complementary genetic tools
will be developed, based on a blue-light inducible version of Cre recombinase
and a red/green light inducible CcaS- CcaR optogenetic system. The researchers
will optimize light intensities and exposure times to turn on drug resistance
for cells growing within a microfluidic device. Using an assay to select cells
based on expression of a fluorophore, the researchers will quantify the
sensitivity and specificity of the approach. The ultimate utility of these tools
is in their ability to select cells with dynamic phenotypes to generate novel
biological insight. To test this potential, the researchers will focus on
(p)ppGpp-responsive promoters, efficiently measuring temporal and stochastic
properties of promoters with a pooled library approach coupled with dynamic
selection. Overall, the project will introduce optogenetic tools for selection
using light and will demonstrate the power of these tools to reveal new insights
into how individual bacteria cope with environmental stress.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.