* 2324850
* SBIR Phase I:  A Carbon Capture System for Algae Cultivation and Biochemicals Production using Hybrid Solar Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Alexander Mathews, NATIONAL RESOURCE CONSULTANTS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to mitigate CO2 (carbon dioxide) emissions into the
atmosphere from point sources by developing a cost-effective carbon capture
technology using a hybrid solar algae cultivation system. The team seeks to
develop a method to use algae to produce biochemicals and biofuels. The algae
cultivation system will utilize deep photobioreactors operated under controlled
environmental conditions so as to obtain high area biomass productivities at a
low land footprint. An algal biorefinery approach will be used to produce
organic chemicals from the carbohydrate fraction, biodiesel from the lipids
fraction, and end use for the residue. The adverse effects of CO2 accumulation
include the frequent incidences of wildfires, flooding, intense hurricanes, and
the acidification of the marine environment. The annual cost of wildfires alone
in the U.S. in terms of damage to human health and the ecosystems is estimated
to range from $71 to $348 billion. Growth rates of algae and the ability to
absorb CO2 are about ten times that of terrestrial plants. This project will
provide a sustainable carbon capture technology as it primarily relies on solar
energy to capture CO2 and produce high value bioproduct. Implementation of this
technology would also provide significant employment opportunities in diverse
areas.

The project will develop a hybrid solar/Light Emitting Diode (LED) lighting
system within a photobioreactor to obtain high algal productivity and carbon
dioxide capture from point emission sources. The novel hybrid solar lighting
system will provide internal illumination at optimal intensity and temperature
conditions to maximize carbohydrate productivity. The carbohydrate fraction of
the algae will be processed to obtain high value platform organic acids using a
proprietary low pH fermentation process. The goal of this project is to a obtain
proof-of-concept for a photobioreactor design that will maximize volume per unit
surface area so as to obtain high areal carbohydrate productivity with a small
land area footprint and low external energy input. Fiber optic lighting will be
used to provide internal illumination. The project scope also includes the
feasibility of converting algae via acid hydrolysis to sugars and subsequent
fermentation of these sugars to high value organic acids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.