* 2324507
* SBIR Phase I:  A tool to automate a narrative patient summary of the medical chart for outpatient physicians
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Vince Hartman, ABSTRACTIVE HEALTH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,991.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a machine learning-enabled
medical record summarization tool designed to provide a narrative summary that
can aid physicians in patient care. On average, physicians spend just 3 minutes
reviewing a patient’s medical record, and during this time they must interpret
unstructured Electronic Health Records (EHR) that can make it difficult for
physicians to identify information essential to patient care and diagnosis. By
targeting the rich clinical data embedded in unstructured clinical notes, the
proposed tool could provide clinically relevant information and a contextual
understanding of a patient’s medical history. If successful, the proposed
solution will reduce the data burden placed on doctors, mitigate the risk of
missing valuable information that could affect patient diagnosis or lead to
costly medical errors, and maximize downstream effects on patient outcomes.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to leverage
advances in natural language processing (NLP) to assist doctors by automating
the process of electronic health record review. The underlying innovation is an
extractive-abstractive pipeline that determines what content in the medical
record is the most salient and should be summarized through a transformer (a
machine learning model). This project aims to advance this summarization tool to
more challenging use cases, primarily summarizing the outpatient record, a task
made challenging by the large scope of the data, clinical redundancies,
different data structures, and sources inherent to outpatient data, all of which
need to be accounted for in model training and validation. Objectives include to
1) developing an outpatient summarization model and demonstrating the ability to
produce summaries that semantically match reference text with a high level of
fluency, 2) validating the utility of artificial intelligence (AI)-generated
outpatient summaries to provide significant value to physicians, 3) evaluating
the ability of AI-generated summaries that provide information relevant to
future patient visit through ablation study, and 4) incorporating checks for
bias in the existing model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.