* 2324784
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Support for the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (IEEE ICDM 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Liang Zhao, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,000.00

This activity will increase student participation in the 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2023) that will take place from December 1-4,
2023, by providing travel grants to U.S.-based students. The International
Conference on Data Mining series has established itself as the world’s premier
research conference in data mining. It provides an international forum for
presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and dissemination
of innovative and practical development experiences. The conference covers all
aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software and systems, and
applications. This event provides an opportunity for US-based students to attend
a premier conference in their research field overseas, present their research,
exchange ideas and prepare future leaders in an important research area. In
addition to enhancing student research careers. A strong representation of US
researchers at the conference also help maintain US competitiveness in this
important area.

The ICDM conference series promotes novel, high-quality research findings, and
innovative solutions to challenging data mining problems, and seeks to advance
the state-of-the-art in data mining. ICDM draws researchers, application
developers, and practitioners from a wide range of data mining related areas
such as statistics, machine learning, pattern recognition, databases, data
warehousing, data visualization, knowledge-based systems, and high-performance
computing. The event will include: i) student paper presentations, ii) a Student
Forum, a iii) Women in Science Research Forum, and iv) a Networking with Experts
event. These are meant to help the students and young researchers prepare for a
career in scientific research, as well as broadening participation of women in
computing, in particular in data mining research. The conference proceedings are
published by the IEEE. The recipients of the NSF travel support will be listed
at the ICDM 2023 conference website, together with additional ICDM 2023
information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.