* 2324716
* Collaborative Research: IIBR Instrumentation: A continuous metabolite sensor for lab and field studies
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Elizabeth Ferguson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2027
* USD 696,137.00

An award is made to the University of California Irvine to develop an
implantable probe and recorder that continuously measures lactate in freely-
moving wild animals and animals in the laboratory. Lactate plays many key roles
in the body, including as a stress response signal, a fuel source, a signaling
molecule and an indication of reaching maximum oxygen consumption during
exercise or reaching the limit of aerobic diving in marine mammals. Despite its
importance, lactate has never been continuously measured in freely-moving
animals. With this device, which will also measure oxygen, glucose and
temperature, researchers can continuously measure lactate and other variables in
active, resting, diving or hibernating animals in the field or under controlled
laboratory conditions. This new device will eliminate the impacts of having an
investigator present since the implantable probe can be attached to a backpack
recorder, allowing free movement of animals. The project will foster
interdisciplinary collaborations between bioengineers and biologists from three
different institutions and provide interdisciplinary scientific training for
Ph.D. and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow. Using the
development of this device as a teaching tool, this project will provide unique
training through a summer course on instrument development for underserved high
school students in partnership with a non-profit organization.

This innovation project will use specialized chemical formulations and light
sensing technology to develop a 0.7 mm diameter, flexible probe that provides
highly accurate, rapid and continuous measurements of key parameters, including
lactate and glucose. Because each sensor is based on the same measurement
design, users can choose sensors specific to their research questions, providing
the flexibility required for a device that will be used by a wide-range of
researchers. To ensure the probeâ€™s function for different experiments or
conditions, it will be validated to meet specific criteria for response time,
accuracy, signal stability, sensitivity, precision and biocompatibility. It will
also be tested in different animal models and environmental conditions to ensure
its applicability to a diverse range of study sites, experiments and animal
models. Continuous monitoring of oxygen and lactate levels will provide a
clearer and more comprehensive picture of oxygen consumption, oxygen delivery to
the tissues, lactate accumulation and lactate recovery in response to varied
physiological challenges and stressors. This will be a major technological
breakthrough for a number of NSF biology research communities, including
physiology, ecology, energetics, conservation biology and exercise science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.