* 2324958
* CAREER: Acceleration Methods, Iterative Solvers and Heterogeneous Architectures: The New Landscape of Large-Scale Scientific Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Agnieszka Miedlar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2027
* USD 21,974.00

The rapidly changing landscape of traditional high-performance computing and the
emerging technology of edge computing, used in smart grids, unmanned autonomous
vehicles, and wearable healthcare devices, bring new challenges to modern
scientific simulations. This project aims to enable new algorithmic and software
advancements, particularly in the field of numerical linear algebra, to fully
utilize these new heterogeneous architectures. The primary goal of this project
is to provide computational building blocks for scalable implementation of
numerical linear algebra, which is an essential and often indispensable
component of simulation software. Methods developed as a part of this project
will help computational physicists and chemists to efficiently identify and
study promising novel materials and enable high fidelity numerical simulations
to address the challenges at the frontiers of science and engineering. The
research program is integrated with education and outreach activities that aim
to build the future science and engineering workforce and stimulate public
engagement with mathematics. The project provides undergraduate and graduate
students with advanced training in critical science and technology skills as
well as opportunities for interdisciplinary research on applications of global
importance. The investigator also aims to increase local engagement and
participation through STEM-promoting public events, provide K-12 students with
hands-on computational mathematics education, as well as include members of
underrepresented groups and enable their professional success.

The overarching goal of this research is to further the understanding of a broad
class of extrapolation and nonlinear convergence acceleration techniques and
explore their ability to enhance and extend existing solvers to fully utilize
distributed and heterogeneous computing environments. Convergence acceleration
methods have been successfully used in science and engineering for decades, but
their rigorous mathematical underpinnings are still not fully understood.
Moreover, iterative methods for computations in eigenvalue problems and general
nonlinear systems are one of the most important research areas in computational
mathematics. The project has the following research objectives: (1) provide a
systematic mathematical study of nonlinear acceleration techniques; (2) develop
accelerated, possibly asynchronous, iterative algorithms to solve linear systems
with potential similar to the well-established Krylov subspace methods; (3)
enable efficient and reliable eigenvalue computations by developing accelerated
(block) iterative (non)linear eigenvalue/eigenvector solvers; (4) develop and
validate new numerical linear algebra tools to support algorithmic developments
in computational physics and chemistry. All the methods under development are
intended for application to a wide range of complex science and engineering
simulations in exascale and distributed computing environments.

This project is jointly funded by Computational Mathematics and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.