* 2324864
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type II: REFRESH: Revisiting Expanding FPGA Real-estate for Environmentally Sustainability Heterogeneous-Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jingtong Hu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

Computing systems can exert substantial environmental impacts across their
entire life cycles, encompassing manufacturing, usage, and end-of-life disposal.
For example, manufacturing processes often require significant amounts of energy
and produce substantial carbon emissions. When computers reach the end of their
life, they become electronic waste (e-waste). E-waste, if not properly managed,
can pose risks to human health and the environment due to the presence of
hazardous materials. Mitigating these impacts is a significant challenge for
sustainable computing. This project introduces innovative approaches to minimize
the environmental impact of computing systems by recycling decommissioned chips,
integrating them to extend their lifespans, and achieving near state-of-the-art
performance with the newly integrated chips. The project will be carried out by
a team of investigators from the University of Pittsburgh and the University of
Notre Dame. The project's impacts are twofold: significantly reducing carbon
emissions from manufacturing and mitigating environmental risks associated with
e-waste by keeping these toxic, non-biodegradable devices out of landfills. This
project is making valuable contributions to society through education and
outreach activities designed to engage K-12 students with an interest in
environmental science, biology, and artificial intelligence (AI).

The primary goal of this project is to achieve sustainable computing by reusing
recently retired field-programmable gate array (FPGA) chips to build REFRESH
FPGA devices and employing 2.5-dimensional (2.5D) integration with an underlying
interposer for interconnection. This approach aims to significantly reduce
carbon emissions incurred from the fabrication process of new chips. The project
consists of four research thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on developing REFRESH FPGA
architecture and design automation toolflow, tailored to address the challenge
of targeting hardware designs onto non-monolithic FPGAs. Thrust 2 investigates
REFRESH FPGA hardware analysis and prototyping through a design automation
framework capable of automatically selecting the optimal design configuration
including inter-chip connection topology, connection bandwidth, and the
selection of FPGA chips based on their aging condition. Thrust 3 is dedicated to
developing a system-in-a-package sustainability analysis, validation, and
optimization process, aiming to accurately model and assess the environmental
impacts stemming from the 2.5D integrated REFRESH FPGAs including fabrication,
integration, and packaging. Thrust 4 extensively explores the most effective
methodologies for accelerating a wide range of applications from machine
learning to genomics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.