* 2324575
* Equipment: Facilitating Optical X-Ray Techniques for Research and Organized Training at Alabama State University (FOXTROT-ASU)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Robert Green, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 203,696.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. This project focuses on the acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer to
enhance the teaching and research capabilities within the Chemistry, Forensic
Biology, Forensic Chemistry and Biomedical Engineering programs.
Underrepresented students in STEM will have the opportunity to conduct research
with major instrumentation and have questions answered by utilizing this
technique. Access to this instrument allows for students to strengthen their
research background and understand the connection between theory and application
by incorporating this technique into the degree program curricula. This endeavor
will play a role in preparing students for the workforce and/or advanced degree
programs in STEM disciplines and create local collaborations with other
institutions and affiliated research centers.

Project goals include the effective analysis of complex structures of novel
crystalline samples synthesized from solid-state techniques by which defects can
be induced via substitution or by a post-synthesis reduction step. X-ray
diffraction will be used as an essential technique to monitor and identify
phases within the synthetic process and gives insight to the completion of the
process. The subsequent properties analyzed as a result of this technique gives
valuable insight regarding the changes based on the sample’s composition,
structure, stability, and local environment of atoms. Refined bond distances and
angles generated from Rietveld analysis provided by the instrument will be used
to provide bond valence sums and global instability indices for synthetic
products and compared with computationally modeled bond valence values for
optimization leading to higher impact peer-reviewed publications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.