* 2324718
* GEO OSE Track 2: Enhancing usability of the Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM) to accelerate innovative sea-level research
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2027
* Andy Aschwanden, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 02/28/2027
* USD 637,955.00

The Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM) allows researchers to answer questions about
the past, present, and future of the Earth's glaciers and ice sheets. PISM has
been developed in the open, with its code freely accessible to the public.
Despite this, PISM is not as easy to use for all users. In addition, cutting
edge research also requires access to and knowledge of supercomputers, which can
either create a financial burden on researchers or result in time constraints,
or both. The goal of this project is to accelerate innovative sea-level research
by making PISM easier to install and use, thus giving researchers more time to
focus on science. This project will benefit the growing community of PISM users
as well as the broader sea-level research community. The proposed packaging of
PISM and the easy-to-use cloud version of PISM are expected to attract new
researchers to the field and reduce the time to science for existing users,
resulting in more time available to develop novel creative and innovative sea-
level science that is reproducible.

The above goal of making PISM easier to use, and therefore facilitating
glaciology and sea level rise research, will be achieved by: 1. packaging and
distributing PISM releases through community preferred channels (e.g. Spack,
Conda, Debian), 2. developing a cloud-native simulation platform for PISM, PISM-
Cloud that can be set up within a few minutes and with a few mouse clicks and
accessed through a Jupyter notebook interface, 3. generating a working example
“PISM-Cloud7” built upon PISM-Cloud with which users will be able to participate
in the next community effort to estimate future ice loss from Greenland ("Ice
Sheet Modeling Intercomparison for CMIP7", ISMIP7 for short) 4. hosting a
training workshop, and 5. providing select free access to cloud-computing
resources to groups participating in ISMIP7. Project researchers will use PISM-
Cloud7 to participate in the 7th Ice Sheet Modeling Intercomparison Project
(ISMIP7). In addition, a training workshop will help new researchers getting
started with PISM-Cloud7 and to contribute to the ISMIP7 community effort. PISM-
Cloud will also make it easier for educators to include hands-on experience in
ice sheet modeling and sea-level research in their curricula based on PISM-
Cloud7 workshop materials and documentation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.