* 2324863
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Phytolith Analysis in  Determination of Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Johan Jarl, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 40,251.00

This project investigates the relationship between environment and the shift in
hominin stone tool technology and behavior occurring during the Late Middle
Paleolithic LMP ~60–40 ka) and Early Upper Paleolithic (EUP ~46—30 ka). This
shift is associated with the territorial expansion of Homo sapiens and the
gradual disappearance of Homo neanderthalensis. The timing and nature of this
transition differs across geographic regions. Why and how it occurred remains
one of the major questions in late Paleolithic archaeology. In this study,
microscopic plant remains from three geographically and environmentally distinct
sites spanning the LMP—EUP are investigated. Comparing the environment to the
technology and geographical movement of Neanderthals and modern humans sheds
light on the degree to which changes in the local landscape influenced changes
in behavior. The methods utilized here are applicable to late Paleolithic
archaeology providing researchers a straightforward tool to investigate the same
questions. During the last ice age, the region acted as a climatic refuge for
plants, and possibly also Neanderthals and modern humans. Today, the region is a
biodiversity hotspot with over 6000 species of plants. Understanding past local
environment change as a result of climate change can therefore be important to
understand not only behavior of earlier hominins, but also how the environment
responds to future climate change. Archaeology is particularly well placed to
study the influence of climate on local environments owing to the extended
periods of time studied.

This project uses phytolith analysis to recreate past environments. Phytoliths
are silica imprints of plant cells, and therefore direct evidence of the plants
present at the time. The use of phytoliths for environmental recreation is well
established and can be applied in virtually any place where there are or have
been plants. Previously, regional modern soil samples were taken from different
environments, and analyzed to create vegetation fingerprints, associating
phytolith assemblages with particular vegetation types. The result of this work
provides a proxy, showing what type of phytoliths can be expected in a
particular environment. Through statistical analysis of the archaeological
phytolith assemblages in conjunction with the modern data, a detailed recreation
of past environments are produced. These results are analyzed alongside
archaeological data of hominin behavior acquired over the last two decades by
different research groups in the region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.