* 2324943
* Charge Transport and Carrier-Phonon Interactions in Soft Lattice Metal Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2026
* USD 520,000.00

Non-technical Description

Metal halide perovskites are a unique class of “soft” semiconductors that have
attracted enormous interest. They can be solution processed at relatively low
temperatures and have shown promise for optoelectronic devices such as solar
cells, light emitting diodes and radiation detectors. However, understanding
charge transport in these materials remains elusive. Studies of charge transport
are complicated by ion movement and the difficulty in forming high-quality
electrical contacts. Furthermore, perovskites can degrade during processing or
when depositing metal contacts on top of them. This results in excessive contact
resistance and limits device performance. By physically laminating electrodes
onto perovskite films, the team will avoid such degradation and be able to
perform reliable electrical studies. They will combine studies of photocurrent
and capacitance on temperature and light intensity with direct structural
analysis. They will also vary contacts and use doping to further tailor the
carrier density and explore unique phenomena in these materials. This systematic
study will unravel the intriguing properties of perovskites and develop critical
insights needed to design more efficient devices. The relevant research
activities also offer valuable educational opportunities to students for
training next generation of workforce in relevant technologies.

Technical Description

This project exploits a unique van der Waals integration strategy to create
atomically clean contacts with greatly reduced contact resistance for a
systematic electrical transport study of metal halide perovskites (MHPs). By
physically laminating the prefabricated atomically flat thin film metal
electrodes onto the perovskite thin films without directly exposing the
perovskites to any lithography or deposition steps, this approach can
effectively avoid the associated material degradations to achieve greatly
reduced contact resistance for reliable electrical transport studies. The
project will probe charge transport and photocarrier induced local lattice
distortion, the associated phase transition, and their impact on the carrier
dynamics and fundamental transport properties: including temperature- and
illumination-dependent photo-conductance and photo-capacitance studies to probe
carrier-phonon interactions, and their impact on the carrier recombination and
transport properties; direct structural analysis to investigate the atomic
structural change associated with the carrier generation under different
illumination or temperature; developing different contacts or selective doping
strategies to probe both electron and hole transport characteristics; using the
optimized device fabrication and measurement protocols to probe the carrier-
phonon interactions and ferroelectricity in low-dimensional MHPs and other
related materials; and further tailoring the carrier density through a
combination of chemical doping, electrical static doping and photodoping to
probe carrier-phonon or carrier-carrier interactions and explore possible
emergent phenomena. These research activities help develop a critical
understanding of the fundamental photophysical, electrical transport properties,
and the intriguing carrier-phonon interactions in this unique class of
materials, which will not aim engineering improved photovoltaics or light-
emitting diodes, but also help unlock new technological potentials from MHPs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.