* 2324977
* Conference: Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Meeting Madison-Wisconsin August 7-11 2023
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Patricia Champion, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2026
* USD 48,793.00

The 2023 Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference will be held at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison from August 7-11, 2023. The “Phage” meeting
is the oldest scientific meeting focused on the molecular biology of bacteria
and their phages, originating in the 1940’s at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
(CSHL) and continuing at the University of Wisconsin-Madison since 2009. The
Phage meeting is an exciting forum for presentation and discussion of the latest
advances in modern molecular biology of bacteria and bacteriophages across many
disciplines, including genetics, molecular and cell biology, developmental
biology, physiology, immunology, evolution and ecology, and biotechnology, among
others. The rich diversity of topics and disciplines provides ample
opportunities for cross disciplinary exchange of scientific ideas among
researchers from diverse backgrounds and career stages. In 2022, the Phage
meeting had 475 attendees representing 35 US states and 13 countries, and the
same is expected for the 2023 meeting. The program includes seminars (>70%
chosen from submitted abstracts) and poster sessions, as well as mentoring
sessions for discussion of career paths, inclusivity, and diversity, the
Sternberg Thesis Award for the most outstanding PhD thesis on bacterial or phage
molecular genetics, trainee poster awards and community building events
including the Hatch Echols 5K fun run.

The rigor and inclusivity of the scientific program of the Phage meeting, the
focus on increasing the diversity of trainees, and the opportunities for
interaction will positively impact the broad field of research on bacteria and
their viruses, while providing numerous opportunities for trainees to present
their work and start building their scientific network and career.

This meeting is supported by the Genetic Mechanisms and Systems and Synthetic
Biology programs (Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences) and the
Symbiosis, Infection, and Immunity program (Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.