* 2324068
* SBIR Phase I:  A Technology-Enhanced Statistics Learning Software App
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Zaneta Chapman, ZANET ANALYTICS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in the development of an immersive, game-based, learning app
to help teach statistics in an engaging way to middle and high school students.
Designed as a classroom resource, the app is aimed at providing a mechanism to
promote statistical thinking. The app will integrate research activities into
the teaching of statistical concepts and techniques to common core curriculum
standards. The game design is expected to increase interest in statistics and
also increasing the number of students going into STEM related fields.

This game-based app features artificial intelligence (AI) and augmented reality
learning components tailored to meet students where they are academically and
customize fit to each student’s individual interests. This app will be used as a
classroom resource. Phase I research and development addresses technical
feasibility hurdles such as the development of augmented reality and artificial
intelligence features. Other challenges include the development of a user-
friendly, seamless application that does not require internet access and a
feasible system architecture to integrate the computational engine with the game
user interface and ensure reasonable response times. To overcome the inherent
technical hurdles, the team will use an agile development cycle that allows for
faster development of the finished product, as well as flexibility to respond to
changes and requirement updates as they occur.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.