* 2324591
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Strategically Engaging Private Institutions at Building Research Infrastructure, Networks and Knowledge (BRINK) in the Emergence of Research
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Sandra Justice, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 22,457.00

The unique responsibilities of Research Administration and Research Development
(RARD) administrators, as professionals who support collaboration across diverse
research disciplines, support faculty at all stages of their academic careers,
and who engage with external partners and sponsors, make RARDs a critical human
resource investment in growing the research enterprise. This project will train
RARD professionals to use a strengths-based approach, called SOAR (Strengths,
Opportunities, Aspirations, and Results) in strategic thinking, planning,
leading, and facilitating conversations that spark innovation, collaboration,
and support research engagement within and across emerging research institutions
to provide mentoring, shared expertise and resources required for growth.
Lawrence Technological University in partnership with University of South
Florida and Michigan Independent Colleges and Universities network will host the
Building Research Infrastructure, Networks, and Knowledge (BRINK) conferences to
provide training over a year-long period via in-person and virtual workshops and
will host a symposium to showcase the results of participant’s implemented
capacity-building projects within and across emerging research institutions.
BRINK addresses emerging research institutional barriers by increasing capacity
through a synergistic approach that optimizes training, collective mentoring,
and symposia. The basis of BRINK’s RARD training is the SOAR framework and
method of Appreciative Inquiry (AI), a practice of asking generative questioning
and use of positive framing, to involve all stakeholders in strategic planning
and organizational change. Initial workshops will be training in SOAR,
individual assessment of strengths (the SOAR Profile), and setting objectives
for individual projects. The project will engage Research Administration and
Research Development (RARD) administrators from Michigan’s emerging research
institutions who will learn how to use SOAR to think and plan strategically
about the practices and processes within their respective research enterprise.
Three iterations of follow-on 90-day mentoring sessions will share interim
successes on projects and strategies supporting implementation. The final
symposium will provide an opportunity to share successfully practiced strategies
that specifically contribute to the research community’s capacity to support all
emerging research institutions. The BRINK project activities will promote the
development of a sustainable network of emerging research institutions in
Michigan. The Florida Research Development Alliance is a partner and model for
building this sustainable structure. The methods and results of the BRINK
program will be widely disseminated with the goal of promoting networked
approaches to building research development and support capacity within emerging
research institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.