* 2324544
* SAI: Strengthening Energy Infrastructure Resilience and Equity During Extreme Cold Weather Events
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Burcin Unel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

Electricity and heating needs spike during extreme cold weather events. Natural
gas pipeline utilization approaches the maximum capacity during these periods,
and power plants may not receive enough natural gas for electricity generation
because gas distribution companies hold the highest priority of service. This
was prudent during an era when the primary use for gas was space heating and not
electricity generation. That landscape has changed, with electricity now more
commonly used for heating in the residential and commercial sectors. This
creates a disadvantage for customers who rely on electricity for heating because
the priority for natural gas distribution is not for electricity generation.
Recent electricity crises demonstrate the costly human impacts that power
outages coupled with natural gas supply shortfalls can have during extreme cold
weather events. Importantly, adverse consequences of cold weather outages tend
to fall on historically overburdened and underserved communities. These
disparities are expected to become more pronounced as residential electricity
consumption grows through 2050. This SAI project investigates the complex
challenges raised by the increasing interdependence between the electric power
and natural gas sectors in the United States.

This project develops a framework that integrates energy systems modeling,
mechanism design and stakeholder engagement to improve allocation of natural gas
between local distribution companies and power plants during extreme cold
weather events. The integrative research approach develops models to assess
damages to key components of the energy infrastructure during extreme cold
weather events. The models are used to simulate the joint operations of energy
infrastructure during winter storms, and assess the associated impacts on costs,
emissions, and power outages at the county level in a regional test system.
Potential policy solutions that enhance efficiency and equity of gas allocation
during severe cold weather events are proposed and evaluated. The research is
deeply integrated with a robust engagement program involving a range of key
stakeholders, including energy regulators, non-profit and community-based
organizations, energy companies, and electric grid operators. The research and
stakeholder engagement advances the understanding of solutions to strengthen
U.S. energy infrastructure resilience and promotes equitable access to this
infrastructure.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.