* 2324194
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Synthetic machines from feedback-controlled active matter
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Cristina Marchetti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,350,000.00

Non-technical Description: Biological cells exhibit remarkable functionalities,
such as motility, division, and self-healing. Reproducing these life-like
behaviors in synthetic materials would both revolutionize engineering and
advance fundamental science. Active fluids, which are composed of motile energy-
consuming microscopic units, are a promising platform for achieving these
ambitious goals. In contrast to widely studied conventional passive materials,
active fluids generate internal forces that drive persistent autonomous motion,
an alluring life-like feature. On their own, however, bulk active fluids exhibit
chaotic flows. Thus, they are unable to perform useful functions such as
generating work or driving net material transport. By seamlessly merging
experiments, theory and machine learning methods, this project aims to harness
the chaotic dynamics of active fluids to achieve functional behaviors. In
particular, the project will measure the instantaneous configuration of a light-
responsive active fluid and use model-dependent theory and/or model-independent
machine-learning methods to forecast its evolving dynamics. This information
will impose theory-guided external signals that steer the system toward a
targeted state such as a persistent rotation of an inclusion or cell-like
persistent crawling of a deformable droplet that encapsulates an active fluid.
The project will also pursue several tightly integrated education and outreach
activities focused on (1) providing rigorous training and mentoring in
interdisciplinary sciences to graduate and undergraduate students, (2)
encouraging underrepresented groups to pursue work in STEM-related fields, (3)
and raising general awareness of the importance of scientific research to
broader communities.

Technical Description: By controlling interactions between the force-generating
cytoskeleton and the surrounding deformable lipid membrane, biological cells
achieve remarkable functionalities. Inspired by this observation, this project
will pursue two complementary aims that use light-responsive microtubule-based
active fluids to control the dynamics and motions of rigid and deformable
interfaces and inclusions. This represents a first step toward creating
synthetic life-like materials and machines. The first aim will embed an isolated
rigid inclusion into a photo-responsive active nematic liquid crystal. The
stresses generated by the active fluid exert stochastic forces on the inclusion,
driving its dynamics. The aim is to implement hybrid theory-experiment feedback
to drive the targeted inclusion dynamics by imposing spatiotemporal patterns of
active stress. The second aim will encapsulate light-responsive active fluids
within deformable droplets created by conventional liquid-liquid phase
separation. Under uniform illumination (thus uniform activity), active droplets
exhibit life-like morphological shape changes and activity-induced spreading,
but unlike biological cells have no directional motion. The implemented feedback
scheme will control the formation, motility, fusion, and breakup of the active
droplets. The project will develop unique responsive and adaptive materials as
envisioned by the DMREF program, by implementing iterative theory/experiment
feedback cycles during a single experiment on timescales of seconds to minutes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.