* 2324514
* DESC:Type I: Sustainable Serverless Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sudeep Pasricha, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 545,875.00

Cloud computing has transformed our everyday lives by enabling on-demand access
to powerful computer system resources from Internet-connected platforms
including smartphones, digital health devices, connected vehicles, and smart
home systems. Serverless computing is an emerging paradigm that enables fine
granularity function-level cloud microservices to be accessible by these smart
platforms. The paradigm allows cloud computing service providers to more
efficiently provision their compute resources, which translates into cost
savings for both developers and service providers. This in turn is expected to
make digital intelligence more accessible, affordable, and pervasive in our
everyday lives. However, one of the biggest outstanding challenges with
serverless computing is to support function-level performance guarantees while
minimizing the environmental impact of cloud datacenters that host serverless
computing. Cloud datacenters are already a major contributor to global carbon
emissions, wastewater generation, and electricity use, and serverless computing
will exacerbate these pressures on the global environment. This project will
involve transformative research to realize sustainable serverless computing with
three major thrusts that will be addressed in an integrated manner: 1)
Performance and sustainability modeling for serverless computing will be
conducted to capture the performance of serverless workflows in datacenters
while also characterizing carbon footprint and water use for supporting
serverless computing for the first time, including the overheads from
manufacturing, operation, transportation, water-use, and end-of-life
decommissioning; 2) Encapsulation layer enhancements will be developed to
address some of the biggest performance bottlenecks with serverless computing,
such as high startup latency, low performance storage, and fault tolerance;
while simultaneously minimizing operational and embodied carbon footprint
associated with serverless computing; and 3) Orchestration layer enhancements
will be devised based on hybrid evolutionary-learning and multi-agent
reinforcement learning to minimize the environmental impact of serverless
computing while meeting performance goals across geographically-distributed
datacenter platforms.

This project is aligned with the goals of the National Discovery Cloud for
Climate (NDC-C) program as it involves cloud-based data modeling, analysis, and
optimization for a variety of emerging serverless computing applications,
including weather predictions from multi-modal data and climate modeling, that
promise to advance climate-related research. The project also aims to realize
fundamentally more sustainable cloud computing infrastructures that can support
large-scale climate science and engineering workloads in the scope of the NDC-C
program while reducing the damaging environmental impacts of cloud computing
datacenters that execute them. The emphasis on characterizing and co-optimizing
the performance and environmental impacts of serverless computing will improve
the proliferation of low-cost cloud computing, making it more cost-effective and
seamless to integrate into computing-driven services that can enrich our
everyday lives. Workforce development is another important broader impact of
this project, with high school students, undergraduate and graduate students
being trained in the multi-disciplinary domains of high-performance computing,
optimization theory, and environmental sustainability. Close collaboration with
industrial partners will also ensure timely dissemination and integration of
research outcomes into real-world sustainable climate-friendly computing
initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.