* 2324490
* Collaborative Research: New Theory and Methods for High-Dimensional Multi-Task and Transfer Learning Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jinchi Lv, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 51,576.00

In many modern big data applications, data is often collected from diverse
sources. To improve prediction or clustering accuracy, multi-task learning and
transfer learning techniques have been employed widely to leverage the possible
similarities across different tasks. For example, it is of crucial importance to
develop reliable inference procedures for applications such as the Federal
Reserve Economic Database (FRED) to identify latent factors and individual
compositions of significant macroeconomic variables associated with typical
macroeconomic indicators. Similarly, for databases like the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center
(NACC), early detection and risk factor identification of dementia, such as
Alzheimer's disease, is vital. In these contexts, different economic indicators
or patients in different hospitals may share certain similarities. However, it
remains largely unclear how to develop flexible inference procedures for high-
dimensional multi-task learning and transfer learning. The research project can
have potentially significant impacts across diverse fields, including economics,
business, engineering, and medicine. These new theoretical and methodological
developments will build rigorous statistical foundations for high-dimensional
multi-task and transfer learning inference under practical conditions, and
provide interpretable, flexible, and robust tools for various researchers and
practitioners in data science applications. The project also provides research
training opportunities for graduate students.

High-dimensional multi-task and transfer learning inference under both
supervised and unsupervised settings are challenging and important topics in
statistical machine learning and data science. In this project, the PIs address
these fundamental challenges by conducting systematic studies to develop novel
methodologies, algorithms, theories, and applications through three interrelated
aims. First, the PIs plan to investigate high-dimensional manifold-based multi-
task learning inference, which involves learning a shared representation of
multiple tasks that lie on a low-dimensional manifold. the project will develop
robust and scalable algorithms that can handle high-dimensional data and
incorporate manifold constraints to provide much-needed inference tools for the
latent singular value decomposition (SVD) structures. Second, the PIs plan to
tackle high-dimensional robust multi-task clustering inference, where the goal
is to simultaneously cluster data from multiple tasks in the presence of
outliers and noise. The project will develop novel robust multi-task clustering
algorithms that can handle high-dimensional data and outlier tasks. Third, the
PIs plan to investigate high-dimensional adaptive and robust multi-task learning
and transfer learning from similar linear representations, which involves
learning a shared representation of multiple tasks that share similar linear
structures. Here, the project will develop adaptive and robust algorithms that
can handle high-dimensional data, adapt to different noise levels, and transfer
knowledge across similar linear representations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.