* 2324770
* Collaborative Research: III: Small: Reconstruction of Diffusion History in Cyber and Human Networks with Applications in Epidemiology and Cybersecurity
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hanghang Tong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Diffusion processes in networks can be used to model and study many real-world
phenomena, including the spread of information on online social networks,
infectious diseases such as COVID-19 in human networks, and computer viruses on
the Internet. Informally speaking, reconstruction of diffusion history (RDH) is
the problem of identifying a diffusion process that provides the best
explanation of a given set of observations, where the diffusion history is a
time-sequenced spreading graph. This project focuses on fundamental theories and
efficient, data-driven algorithms for RDH. The theories and algorithms for RDH
have immediate applications for identifying people exposed to viruses in
epidemiology, for tracking the spreading of computer viruses/malware in cyber
security, and for locating the sources and participants of leaked classified
information or rumors in social networks.

Thrust 1 of this project establishes the theories and fundamental limits of RDH
with partial observations and answers fundamental questions such as how the
reconstruction accuracy and computational complexity scale with network size and
data samples. Thrust 2 develops a new algorithmic foundation based on deep
learning, especially those at the intersection of graph neural networks and
recurrent neural networks, with partial observations. The network topology and
temporal dynamics are embedded into the design of cells or neurons and the
architecture of the neural networks. The developed algorithms are expected to
significantly surpass the state of the art in terms of accuracy, scalability,
and applicability. Furthermore, the theories and algorithms are evaluated using
both synthetic and real-world datasets. New deep learning algorithms developed
under this project and their applications will be integrated into the courses
taught by the investigators. The team continues to seek undergraduate students
and students from underrepresented groups to involve them in this research
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.