* 2324733
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 1: Facilitating Reproducible Open GeoScience
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Nicholas McKay, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 84,520.00

The sharing of all science artifacts (source data, code, and workflow) is
fundamental to reproducible and replicable research. The geoscience community is
only now beginning to harness the power of the open source model, and formal
training on the benefits and proper use of this model is still missing from most
geoscience curricula. This project proposes a series of workshops aimed at
teaching geoscientists at different career levels how to integrate relevant open
source tools into their work, and make these tools an integral part of their
publishing process. Additionally, participants will learn how to contribute to
the production and maintenance of open-source research software. By doing so,
this project will facilitate collaboration among scientists with diverse
perspectives, educational backgrounds, skill levels, and computer proficiency,
promoting a level playing field for all participants.

This project will leverage existing community endeavors to create concise
training sessions focused on the effective use of open source resources and best
practices in science publishing within the open source community. This project
will expand on the human infrastructure supporting open sciences resources while
promoting best practices for the reproducibility of geoscience research.
Acquiring the skills to participate in the open science community will offer
opportunities beyond the realm of pure academic research, which will build
capacity in the American data science workforce and help bridge the gap between
academic research and market-ready solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.