* 2324456
* Collaborative Research: Testing the spatio-temporal repeatability of (co)evolution in Tasmanian devils and their transmissible cancer
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Mark Margres, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2027
* USD 616,108.00

Emerging infectious diseases (EIDs) are a leading global challenge in the 21st
century. In addition to their great concern for human health, EIDs are now a
leading cause of biodiversity declines. A well-known example is a lethal,
transmissible cancer that threatens Tasmanian devils with extinction. Typical of
infectious diseases, the host evolves to resist the pathogen. In turn, the
pathogen is pressured to evolve to overcome new host defenses. Indeed, long-term
data show that devils and their tumors are evolving in response to one another,
but the genetic pathways by which they respond remain poorly described. The goal
of this research is to determine whether the genetic pathways underlying
adaptive changes in devils, such as increased survival once infected, are
similar or different among devil populations infected for different lengths of
time. Similarly, the tumor has adapted, and tests of repeatability of tumor
genetic evolution in time and space will also be conducted. The implications of
this work are far reaching. If, for example, genetic pathways are similar among
populations, then conservation and treatment options can be generalized.
Conversely, if genetic pathways are different, treatment options may need to be
tailored, with different treatments for different populations. Regardless, the
work will lead to improved conservation and management of the iconic Tasmanian
devil. Additionally, the Tasmanian devil cancer evolves quite similarly to human
cancer, providing a unique opportunity to track tumor evolution in a natural
population.

One of the biggest challenges in the life sciences today is unraveling the
genotype-phenotype relationship. Rapid global change necessitates assessments of
species’ capacity to adapt and whether adaptive evolution is repeatable to guide
appropriate management strategies. Owing to the polygenic nature of most
phenotypic traits, this is a formidable task. However, virulent EIDs can levy
intense selection pressure on multiple host populations as they spread, offering
a way to test patterns of repeatability in host-pathogen evolution. Tasmanian
devils and their lethal transmissible cancer are a model system for such tests.
The east-to-west progression of disease emergence across Tasmania has created a
natural experiment. Different devil populations have been infected for different
numbers of generations and are at different evolutionary stages of disease
progression. Thousands of phenotypic measurements of diseased and healthy
devils, along with extensive tissue sampling of devil-tumor pairs, will enable
robust tests of molecular signatures of (co)evolution. Genome scans and
evolutionary concordance analyses will be used test whether the genomic
architecture underlying adaptive phenotypic traits in devils and tumors are
repeatable in time (i.e., across different stages of disease emergence) and
space (i.e., across different populations). If concordant, the underlying
mechanism (e.g., soft selective sweeps, hard sweeps or gene flow) will be
tested.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.