* 2324742
* EAGER: Development of a Hybrid Knowledge- and Data-Driven Approach to Guide the Design of Immunotherapeutic Cells
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Natasa Miskov-Zivanov, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2025
* USD 299,986.00

Over the past decade, immunotherapy has rapidly become the "new pillar" of
cancer treatment, utilizing and strengthening the patient's immune system to
attack tumors. Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) engineered on T cells, a type
of white blood cells, have revolutionized the treatment of blood cancers and
have shown promise for treating solid tumors, as well as auto-immune diseases
and chronic viral infections. The main goal when engineering CAR T cells is to
generate T cell phenotypes capable of effective and durable tumor clearance with
increased anti-tumor cytotoxicity, T cell persistence, and lower exhaustion. CAR
intracellular domains play a key role in converting antigen recognition into
these anti-tumor effector functions. Selecting among a plethora of candidate
receptor domains and ordering them on a receptor, to optimize their effect on
cellular function, presents both tremendous opportunities and considerable
design challenges. A large-scale systematic computational exploration and
recommendation of CAR signaling domains has the potential to transform the field
of CAR-based immunotherapy by producing novel CAR T cell behaviors leading to
safer, more effective therapies. At the same time, such studies offer excellent
interdisciplinary training, bridging synthetic biology explorations and
fundamental biology knowledge with innovative computational approaches.

To accomplish these goals, this EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
will explore a radically different CAR T cell design methodology, a hybrid
artificial intelligence approach that integrates experimental data, through
data-driven learning and inference methods, with knowledge sources, through
knowledge-driven mechanistic network assembly and analysis. This project will
systematically study the steps in the receptor design pipeline, and their full
automation: retrieval of relevant information from literature and pathway
databases, intracellular T cell network assembly, knowledge-based constraint
generation and use in data-driven deep learning methods. With these
explorations, this project will determine the most effective methods to address
the uncertainty and training runtime of previous approaches, while providing
reliable recommendations and explanations of CAR designs. Ultimately, this
project would advance the knowledge and contribute novel research strategies in
synthetic biology, systems biology, biosensing, and immunotherapy. The outcomes
of this project, evaluation of novel algorithms and methods, network simulation
and analysis data, and mechanistic explanations of recommended CARs, will be
open source and publicly available for the wide scientific community to examine,
utilize, and reproduce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.