* 2324183
* The AGEP 2024-2027 National Research Conference Series
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Leslie Goodyear, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2028
* USD 2,013,922.00

The “AGEP 2024-2027 National Research Conference Series” was created in response
to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP)
program solicitation (NSF 21-576). The goal of the AGEP program is to increase
the number of historically underrepresented minority faculty in STEM. The use of
the term "historically underrepresented minority" reflects language from
Congress, and in the context of the AGEP program, the AGEP populations are
defined as STEM doctoral candidates, postdoctoral scholars, and faculty, who are
Blacks and African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians,
Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The NSF AGEP
program seeks to fund grants that advance and enhance the systemic factors that
support equity and inclusion and, consequently, mitigate the systemic inequities
in the STEM academic profession and workplace.

As the nation addresses STEM achievement gaps in postsecondary education, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain, and promote STEM faculty
who are members of AGEP populations and who serve as role models and academic
leaders for students to learn from, work with and emulate. NSF reporting
indicates that STEM associate and full professors, who are members of racial and
ethnic groups, occupy 8% of senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and
universities, and about 6% of faculty positions at the nation's most research-
intensive institutions. This AGEP National Research Conference series will
advance knowledge about initiatives that can be institutionalized, sustained,
and strengthened to increase the number of historically underrepresented
minority faculty in STEM. 

This conference series will bring together hundreds of AGEP awardee team members
to advance knowledge and broader impacts about academic STEM career pathways,
institutional and systemic change, intersectionality, and institutionalization.
The objectives of the conferences are: 1) To celebrate the AGEP program awardees
by bringing together project teams to share and learn from each other and
celebrate the outcomes and impacts of their work to increase the number of
historically underrepresented minority faculty in STEM and STEM Education; 2) To
bring together AGEP awardee teams with experts who are knowledgeable about, and
who research institutional and systemic change, intersectionality, and
institutionalization; and 3) To support the AGEP awardee teams and the public by
providing an online conference website, with annual conference materials and
proceedings, as well as a printed annual proceedings publication.   Each of the
four annual conferences will be held in the Washington, DC metro area in
calendar years 2024-2027. All conferences will include plenary and keynote
sessions, research presentations, poster sessions, break-out sessions, within-
AGEP track sessions (e.g., Transformation Alliances, FC-PAMs, ACAs, ITAs),
sessions for specific subgroups (e.g., evaluators, participants, lead PIs), and
NSF-led sessions about post-award management and funding opportunities. The
proposed work includes evaluation components to assess the success of the
project work. The dissemination plan will produce an online conference website,
with annual conference materials and proceedings, as well as a printed annual
proceedings publication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.