* 2324552
* Conference: The PUI Research Nexus: Faculty, staff, and administrators  raise awareness, assess systemic barriers, and prepare to act in support of the research enterprise
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Patricia Flatt, John Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 100,000.00

In this project, regional inter-institutional workshops will be offered to teams
of research administrators, institutional leaders, and faculty from Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) to catalyze the identification of common
barriers that limit research activity and the collaborative development of
solutions to overcome these barriers to grow capability and capacity. Increasing
the research capacity and infrastructure at PUIs will promote faculty and
student engagement in research activities and broaden participation in the
nationâ€™s research enterprise.

As a first step towards creating a collaborative and transformative PUI research
capacity and capability building model that overcomes common research support
structural barriers, this project will offer one-day workshops in the Midwest,
Northwest, and Southeast regions of the United States. Teams of research
administrators, faculty, and institutional leaders will gather to identify
challenges, build regional support networks, and create shared resources that
increase the success of their institutional research enterprise. The resulting
suite of best practices will be the foundation of a research toolkit that can be
implemented broadly in PUIs across the nation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.