* 2324555
* Travel Grant for U.S. Scientist to the African Geophysical Society Conference and International Space Weather Initiative (ISWI) School; Lusaka, Zambia; September 26-October 4, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Chigomezyo Ngwira, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 47,706.00

This travel grant will support ten US scientists and students to participate in
the International Space Weather Initiative (ISWI) school and the African
Geophysical Society (AGS) 2023 International Conference. The ISWI school and the
AGS conference will be held in Lusaka, Zambia, from September 26th to 30th and
October 2nd to 4th, 2023, respectively. The timing of the AGS conference and
ISWI School will enhance discoveries and advance science to recent, vigorous
international modeling and observational efforts in geospace sciences. The
conference and school will address a primary objective of the NSF International
program to establish new collaborations and further existing partnerships
between US and African geospace science programs and institutions while
addressing and discussing outstanding and relevant scientific problems.

The success of the AGS conference and ISWI School will strongly rely on the
support of the international space weather community. Previous international
meetings held in Africa have opened the door for many new collaborations between
US and African institutions to study complex space weather phenomena in detail.
The primary objective of having an international meeting in Africa is to create
one-on-one interactions with scientists from the US and other international
institutions. These crucial professional connections are essential to opening
more opportunities for new international collaborations, including instrument
deployment and data collection. ISWI school and AGS conference activities and
follow-on discussions will boost and expand these connections, which will
enhance capacity building in Africa. ISWI school will consist of roughly 40-50
graduate students and postdocs from across the globe, most of whom will be drawn
from Africa. Having the ISWI school before the AGS conference will have students
appreciate the conference topics more. NSF funding will directly support two US
students and four US scientists (lecturers) to participate in the ISWI school,
and an additional four scientists/students will attend and contribute to the AGS
International Conference. Therefore, the travel will be associated with the
participation of students, postdocs, early career scientists, and
underrepresented minorities and their exposure to the frontiers of space weather
science and technology in a truly interdisciplinary and international scientific
gathering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.