* 2324689
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 1: Community-driven enhancement of information ecosystems for the discovery and use of paleontological specimen data
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Holly Little, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 10/31/2025
* USD 177,674.00

Over 10 million fossil specimen records are publicly available via online
portals, such as GBIF (Global Biodiversity Information Facility). However,
researchers are currently unable to realize the full potential of these data
because they are difficult to find and use due to the bio-focused nature of the
portals. This project aims to: (1) leverage the Paleo Data Working Group's
(PDWG) decade-long leadership to connect existing open science
cyberinfrastructure resources in a network that will better integrate data from
fossil and biological collections; (2) democratize access to collections-based,
digitized paleontological data for research; and (3) expand PDWG's successful
community-of-practice model to further build capacity for improving and
mobilizing data from fossil collections.

Paleontology, situated at the intersection of geo- and bioscience, is an
inherently interdisciplinary field with impactful research that has the
potential to significantly contribute to better understanding the current
biodiversity crisis in relation to rapidly changing global climatic conditions.
This project will support transformational and translational research in these
fields by driving development in the open data landscape, and improving
discoverability and use of millions of fossil specimen records. It will target
known cyberinfrastructure gaps related to taxonomy and stratigraphy by engaging
with the paleontological collections and research user communities, in
collaboration with cyberinfrastructure partners, to evaluate the existing
technical landscape. These efforts will ultimately lead to the development of a
roadmap for establishing an enhanced network of FAIR and research-ready data
accessible via TRUSTed digital repositories (the “Paleo Roadmap”). The project
goals will be accomplished through a community-based approach that centers the
role of humans in open science cyberinfrastructure. Engagement of a diverse
group of stakeholders - ranging from small collections to early career
individuals - is central to all parts of the project and development of the
Paleo Roadmap.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.