* 2324378
* Animal Disaggregases and Amyloid Contributions to Early Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2026
* Bryan Phillips, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 775,000.00

Neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, ALS, and
Huntington’s disease pose a serious healthcare and societal challenge with an
estimated prevalence of >7 million cases in the US. These are protein misfolding
diseases in which the combination of environment, stress, and aging trigger the
conversion of normal proteins into non-functional and deleterious aggregates
known as amyloids whose accumulation over time leads to neuronal death. One
overlooked but critical challenge for treating toxic aggregates is that protein
aggregation is also adaptive, serving vital biological functions such as long-
term memory, storage of peptide hormones, and melanin polymerization in animals.
It is now also clear that protein aggregates are widespread in normal animal
development and their mis-regulation upon introducing non-native proteins
capable of disentangling aggregates results in developmental defects. The
objective of this proposal is to characterize the presence and role of amyloid
aggregates during early development and to investigate their regulation by a
novel class of chaperones which may be key to aggregate processing during animal
development. Understanding the regulation of developmentally important
aggregates will lead to insights into aggregate-based pathologies and novel
developmental mechanistic strategies utilizing functional protein aggregates to
regulate cell fate specification. The Broader Impact activities include
developing new inquiry-based learning activities to increase gender and minority
diversity in STEM fields and implementing an annual 6-week Ambassador in
Training Program (ATP) to train a class of ~10 undergraduates in science
communication so they can lead enhanced Departmental tours to visiting potential
students and their families.

The PIs recently identified multiple specific amyloid bodies during the early
stages of animal development supporting the hypothesis that animal aggregates
are an important component of early development. The objective of this proposal
is to characterize the presence and role of amyloid aggregates during early
development and to investigate their regulation by the ABCF proteins which have
been previously demonstrated to affect aggregation reporters and native prions
in yeast, resolubilization of denatured proteins in vitro, and amyloid
processing during animal development. The finding that amyloid aggregates are
widespread in early development prompted a new way of thinking about and
investigating amyloid aggregates in development. This proposal capitalizes on
the complementary and synergistic experimental advantages of C. elegans and S.
cerevisiae to test the hypothesis that ABCF proteins are novel, well-conserved
and heretofore underappreciated disaggregases that regulate proteostasis in
yeast and membrane-less organelle formation in animals, thereby controlling the
soluble, functional proteome in a cell fate-specific manner. Aim 1 tests the
role of ABCF genes in tissue and cell type specificity of aggregation during
animal development. Aim 2 characterizes the role of ABCF in regulating RNA
processing (P) body constituent aggregation in worms and yeast, and Aim 3
determines the mechanism of action of Abcf proteins as chaperones. Together,
these aims describe a comprehensive examination of how amyloids and their
dedicated disaggregases serve as novel regulators of key events in early animal
development including storage, propagation, and distribution of maternal and
zygotically synthesized proteins that can be released as required. This project
is jointly funded by IOS/Developmental Systems Cluster and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.