* 2324945
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type I:  Towards Reduce- and Reuse-based Design of VLSI Systems with Heterogeneous Integration
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

All aspects of computing, spanning from small chips to large datacenters, bear a
carbon footprint (CFP) price tag. Although the semiconductor industry has
dedicated several decades to making chips smaller, faster, and more energy-
efficient, the environmental impact has often been neglected. While technology
scaling and electronic design automation (EDA) have facilitated designing
energy-efficient very large-scale integrated (VLSI) systems that lower
operational CFP, the overall environmental footprint has continued to grow,
primarily due to carbon emissions from chip design and manufacturing processes.
To ensure the sustainable use of modern computing, it is crucial to develop
design techniques that not only meet power, performance, and area (PPA) targets
but also consider the CFP. With today's trillion-transistor VLSI systems being
designed by heterogeneously integrating a set of chiplets, each corresponding to
a single die, onto a substrate to reduce costs, and new design methodologies to
support these technologies being rolled out, now is an ideal time to help shape
these methodologies to be more sustainable. The novelty of this project lies in
paving a path toward sustainable design and manufacturing of VLSI systems
through heterogeneous integration (HI). It defines metrics related to CFP and
develops simulators and optimizers that integrate with design methodologies to
measure and reduce the overall CFP.

Inspired by the principles of environmental sustainability—reduce, reuse, and
recycle—this project aims to decrease the CFP associated with modern
heterogeneous VLSI systems. HI systems offer great potential for sustainable
computing by "reducing" carbon emissions through minimized computation required
for designing each component from scratch and by "reusing" pre-designed chiplet
intellectual property (IP) blocks through hierarchical approaches. Reusing
chiplets across multiple designs, implemented in different technology nodes,
within the current generation of integrated circuits (ICs) and even in future
generations can significantly alleviate the manufacturing CFP. This project
develops EDA approaches that (a) measure the carbon impact of heterogeneous VLSI
system by building simulators that analyze its CFP across the design,
manufacturing, and operational levels of a supply chain; (b) design methods for
building high-performance HI systems, a new capability to be developed (since
viable HI design flows do not exist today), tuned for efficient computation to
reduce design-time carbon; (c) extend methodologies in the design task to
incorporate the simulators from the measure task, to optimize the carbon
footprint of a design, subject to PPA specifications on the HI design. This
project outlines environmentally conscious computing practices by emphasizing
the integration of CFP-related metrics into HI design methodologies and brings
the community's attention to this critical issue in the semiconductor industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.