* 2324766
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 2:  QGreenland-Net: Open, connected data infrastructure for Greenland-focused geoscience, and beyond
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Matthew Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 01/31/2027
* USD 613,876.00

This project will develop QGreenland-Net, a cloud-based geospatial data
infrastructure for Greenland-focused research and education that builds on the
existing QGreenland geographic information system (GIS) package. QGreenland-Net
is motivated by U.S. and international strategic priorities to increase the
usability and accessibility of Greenland-related data for research and decision-
making. To address these needs, QGreenland-Net will build capacity for open data
sharing, shared data services, and consistent standards across U.S.-,
Greenland-, and Denmark-based data producers and geospatial software creators.
QGreenland-Net will create open data services that simplify geospatial data
integration, making it easier for researchers and managers to map, analyze, and
model changes in the Greenlandic Arctic. This inherent support of data sharing
is a key element of open data ecosystem creation that will arise from
QGreenland-Net activities. The broader impacts of QGreenland-Net are far
reaching, serving data creators, data users, geoscientific and interdisciplinary
researchers, educators from high school through graduate school, and interested
decision makers, planners, and communities. Free and open access is a key
element of an open science ecosystem, and all QGreenland-Net development, tools,
and support resources will continue to be open and free to access.

QGreenland-Net will mobilize and deliver critical geospatial data resources for
Greenland-focused research and education from sources that are currently highly
dispersed, inaccessible, and not interoperable. The software created by
QGreenland-Net will serve the full geospatial data community, and it will
provide a replicable approach to data delivery that could be applied across
Arctic science and the geosciences. At the heart of the QGreenland-Net project
is a new NSF Arctic Data Center and QGreenland partnership to create an “Open
Geospatial Data Cloud” (OGDC) to improve discoverability, accessibility, and
interoperability for geospatial data from the DataONE federation of data
repositories. Using these cloud resources, researchers and educators will be
able to identify geospatial data of interest from the network of repositories,
make data transformations, and then share, analyze, and visualize those data via
QGreenland or other geospatial software. QGreenland-Net will coordinate across
the Greenland research, open research software, and federated data communities
to ensure interconnected data-to-application process development, and it will
support sustained and networked growth of this new open science ecosystem
through workshops, tutorials, and community-building. Introduction of an
educator-specific QGreenland package will support teaching Polar science
principles, and further development of enduring educational materials will allow
teachers, students, and researchers to cultivate new capacity for geospatial
data use and discovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.