* 2324962
* eMB: New Approaches for Interpreting Neural Responses to Behaviorally-Relevant Sensory Stimuli
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Richard Bertram, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 141,157.00

Neural information is encoded in spike trains that describe the timing of
electrical impulses in neurons. In neural sensory systems, information about the
presence and type of stimulus is encoded this way, both at the level of
individual neurons and at the level of neural ensembles. Neural spike trains
have been studied for many years using various mathematical and statistical
techniques. However, there has been a recent explosion of new techniques
developed for the analysis of data sets and networks that have potential
application to the analysis of neural spike trains. This project will develop
new methodology for analyzing neural spike trains using recently developed
mathematical techniques. The techniques will be developed for the interpretation
of spike trains recorded from the part of the brain responsible for coding
information about taste. However, the methodology can be broadly applied to
spike trains from other neural sensory systems. The team members of this highly
interdisciplinary project include senior investigators with expertise in
chemosensory neural processing, computational neuroscience, and data science.
They will work together with undergraduate and graduate students on all aspects
of the project. Senior team members also participate in workshops such as
computer coding boot camps that share their expertise at the interface of
mathematics and biology with students and others interested in learning new
approaches to data analysis.

Extracting information about input stimuli from a neuron's spike train is
extremely challenging. This project has two aims that describe approaches for
doing this using new mathematical techniques. The focus of Aim 1 is at the
single-neuron level, with the goal of determining which neurons code information
about the stimulant, and how they code that information. It employs Bayesian
analysis, in combination with techniques developed recently from optimal
transport and topological analysis of burst dendrograms. The focus of Aim 2 is
at the neural ensemble level, taking advantage of experimental technology that
allows for the simultaneous recording from tens of neurons in the behaving
animal. An analysis of this network-level data will build on techniques used in
the first aim and will also use network science techniques such as community
detection along with topological data analysis to characterize how stimuli are
coded in neural ensembles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.