* 2324369
* Collaborative Research: Breaking the 1D barrier in radiative transfer: Fast, low-memory numerical methods for enabling inverse problems and machine learning emulators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Pincus, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 148,832.00

The radiative transfer equation arises in many important applications, such as
medical imaging, astrophysics, weather and climate. It describes, for example,
the behavior of the sun's rays as they propagate through the atmosphere and are
absorbed or scattered by clouds. In these applications, computer simulations are
often used to obtain solutions to the radiative transfer equation. However, a
substantial challenge arises in these simulations due to the large number of
dimensions needed to describe the radiant intensity at each spatial location,
and in each possible direction of propagation (east-west, north-south, up-down).
The large number of dimensions requires a large amount of computer memory and
computing time. Due to this high computational expense, it is common to use
simplifications, such as a one-dimensional (1D) approximation or two-stream
approximation in weather and climate applications. This project aims to overcome
this 1D barrier and solve the full radiative transfer equation, and do so with
fast, low-memory computer simulations. The computational methods, the
theoretical understanding of these methods, and the development of software
tools will improve understanding of climate, weather, and medical imaging, and
thus influence the well-being of individuals in society. The interdisciplinary
training of a postdoctoral researcher and students in mathematics and
atmospheric science is also an important component of the project. Mentoring and
broadening the participation of students from underrepresented groups, with
outreach activities to local K-12 schools will also be part of the project.

This project aims to develop fast, low-memory numerical methods that overcome
the 1D barrier and solve the full radiative transfer equation, The methods
include discontinuous Galerkin spectral element methods used for their low-
memory properties, and hp-adaptive mesh refinement (hp-AMR) to handle steep
gradients that arise in medical imaging or from clouds in the atmosphere. In
addition to solving the radiative transfer equation for a given atmospheric
state (i.e., solving the forward problem), the inverse problem will also be
solved, where measurements of the radiation are used to infer the state of the
atmosphere. The inverse problem has important applications in medical imaging,
remote sensing and data assimilation for weather forecasting. A goal-oriented
version of hp-adaptivity will be used to overcome some of the unique challenges
that arise for the inverse problem. Finally, machine-learning-based emulators
will be trained using synthetic data that is made possible by the methods above.
To better understand 3D radiative effects in atmospheric science, data will be
analyzed from cloud scenes from observations and/or large eddy simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.