* 2324168
* Collaborative Research: DMREF:Programmable Design, Synthesis, and Forensics of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2027
* USD 475,000.00

Non-technical Description: In our materials-limited world, developing new
materials is the foundation of technological progress. The current approach to
materials design relies on trial-and-error exploration of chemicals and
reactions to achieve a target function where structureâ€“property relationships
are identified only in retrospect is woefully inefficient. The proposed research
will disrupt this status quo by developing a foundation for conceptually new
processes, where discovered molecular codes will instruct the continuous flow
synthesis of materials with encoded combinations of physical properties.
Implementing digital codes in soft matter design will drive new synthetic
pathways, stimulate new physical models, and catalyze fundamental shifts in
various technologies, including personalized medicine, soft robotics, and
sustainable materials fabrication. Collaboration with the Ackland Museum of Art
will educate students on the connection between Materials Science concepts and
Art in different cultures across human history. Building on this knowledge,
participating students will create artwork merging Materials Science and Art. In
addition, the DMREF team will develop the CREATE (Consider, Read, Elucidate the
hypothesis, Analyze and interpret data, and Think of the next Experiment) method
to give undergraduate students creative ownership of the research design and
execution, as well as build an inclusive environment. This DMREF team also
proposes to actively recruit and support women and underrepresented groups,
including but not limited to people with disabilities and low-income students.

Technical Description: The project will pursue the development of programmable
materials by integrating molecular design codes, automated synthesis, and
forensic structural analysis. Structurally encoding time-dependent properties
and retroactively deciphering network structure from the temporal response
represents one of the intellectual challenges of the project. State-of-the-art
network theory and computer simulations will define a set of codes that
encompass the composition, architecture, and temporal evolution of soft
materials. These quantitative descriptors will be implemented into Artificial
Intelligence-guided materials design and synthesis platforms for polymer
networks, wherein novel in-line characterization techniques and multiple
feedback loops enable iterative multi-objective property optimization. The
design-by-architecture approach will launch the programmable synthesis of
polymer networks (elastomers, gels, and thermoplastics) with tailored
combinations of properties encoded in molecular structure. In line with the
Materials Genome Initiative mission, this effort will create an Artificial
Intelligence-driven platform with multiple embedded feedback loops and an open-
source Big Data search engine that enable materials design, synthesis, and
forensics. This project is co-funded by the NSF Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS) Divisions of Materials Research (DMR) and Chemistry (CHE) through
the Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
program, the DMR Polymers (POL) Program, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.