* 2324736
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 1: Advanced cloud-based Data- and Visualization-Integrated Simulation EnviRonment (ADVISER) to Advance Computational Glaciology
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Daniel Shapero, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 10/31/2025
* USD 46,742.00

The adoption of cloud computing has increased tremendously over the years,
especially in business. However, the use of this technology in computational
geosciences—and particularly, in polar sciences and glaciology—has lagged
behind. For scientists working in these areas, cloud computing can greatly
simplify how users access and leverage high-performance computing resources, as
well as open source multiphysics simulation software. To realize these benefits,
it is necessary to create open, inclusive cyberinfrastructure that bridges
existing knowledge gaps and to conduct outreach to improve adoption of the cloud
and existing geosciences software platforms. This project achieves these goals
by: (1) building an open cloud computing platform, Advanced cloud-based Data and
Visualization Integrated Simulation EnviRonment (ADVISER), that can be used by
computational geoscientists; and (2) by extending existing geosciences software
(Icepack) to run easily and efficiently on ADVISER. Extending ADVISER for use in
computational glaciology research and education democratizes the power of cloud
computing and gives its benefits to those with little or no expertise in the
cloud. By its design, no special hardware or knowledge is required to use
ADVISER, so students in classroom environments will be able to participate in
new kinds of lesson plans, such as running glacier flow simulations on ADVISER
during class sessions. Through a planned workshop/hackathon, this project will
involve students across several universities and colleges, educating them to
better harness computational power (via the cloud), a skillset not traditionally
available through course curricula in geosciences or engineering.

The project comprises four specific tasks: (1) extending a cloud-native
platform, ADVISER, for running and managing scientific software and data in the
cloud; (2) adapting the Icepack software for modeling of glacier flow to run on
ADVISER; (3) creating data assimilation pipelines that enable importing various
existing and novel data sets into the ADVISER platform in formats amenable to
usage in software like Icepack; and (4) hosting a workshop and a hackathon that
spur sustainable adoption and extensions of ADVISER and Icepack for the broader
computational geosciences community. The investigators' vision is that their
ADVISER platform will allow for the seamless incorporation of emerging remote
sensing data, machine learning algorithms, and physics-based computational
models for forward and inverse problems. The investigators will particularly
focus on real-world data assimilation from Antarctic ice shelves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.