* 2324999
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Swimming Microrobots for Intravascular Neuromodulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nitin Sharma, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 275,000.00

Electrical stimulation of nervous systems via blood vessels is an emerging
technique to relieve many chronic conditions, including paralysis, arthritis,
Parkinson’s disease, obesity, etc., without requiring major surgery. The
technology is still in its infancy and uses stimulation electrodes attached to
an external apparatus, which limits deeper access to the brain and spinal cord.
Instead, microrobots, unattached to an external apparatus, swimming in blood
vessels via remote guidance and wireless power may ease access to harder-to-
reach areas in the human body and perform stimulation or deliver drugs. This
award aims to study the feasibility of using sound waves to move microrobots in
blood vessels. Especially, the award will model mechanisms of harnessing the
sound waves to move the microrobots, deliver drugs, and harvest energy. If
feasible, these microrobots would deliver drugs and allow wireless electrical
stimulation of neurons deeper inside the body. Microrobots with these
capabilities would eventually benefit millions of people who have upper motor
neuron lesions or brain disorders such as Parkinson, depression, epilepsy, etc.,
without the need to undergo expensive surgery, and thus minimizing the risk of
infections from protruding wires. The proposed research plan also integrates
outreach activities at a local museum and a planetarium. The project will design
and validate the microrobots with swimming, remote drug delivery, and
neuromodulation capabilities to achieve the goal. The first aim of this award is
to investigate currently unknown acoustic mechanisms that use encapsulated air
bubbles to enable propulsion of the microrobot in a fluid, remote drug release,
and harvest energy. The second aim will create data-driven models that capture
the acoustic mechanisms of mobility and stimulation current. Further data-driven
controllers will be derived to enable microrobots to reach desired targets.
Finally, in third aim, the microrobot’s ability to swim to a target and
intravascular neuromodulation in a larger animal model will be validated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.