* 2324837
* CAS-Climate: To Irrigate or Not? Assessing Climate Change Adaptation for Sustainable Water-Agriculture Systems in the Mississippi River Basin
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kaiyu Guan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

The Mississippi River basin (MRB) is a region where complex water, agricultural,
and environmental challenges are rapidly emerging and are expected to be
exacerbated by climate change. Agricultural intensification has enabled
consistently upward crop yield trends, but at the cost of many adverse impacts
on water resources (e.g., groundwater depletion) and ecological systems (e.g.,
Gulf hypoxia). In the primarily rainfed agroecosystems in the eastern MRB,
sustaining crop yield trends under future climate could require substantial
irrigation expansion. Conversely, in the western MRB—particularly over parts of
the High Plains Aquifer (HPA)—intensive groundwater irrigation is causing
aquifer depletion. Thus, sustainable agricultural intensification in the
divergent MRB agroecosystems under future climate will likely require adaptation
strategies that involve transitions from rainfed to irrigated farming and vice
versa, which will have profound implications on the intricately interwoven
water, agricultural, nutrient, and ecological systems. This project will address
this complex water-agriculture-nutrient nexus challenge by examining the
effectiveness of various agricultural adaptation measures under a range of
climate change scenarios. It will engage K-12 students in outreach activities
related to pressing water-food-environmental issues in the US, provide
computational research opportunities for undergraduate students, and train
graduate students at the interface of multiple disciplines. Results will be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, extension activities at two
universities, and conference presentations. Outcomes will be relevant to
critical problems faced by farmers, water managers, and broader MRB communities.

The project objectives are to (i) assess the need, potential, and feasibility of
irrigation expansion in the eastern MRB to sustain food production under climate
change, (ii) quantify water scarcity under sustained irrigation and future
climate in the western MRB, (iii) assess plausible agricultural adaptation
strategies to reduce water stress across the HPA, and (iv) quantify the changes
in green, blue, and gray water footprints across the entire MRB under various
adaptation and climate change scenarios. The project will use a newly integrated
hydrological-agricultural-ecological modeling framework based on the Community
Land Model version 5 (CLM5), capable of simulating surface water, groundwater,
crop growth, agricultural management, irrigation, reservoir operation, and
nutrient flow processes over large domains. The framework will offer novel
capabilities to study the co-evolution of water, agriculture, and nutrient
systems under climate change and assess alternative water and crop management
practices at relatively high resolution, yet over large domains. The study will
generate new knowledge on sustainable agricultural intensification across the
divergent eastern and western MRB agroecosystems using climate change adaptation
measures that holistically consider water resource sustainability and basin-wide
gray water footprint. The novel systems modeling approach will contribute to
advancing research on coupled natural and human systems toward next generation
Earth system science.

This award is co-funded by the Environmental Sustainability and Hydrologic
Sciences programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.