* 2324992
* I-Corps:  Catalytic Porous Organic Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of catalytic materials that will enable the more efficient and green
production of high value materials including pharmaceuticals and dyes. These
proposed catalysts may be recycled or used for extended periods and are easily
separated from the final products, which simplifies the manufacturing of these
materials. In addition, the proposed materials materials have an advantage by
making use of porous organic polymers that may provide solution-like
reactivities as well as the advantages of a supported surface immobilized
catalyst. The recyclable and ease of separation combine to create systems that
may be used in conventional or emerging production methods and lower production
costs.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of new concepts in catalysis
enabled by new generations of polymers with high degrees of internal free
volume. These proposed polymers have high degrees of porosity and are created by
molecular level designs that fuse non-compliant 3D monomers directly into the
polymer backbone. The polymer structures are modular and can include structures
capable of reactions that are promoted by light that oxidize of reduce compounds
(photoredox reactivity), as well as thermochemical metal catalyzed reactions.
Catalytic polymers can be bound to magnetic inorganic magnetic particles, glass
sidewalls of reactors, on stirring turbines, or on the surfaces of tubing. The
polymer structures and pockets around the catalytic sites can produce
selectivity and high numbers of turnovers. In the case of photoredox catalytic
materials, the polymers display much higher rates than molecular catalysts
dissolved in solution, as a result of their excitonic and charge transporting
abilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.