* 2324768
* I-Corps:  Non-invasive Indirect Calorimetry using Transdermal Optical Sensors for Diagnosis and Treatment of Metabolic Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Ryan Buckley, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an optical sensor that measures calories burned in real time. The
proposed technology addresses the need for physicians and dieticians to
accurately map a patient’s metabolic rate, which may provide information to
assist in guiding proper nutrition and significantly reduce costs in seriously
ill patients. In addition, professional athletes and others in the fitness
industry may utilize such a technology to further develop and track their
performance, providing crucial information to their coaches and sports medicine
personnel. Current standard technologies, such as the metabolic cart, are large,
cost-prohibitive (>$50K), and require intensive training and personnel for
operation. As an inexpensive alternative, clinicians rely on crude calculations
and daily weight measurements to guide patient nutrition. These predictive
equations are often not accurate and are non-inclusive, only applying to a
subset of the population. Dietitians struggle with making estimates for a
variety of patients, especially for premature infants and patients that are
obese, undergoing liver transplant surgeries, or suffering from thyroid
problems. Accurate metabolic information from the proposed device may
significantly increase quality of care, reduce readmission rates, length of
stay, and complications, and contribute to reduced costs and positive healthcare
outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an optical sensor that
evaluates peculiar gas analyte concentrations in the bloodstream to quantify the
end-user’s metabolic rate. The goal is to implement the metabolism sensor as a
wearable device to measure calorie output from a patient’s extremity (finger or
ear). The metabolic rate sensor utilizes a transdermal or transcutaneous, non-
invasive optical sensor that measures carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2)
levels in the blood. The ratio of incident light to collected light through
tissue will provide the data needed to calculate the patient’s energy
expenditure. As caloric fuel is burned in the body in the presence of O2, CO2 is
produced before being exhaled. The sensor system employs low-cost light emitting
diodes (LEDs) and photodiodes to measure the absorption and scattering of light
at wavelengths specific to spectral markers of O2 and CO2. A proprietary
algorithm adopted from the Weir equation estimates the number of calories burned
in real time from continuous spectral measurement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.