* 2324713
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 2: Developing CI-enabled collaborative workflows to integrate data for the SZ4D (Subduction Zones in Four Dimensions) community
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Cailey Condit, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 67,074.00

Geological research is increasingly conducted by groups of researchers who work
together to collect and analyze data. Data collection occurs both in the field
and in laboratories. This project will modify an existing digital data system
called StraboSpot to allow researchers to work collaboratively. These digital
tools will be developed by working with an ongoing initiative studying all
aspects of subduction zones, called SZ4D (Subduction Zones in Four Dimensions).
The scientists working on SZ4D are already working together in groups, both in
the field and with microscopes in the lab, to unravel both the basic science and
issues of societal relevance associated with subduction zones (examples include
megathrust earthquakes, strike-slip faults, and volcanoes). Through a series of
community-based workshops, this project will build a useable collaborative
environment for collecting and interpreting geological data. This collaborative
environment will then be distributed to the entire geological community through
the StraboSpot data system. This project will develop the cyberinfrastructure
(CI) capability for researchers to work collaboratively while collecting and
analyzing primary field and laboratory data. This process –group-level workflows
– allows geological research as a community-based endeavor, with scientists
collaborating within and across disciplines. New CI will be developed by
modifying StraboSpot, an existing digital data system for geologic data that
facilitates data input and storage. CI-enabled group-level workflows will
transform the type and quality of geological science, leveraging the previous
work on the StraboSpot system. The existing SZ4D (Subduction Zones in Four
Dimensions) community, whose ambitious science agenda has a demonstrated need
for integrative and collaborative workflows, will guide the CI development to
meet their community workflow needs. The SZ4D group will facilitate the
community interactions to create a community-driven workflow that is consistent
with current needs and data discovery to communicate data within and across
disciplines. Versioning, required to accommodate group-level workflows, will
record the evolution of ideas and foster transparency in our science, critical
to scientific outcomes. Three early career scientists and one post-doctoral
fellow will be supported and receive training in cross-disciplinary
collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.