* 2324873
* DESC: Type I: Data-driven system-design for sustainable long-lasting distributed infrastructures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Stephen Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2026
* USD 522,995.00

To mitigate the effects of climate change, it is crucial to transition to a
carbon-free economy where existing infrastructures no longer rely on carbon-
based electricity. However, the rapid growth in computing demand has resulted in
a significant increase in overall energy consumption, which has a detrimental
impact on carbon emissions. While current research has primarily focused on
reducing energy consumption, it is important to recognize that improving energy
efficiency alone does not necessarily lead to reducing carbon emissions. Highly
energy-efficient systems may still produce substantial carbon emissions. To
effectively reduce emissions from computing systems, it is essential to consider
the entire lifecycle of these systems. This project aims to develop novel
lifespan-aware operation and emission-reduction strategies for distributed
computing infrastructures that enable these systems to consider lifecycle
emissions, promoting the longevity of computing systems and facilitating
emission reduction. The project's broader impacts include developing prototypes
and educational resources for K-12 and undergraduate levels.

Designing distributed computing systems requires rethinking how systems can
operate on clean energy sources and maintain longevity despite demand and supply
uncertainties. This project addresses this challenge by designing a lifetime
management system that incorporates principles of safe computing to ensure
system operation and prevent degradation or failures. It focuses on developing
emission-reduction strategies using novel models and policies integrated into
container-based orchestration platforms. This enables applications to make sound
decisions with regard to emissions and regulate their services based on the
implications of these decisions. Additionally, this project also focuses on
minimizing embodied emissions by extending the system's lifespan and proposing
novel mechanisms and policies that adjust application resources to ensure
systems operate at safe levels. Finally, techniques are developed to jointly
reduce both energy use and embodied emissions, leveraging spatial and temporal
variations in emissions and workload. Together, these mechanisms and policies
will provide a new technical foundation for emission-aware applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.