* 2324940
* DESC: Type I: Minimizing Carbon Footprint by Co-designing Data Centers with Sustainable Power Grids
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nanpeng Yu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Data centers currently contribute a significant percentage of the global
greenhouse gas emissions, estimated to be on par with the airline industry. Many
projections have this percentage increasing dramatically by 2030 due to an
expected increased computational demand. A major driver of environmental
sustainability efforts is the shift towards renewable energy sources, such as
solar and wind energy. However, renewable energy sources are intermittent and
extremely variable which poses a major challenge as power grids must maintain a
balance between supply (from energy generation) and demand (from energy
consumers). This project introduces and investigates a novel carbon metric,
“Exogenous Carbon”, the capacity for data centers to reduce carbon footprint of
the power grid by providing services to balance the power grid while increasing
renewable energy utilization/generation. This project aims to (1) estimate fine-
grain spatial-temporal carbon intensities and quantify exogenous carbon, (2)
develop power-malleable data center run-time techniques to minimize carbon
emissions from the sustainable power grid and maximize the benefit of exogenous
carbon, and (3) develop data center design-time techniques to guide data center
planning and placement, as well as co-design run-time optimization to minimize
life-time carbon footprint.

This project has a significant broader impact on industry and the scientific
community. The developed runtime frameworks, management policies, and
metrics/tools will help power grid operators and data centers of all sizes to
realize environmental sustainability improvements, such as reducing carbon
footprint, reducing energy consumption, and improving power grid stability to
enable greater renewable energy penetration. This project also includes a
significant educational component. The investigators will integrate the research
results and tools into both undergraduate and graduate curricula, as well as
recruit under-represented minorities and undergraduate students at the
University of California, Riverside (UCR), an accredited Hispanic Serving
Institution (OPEID-00131600), to help train students in the fundamentals of
designing for environmental sustainability for future computing systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.