* 2324953
* Deciphering the physical controls on the fate of terrestrially-derived organic carbon in a high-yield tectonically-active margin
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Steven Kuehl, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 264,724.00

Sediment carried by large rivers accumulates on the adjacent continental shelves
forming major deposits of mineral and associated organic matter. Globally, these
deposits represent the major burial sites for organic matter in the ocean and
help to regulate atmospheric CO2. The amount of carbon preserved in a paticular
shelf deposit depends on how fast the sediment is buried. When sediment is
buried faster, more organic carbon is removed. In very energetic shelf settings,
however, waves and tides can cause sediment resuspension. This resuspension
leads to oxidation and breakdown of organic matter that releases CO2 to the
atmosphere. The Ayeyarwady-Thanlwin river system in the northern Andaman Sea is
the third largest globally but has not previously been assessed for its carbon
sequestration potential. It is the only remaining large river system in Asia
that has not been severely affected by human activity. Humans have altered the
delivery of river sediment to the ocean in many systems with unknown consequence
on the global carbon budget. This study uses an existing set of core samples and
other data collectd during a 2017 research cruise. The goal is to examine the
transformation of organic matter from the rivers to the ocean. The study also
explores the physical processes that determine the burial efficiency for orgainc
carbon. This will be determined through modeling of ocean currents, waves, tides
and storms. The results of this study will provide a baseline for future
changes, including planned major dam construction on these rivers. With
increasing human modifications to this system and increased storm frequency
driven by climate change, this research will help better understand the future
of this heavily populated and environmentally sensitive system. This project
will support a Ph.D. student and a post-doctoral scientist. In addition, the
models developed for this project will be available for community modeling
efforts.

Continental margins are the primary depocenters of mud delivered by rivers,
record a rich history of terrestrial and oceanographic conditions, and account
for most of the organic carbon (OC) burial in the ocean. The Ayeyarwady and
Thanlwin rivers enter an active margin in the northern Andaman Sea and eastern
Bay of Bengal. Relatively understudied, their combined inputs rank in the top
three of the world’s river systems in terms of sediment and OC supply. A 2017
research cruise conducted by the PIs recovered a unique and unprecedented set of
observations and sediment samples, and this study leverages these existing
samples and modifies a numerical model to address exciting new questions
regarding the dispersal and fate of sediment and OC in this globally important
system. Specifically: 1) what is the residence time of sediment in the Gulf and
mechanism(s) for transfer of this material to the basin depocenter?, 2) how do
the associated physical processes affect the transformation and sequestration of
organic carbon as it transits the shallow shelf to the basin?, and 3) what are
the relative roles of seasonal (monsoonal) oceanographic conditions and episodic
events (cyclones) in affecting sediment dispersal to the depocenter and
northwestern shelf. At the time of the 2017 cruise, the Ayeyarwady and Thanlwin
were the last free-flowing mega-rivers in tropical and subtropical Asia.
Therefore, this study provides a baseline for certain future change. Numerical
models developed for this project will be available for application to other
river-influenced margins via community modeling efforts. This research supports
the education of a promising Ph.D. candidate who will focus on the organic
geochemistry proposed herein, and a post-doctoral scientist who will focus on
the potentially critical role of fluid mud transport in this system. The PIs
forged strong relationships with the Myanmar research community during the
previous project, and propose to continue this engagement through joint
participation at an international meeting. With rapidly increasing human
modifications to the A-T system and predictions of future increased cyclone
frequency driven by climate change, this research will be instrumental in
understanding the future trajectory of this heavily populated and
environmentally sensitive system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.