* 2324052
* PARTNER: AI/ML-driven edge computing for cardiovascular disease diagnosis/mechanism study
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Jie Wei, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,800,000.00

This project is an ExpandAI Partnership between the City College of New York
(CCNY) and the AI Institute for Future Edge Networks and Distributed
Intelligence (AI-EDGE). In this project, a minority-serving institutions leads a
new collaboration with an AI Institute focused on scaling up already-established
AI research and education programs at CCNY and to pursue shared, complementary
goals around developing AI with use for society in mind and for developing the
next generation of AI education and workforce talent. The collaborative research
focuses on the development of AI for the diagnosis of cardiovascular disease,
which is a persistent leading cause of death in the U.S. The project will also
build community and new centers of excellence in AI where such activities were
not previously well developed.

This project focuses on research towards a low-cost, easy-to-use, and high-
precision sensing and learning system for the diagnosis of cardiovascular
disease. To this end, the projects will take measurements from subjects using
lightweight and safe multimodal sensors and analyze the data using artificial
intelligence and machine learning. As a result, several cardiovascular
parameters will be monitored in real time with personalized learning
technologies. The research leverages the interdisciplinary expertise of CCNY and
AI-EDGE on AI/ML edge computing, multimodal deep learning, medical computing,
and computing-enabled disease mechanism study. An inexpensive and usable
application of AI and edge computing technologies is envisioned with potential
broader implications for further application of medical sensing, healthcare, and
scientific research into the underlying molecular mechanisms of diseases. The
findings and expertise gained from this project are expected to significantly
facilitate the dissemination of applications of AI-enabled edge computing and
distributed learning for healthcare. The project also features efforts to assist
in community building in the neighborhood of CCNY to improve the outreach to
under-represented minority communities and to offer AI and biomedical training
opportunities for students from diverse groups. This project is co-funded by the
NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing the quality of
undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of students pursuing associateâ€™s or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.