* 2324567
* Conference: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Morteza Hashemi, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Goldsmith
* 06/30/2024
* USD 18,000.00

The 24th ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing
(MobiHoc 2023) is a premier symposium on emerging topics in networked systems.
This travel grant assists students from the U.S. universities to attend MobiHoc,
build and strengthen their ties to the community, and share scientific
information through participation in the keynote presentations and technical
sessions. Priority will be given to students from under-represented groups
(including women, minorities, and those with disabilities), authors lacking
other funding, and first-time attendees.

The ACM MobiHoc is a premier symposium with a highly selective single-track
technical program dedicated to addressing the challenges emerging from networked
systems that must operate in the face of dynamics ranging from changing user
demands to connectivity and resource availability. Examples of such dynamic
networks include wired/wireless communications, data centers, sensors, energy,
social, and transportation networks. This award will help increase the
representation and participation of U.S. based students at the conference by
providing travel grants limited to a maximum of $1,200 each. By attending the
event, the students will be exposed to the state-of-the-art advancements in the
field and will have the opportunity to engage with peers from institutions
around the world, connect with prominent researchers, and take part in
conversations that are likely to influence their future and the direction of the
field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.