* 2324936
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type I: FLEX: Building Future-proof Learning-Enabled Cyber-Physical Systems with Cross-Layer Extensible and Adaptive Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Qi Zhu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

When an electronic device does not meet system requirements, it could become a
waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). About 50 million metric
tonnes of WEEE are generated annually worldwide, and it is estimated to increase
to 111 million tonnes per year by 2050, causing immense environmental, human
health, and socioeconomic damage. Retrofitting and reusing these devices may
prolong their lifespan and reduce such negative impacts. For instance, in the
case of a smartphone, extending its usage by just one year can cut its CO2
impact on the environment by 31%. This project enhances the retrofitting
capability for emerging learning-enabled cyber-physical systems (LE-CPSs) to
accommodate changes/updates with existing hardware, so as to increase device
lifespan, reduce e-waste and improve sustainability. The success of this project
could foster a more sustainable future, with far-reaching impacts spanning
across environmental, economic, and societal dimensions. By enhancing
retrofitting capabilities, the lifespan of electronic devices can be effectively
extended, consequently mitigating the necessity for new products and reducing
the cumulative quantity of electronic waste generated. Improved retrofitting can
also lead to more energy-efficient systems, reducing greenhouse gas emissions
and mitigating climate change. Moreover, retrofitting electronic systems can
lead to cost savings for both businesses and consumers, increasing access to
affordable technology, especially for economically disadvantaged communities.
The project catalyzes research in several communities: design automation, cyber-
physical systems, machine learning, and domain experts in multi-agent system
applications. This project also generates broader impacts through curriculum
development, broadening participation in computing, K-12 outreach activities,
and international design contests.

Retrofitting could be quite challenging, especially for emerging LE-CPSs such as
autonomous vehicles, medical devices, and robots, which often operate within a
constantly-changing physical environment, have limited resources and stringent
timing requirements, and employ complex and resource-consuming machine learning
techniques. To bridge the gap between functionality and architecture during
retrofitting and prolong system lifetime, this project develops FLEX, a cross-
layer framework that on the one hand makes the architecture of LE-CPSs more
extensible to facilitate accommodating changes with existing hardware, and on
the other hand makes their functionality more adaptive with respect to resource
limitations and environment changes. The framework includes novel (1) system-
level extensibility-driven design and retrofitting methods that at the design
time explore the design space and trades off future extensibility of LE-CPSs
with other system objectives and at the retrofitting time leverage the
robustness of existing functionality in LE-CPSs to further expand scheduling
slack and accommodate retrofitting needs based on a weakly-hard paradigm; (2)
resource adaptability-driven neural architecture model and design methods that
provide multiple designs of neural networks (e.g., with multiple exists) to
enable resource-aware configuration during retrofitting; and (3) continual and
on-device learning methods that enable LE-CPSs to effectively adapt to the
changing physical environment and system input with little supervision for
increasing system lifetime.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.