* 2324594
* Conference: INTEGRaL: Innovation Network To Enhance and Grow ReseArch Infrastructure and Links
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Gary Kinsel, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 03/31/2025
* USD 99,631.00

This project seeks to improve research administration and research development
infrastructure to support more and better discoveries that will help society.
Research administration and research development professionals help researchers
navigate the complexity of grant submission and award management. Unfortunately,
too few individuals are formally trained for these careers and too few
institutions are adequately staffed to support the ambitions of their
researchers. This is particularly true of institutions that have fewer resources
and receive fewer federal research dollars. To meet these challenges, this
project brings staff members from research institutions together to identify
specific problems and propose scalable and generalizable solutions that provide
sustainable support and diversify and broaden research activity. Enhancing the
skills of research administration and development professionals allows
investigators to focus on their research. Creating training programs and a
better-defined career path for research administration and development
professionals will grow access to research support infrastructure especially in
underserved urban areas and rural communities where many colleges and
universities are located.

The Innovation Network To Enhance and Grow ReseArch Infrastructure and Links
(INTEGRaL) will convene research institutions in Illinois and the surrounding
region to address common challenges and explore potential solutions in research
administration and research development and to consider how a cooperative
approach could advance shared goals. Two overarching themes will frame the work
of the project: 1) training and professionalization of the research
administration and development workforce and 2) how institutions could scale
this workforce to match their grant portfolios. Project participants will be
recruited from multiple types and sizes of institutions of higher education and
related organizations in Illinois and the surrounding region. The project will
be conducted in three phases: (1) an electronic survey to identify the key
specific topics to be addressed under the two main themes; (2) a one-and-a-half-
day workshop to clearly define the problems and propose solutions based on the
topics identified in the survey; (3) post-workshop follow-up sessions for
further discussion of any topics as needed. The expected outcome of this project
is a set of clearly defined problems and proposed solutions to address them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.