* 2324642
* SAI: Healthy and Equitable Public Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Leidy Klotz, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

More than half of the human population is concentrated in urban areas. This
worldwide shift from rural to urban living is likely to continue. Although
urbanization creates opportunities to support human health and well-being, it
also introduces serious threats. Compared to suburban and rural environments,
urban living provides easier access to social infrastructure – the public spaces
where people interact socially and engage with the community. Yet, exposure to
urban versus natural environments is associated with poorer physical and
psychological well-being. One key to understanding these differences is to
recognize that not all urban public spaces are created the same. Stark
differences exist within cities in the qualities of urban and natural public
spaces, and the different opportunities that these public spaces provide. With
the input of community partners, this multidisciplinary project uses online,
laboratory, and community-based data collection to understand the impact of
public spaces on cognition, emotion, and well-being, and to document the lived
experiences of marginalized and non-marginalized community members. This SAI
research project strengthens America’s social infrastructure by identifying
features of public spaces that promote restoration and well-being, and by
providing evidence-based design standards for healthy and equitable public
spaces.

This project explores responses to public spaces among diverse residents in
three U.S. cities. The project leverages a mixed-methods approach, using
qualitative indicators and quantitative data from surveys and experiments. The
quantitative assessments include physiological reactivity data, behavioral eye
tracking and motion tracking data, self-report data, and archival neighborhood-
level data. These methods are used to identify features of public spaces that
are associated with psychological restoration and well-being, and to document
similarities and differences in the experiences of marginalized and non-
marginalized individuals. Findings are regularly shared with an advisory board
with representation from a variety of organizations that promote public spaces,
including cultural institutions, policy groups, educational initiatives and
community groups. The data and the expertise of advisors are incorporated into
the development of a social impact protocol for assessing and designing
healthier and more equitable public spaces.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.