* 2324394
* Extrapolative Analyses for Reliable Machine Learning Driven Scientific Discovery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Junier Oliva, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 391,595.00

There has been a promising explosion in the production and analysis of digital
data from experimental and observational sources, which presents many
opportunities for machine learning (ML) driven scientific discovery in high-
impact applications such as chemistry (cheminformatics) and biology
(bioinformatics). Unfortunately, current ML methodology often fails to properly
characterize data markedly distinct from what was seen during training (i.e.,
extrapolation). This, in turn, hampers our ability to make scientific
discoveries that truly extend past our current knowledge. For example, this is
of great consequence in chemical virtual screening campaigns, where one hopes to
use ML predictions to guide potential targets for expensive real-world
experimentation (e.g., in drug discovery applications). Poor extrapolative power
of ML models can result in false positives, wasting time and resources through
costly synthesis and experimental testing of novel chemical entities. The work
stemming from this award will improve the real-world utility of ML models in
scientific domains and prevent the faulty use of model predictions. The project
also provides research training opportunities for graduate students.

This project develops various methodologies to more accurately assess the
reliability of ML predictions on novel inputs and improve models' extrapolatory
capabilities. First, the project develops empirical trials to more accurately
evaluate the extrapolative capabilities of ML model fitting procedures on
domains that lie beyond the training set distributional support. Second,
utilizing extrapolative assessments, the project develops techniques to
thoroughly explore the input space of possible extrapolation to anticipate and
filter out likely unreliable predictions. Lastly, the project builds methodology
to guide the acquisition of new training data that, once trained on, will
improve model extrapolation.

This award by the Division of Mathematical Sciences is jointly supported by the
NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.