* 2324414
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Convenings to Develop GRANTS MADE: Grant and Research Administration Networking and Training for Students at Maryland and Delaware MSIs
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Willie May, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 11,000.00

Through a series of convenings and a final symposium, this project develops best
practices for a regional pipeline program to establish internships in research
administration for students of the seven four-year Minority Serving Institutions
(MSIs) in Maryland and Delaware. The internships will allow students to gain
experience and familiarity with research administration as a career pathway. By
recruiting and retaining the next generation of research administrators, this
internship program helps expand and diversify the research administration
workforce and builds research capacity, while establishing a model that other
institutions can follow.

The series of convenings supported by this project engage multiple stakeholder
communities in a collaborative, partnerships-driven process. Regional convenings
bring together student interns and research leaders, administrators, and campus
professionals from across the seven Maryland and Delaware MSIs to identify ways
to promote research administration to students as a career opportunity. National
convenings bring together members of professional societies in research
administration to discuss how best to train students to meet the needs of the
broader research administration workforce. In a final symposium, participants
and student interns finalize best practices for developing the regional research
administration internship program. In addition to a culminating white paper,
participants and student interns are included as co-researchers on presentations
and workshops at regional and national conferences and papers for research
administration journals. These deliverables chart a course for establishing and
expanding sustainable, replicable, and scalable internship programs at other
universities, to further build equitable and inclusive environments for research
administration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.