* 2324657
* Supporting the GEO REU Network and Exploring New REU Models to Effectively Engage Diverse Students in the Geosciences
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Valerie Sloan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 125,116.00

Studies show that mentored research experiences, cohort building, and student
career development in inclusive environments effectively engage undergraduates
in STEM career paths. The NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Program supports internship programs at institutions across the nation that
provide valuable educational experiences for undergraduate students through
participation in research. It also aims to increase the participation of the
nation's diverse talent - particularly underrepresented students and students
from institutions with limited research capacity - in the U.S. science and
engineering workforce. Developing and managing an internship program is a
complex undertaking, especially for geoscience internship programs that often
involve fieldwork. This award creates a central network that supports the
efforts of Geosciences (GEO) REU program leaders at over sixty institutions and
provides professional development for participating REU interns. The REU program
leaders will benefit from the experience and insight of others in the GEO REU
Network, including the project leads and other experts. The Network leaders will
provide just-in-time resources, strategies, and tools for GEO REU PIs as they
navigate recruiting and selecting students, preparing mentors, setting
expectations, and addressing student engagement challenges in their programs.
They will provide REU leads with individual support and recruit students from
underrepresented communities, community colleges, and primarily undergraduate
institutions at scientific meetings. The PIs of this project will offer career
development workshops for all GEO REU interns during the summer, which directly
contributes to the preparation of the geoscience workforce. These efforts will
support the community of practice among the internship leads and augment the
efficacy of REU programs.

The geoscience community hosts internships, Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REUs), with the intention of providing students with valuable
education and of bringing undergraduate scholars from a wide range of
backgrounds into the geosciences. Developing and managing an effective,
inclusive internship is a challenging year-round undertaking. The GEO REU
Network will provide support to all GEO REU leaders and students through
fostering the exchange of tools, strategies, and experiences within the
community, developing resources, and providing professional development that
aligns with the REU Program goals. An overarching theme has been to encourage
the adoption of inclusive REU practices and processes. These involve designing
accessible and inclusive REUs that take into account and even examine biases and
privilege in application and selection processes. The project will advance
community understanding of the pedagogy of student research and of inclusive
practices, and it will enhance a sense of collaboration among REU PIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.