* 2324326
* DMREF: Design of fast energy storage pseudocapacitive materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,925,614.00

Non-technical Description: Electrical energy storage is essential to the energy
transition and to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. While electricity
storage in batteries has made significant progresses in recent years in terms of
the amount of energy stored, one major challenge is the long time required for
charging. Capacitors represent another class of electrical energy storage
devices that can be charged very quickly. Such capacitive energy storage is an
important technology for numerous applications where electrical energy needs to
be stored and/or released quickly. However, current devices and materials can
store only a limited amount of energy. The realization of capacitors that could
store a large amount of electrical energy could have an enormous impact on
energy storage for the electricity grid, for electric mobility solutions, and
for consumer electronics. The project aims at designing novel capacitive
materials that can greatly increase the energy storage of electrochemical
capacitors with fast charging and discharging. The projectâ€™s societal impact
lies in its contributions towards the decarbonization of the transportation
sector which accounts for 29% of all greenhouse gas emission in the United
States today. The scientific approach will be based on a material design loop
including experiments and modeling in order to define the features of capacitive
materials enabling high storage ability, in the spirit of the Materials Genome
initiative and on a large computational screening of prospective materials to
obtain candidates that will be tested experimentally. The project will also
serve as a platform for the training of undergraduate and graduate students in
topics related to energy storage and modeling. Advantage will be taken of the
existing infrastructure at UCLA and Stanford University to attract talented,
ethnically and culturally diverse undergraduate student populations to work on
cutting-edge research.

Technical Description: The aim of this research program is to tightly combine
experimental and computational methods to identify a new generation of
electrochemical energy storage materials based on pseudocapacitance, defined as
a charge storage approach which uses fast and reversible surface or near surface
redox reactions, and to construct a prototype device integrating the energy
storage materials. While the underlying principles of pseudocapacitance are
understood, there is currently no ability to predict or design materials that
display pseudocapacitive behavior. A double design loop is proposed. The first
one will operate at the atomic scale and will combine first principle electronic
structure calculations with synthesis and testing. It will provide
thermodynamics and kinetic information to the second level of design that will
involve optimization of energy storage device configurations, combining
continuum modeling and experimental synthesis and characterization. From this
approach, an energy storage device will be demonstrated based on the developed
pseudocapacitive materials. The project will bring fundamental understanding of
the factors governing pseudocapacitive material performance and provide
practical guidelines for the design of high performance energy storage materials
and devices. The research will also have significant scientific merit by
establishing the interrelationships among material structure, charge storage
dynamics, and charge transfer processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.