* 2324203
* DMREF: GOALI: Designing Materials for Next-generation Spintronic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jonathan Sun, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Non-technical Description: Feynman's visionary keynote speech emphasized the
need for probabilistic computers to simulate complex, inherently probabilistic
problems. This project addresses the challenge of developing hardware capable of
accelerating probabilistic algorithms. By designing probabilistic bits (p-bits)
based on stochastic low barrier magnets in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs), the
research aims to realize a breakthrough in probabilistic computing. The proposed
materials foundation focuses on identifying novel soft magnetic Heusler alloys
with ultra-low energy barriers that can be controlled using energy-efficient
spin-orbit torque (SOT) materials. This interdisciplinary endeavor integrates
theoretical modeling, high-throughput materials screening, computational
simulations, experimental synthesis and characterization, and modular
simulations to accelerate materials discovery and device design for p-bit
implementation. The transformative potential of this research lies in enabling
compact and energy-efficient hardware for probabilistic computing, with
implications for the semiconductor industry and expanding the material base for
industry-relevant spintronic memory technologies. Research results produced by
this work will be available to the wider community through the nanoHUB
spintronics portal and gained knowledge will be disseminated through its
educational platform that has offered courses to thousands of students and
engineers. Moreover, student training and workforce development will be enhanced
through a planned summer school.

Technical Description: The objective of this research is to target
technologically relevant high-performance p-bits by designing key material
components. Heusler alloys are a remarkable class of more than 1500
intermetallic compounds whose magnetic properties can be readily tuned via both
alloy composition and band structure engineering. In particular, Heusler
properties are desirable for achieving high frequency fluctuations, because low
magnetization, half-metallicity, nearly zero magneto-crystalline anisotropy, and
exchange field-enhanced spin dynamics can all be realized in these materials. In
addition, a number of Heusler materials exhibit excellent lattice matching to
MgO used as a tunnel barrier in MTJs with high tunneling magneto resistance, as
well as to highly efficient SOT materials. As an outcome of the proposed
materials search and optimization, we expect to demonstrate p-bits with
characteristic fluctuation frequencies up to tens of GHz controlled by SOT
materials with improved efficiencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.