* 2324190
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Establishing a molecular interaction framework to design and predict modern polymer semiconductor assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Seung Soon Jang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

Non-technical Description: Electronic materials based on plastics possess unique
optoelectronic and processing properties that provide exceptional opportunities
for large-area lighting applications, novel versatile solar-energy harvesting
platforms, next-generation sensors, future computing options, and beyond. If the
development of plastic electronics systems can be accelerated, step changes will
be achieved. For instance, new sustainable technologies may be produced that,
e.g., integrate semi-transparent solar cells with greenhouses to yield a new
class of sustainable, zero-energy, controlled-environment agriculture; assist
with smart and controllable heat management for cars and office buildings;
and/or allow the design of novel health-care devices. Despite extensive past
efforts to further advance these materials and technology platforms, design- and
processing- protocols remain based on trial-and-error methods, hampered by the
highly intricate structure of plastic semiconductors, including complex
structural dynamics. The critical bottleneck is that structure-function
relations cannot be understood and categorized with classic nomenclature and
classic approaches. New polymer physics and multi-disciplinary ML/AI approaches
are proposed to be introduced to accelerate materials development.

Technical Description: In this DMREF research, a framework will be delivered to
expand polymer physics concepts. The framework will consider that state-of-the-
art polymer semiconductors have an insolu-ble, complex electron donor-acceptor
(D-A) backbone as well as large sidechains that provide solubility. The vision
is to advance a knowledge platform toward the predictable and controlled self-
assembly of multicomponent plastic semiconducting inks that lead to targeted
device properties. This will require the framework to accurately capture the
molecular interactions and the complex secondary and tertiary structures of
modern D-A semiconducting polymers and enable the development of descriptors
that dictate and classify the assembly of these interesting macromolecules based
on their intricate primary chemical molecular design. The projectâ€™s objective
will be pursued by combining academic research in modeling self-assembly,
polymer physics/thermal phase behavior, relaxation analysis, and molecular
packing/assembly, with contributions by national laboratory partners in solution
scattering (NIST) and theory/modeling (LANL), and targeted synthesis by numerous
synthetic collaborators. ML/AI analytics and methodologies will enhance
experimental efficiency and knowledge inferences. This project, thus, can be
expected to have broad implications in macromolecular science and technology in
general. The project will also provide a highly interdisciplinary workforce
trained in experimental methodologies, theory, simulations, and machine-learning
techniques and a general community more aware of the benefits of the Materials
Genome Initiative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.