* 2324785
* CAREER: Spatial Quantification of Fundamental Mechanisms that Initiate Post-Wildfire Wetting-Induced Shallow Landslides
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Idil Akin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/28/2027
* USD 556,172.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will explore how dynamic
changes in a forest environment that is recovering from a wildfire control the
stability of burnt hillslopes against wetting-induced shallow landslides over
time. The US wildfire management strategy has changed from “fighting wildfires”
to “living with wildfires,” which involves community adaptation to wildfires.
Post-wildfire landslides have been identified as a serious cascading risk to
community adaptation to wildfires, but the fundamental initiation mechanisms are
not yet understood. There is currently no wildfire-specific approach to
evaluating the landslide susceptibility of burned hillslopes. This project will
be the first step toward developing a wildfire-specific framework for analyzing
the stability of hillslopes as a function of time, saturation, and forest use
practices for different intensity fires and different landslide mechanisms. The
research will be integrated with an education program aiming to place a new
generation of engineers in a position to analyze and alleviate the risk of post-
wildfire landslides, inform the policy makers, and promote community education
about such risks.

The primary research objective of this study is to quantify the fundamental
mechanisms that change mechanical and hydrologic soil behavior and therefore
slope stability in post-wildfire environments. The fundamental mechanisms are
hypothesized to be controlled by forest system dynamics (i.e., tree loss,
regrowth, ash movement), that synergistically control suction stress. To achieve
the primary research objective, the following specific objectives will be
achieved: 1) quantify post-wildfire suction stress and forest system dynamics
over time, 2) identify the change functions for the components of forest system
dynamics in relation to suction stress, and 3) evaluate post-wildfire shallow
landslide susceptibility using a probabilistic approach. This will require a
multiscale investigation of soil behavior in post-wildfire environments. The
research plan involves testing soil behavior from the atomic scale to the
hillslope scale and will allow multi-sensor data fusion. Field and laboratory
data will be combined with spatial data from LiDAR scans and aerial photographs.
The spatial variability in suction stress along the hillslope will be presented
as a distribution function and will be an input for a probabilistic slope
stability model for evaluating the wetting-induced shallow landslide
susceptibility of burned hillslopes. In addition, the dependency of the
adsorptive component of suction stress on the soil water retention curve will be
investigated through water vapor sorption isotherms. This will improve our
understanding of the degree of physicochemical forces on mechanical soil
behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.