* 2324896
* Conference: 2023 Archaea: Ecology, Metabolism and Molecular Biology GRC and GRS The Root and Branch of Discovery: Lessons on Life from the Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Amy Schmid, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support the Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on “Archaea:
Ecology, Metabolism, and Molecular Biology,” to be held July 24-30, 2023 at
Mount Snow, VT. This meeting will be attended by undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as senior researchers to discuss our
understanding of all aspects of the structure, biochemistry, evolution, and
microbial ecology of the archaea. Talks will be presented on topics such as
newly discovered archaeal lineages, nitrogen and sulfur metabolism, geochemical
cycles, and cell-virus interactions. In addition to formal talks presented by
experienced researchers and trainees new to the field, engagement will be
facilitated by six poster sessions to stimulate interactions between
researchers. NSF support will be used to defray travel costs to allow attendance
of participants from early stages of their careers, especially for members of
groups underrepresented in this field.

Archaea are the oldest group of organisms on earth, fundamental to evolution of
all larger creatures, yet surprisingly little is known about them due to the
extreme environments in which many of them live. This Gordon Conference and
Seminar will allow discussion of the newest research on the structure and
biochemistry of these tiny creatures, including understanding of their role in
cycling nitrogen and other compounds in the environment, and their key roles in
many ecosystems. The meeting will bring together seasoned investigators with
early-career scientists in both formal talks and discussion sessions to
encourage informal discussion and sharing of latest research results on the
formation of structures in the cell, nitrogen and sulfur metabolism, and their
interactions that maintain communities of microbes essential for stabilizing the
environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.