* 2324666
* Conference: An HBCU Partnership to Enhance Research Support Services and Technical Training
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Norma Frank, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 07/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project addresses the need for greater Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) and other Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs)
participation in federally funded research. Increased external funding not only
benefits the HBCUs and MSIs, but the local community and society as well. Grant-
funded research initiatives contribute to the needs of our communities, and the
broader society in such areas as: education, health care, technology, homeland
security, social wellbeing, workforce development, agricultural sustainment, and
numerous other areas. The project furthers the mission of NSF, identifying
transformative ideas and accessible models that can be used to broaden and
diversify participation in research activities, strengthening the Nation’s
research enterprise.

The goal of the project is to create a strategic plan to increase research
capability and funding capacity at HBCU and MSI institutions. The innovations,
explorations, and advancement of knowledge enabled by increased external funding
at the participating institutions will be a byproduct of this initiative.
Southern University and A&M College (SUBR), the National Sponsored Programs
Administrators Alliance (NSPAA) of HBCUs. Inc. and partnering institutions:
Southern University at New Orleans, Southern University at Shreveport, Grambling
State University, Dillard University and Xavier University, will join in this
common effort to identify barriers, share best practices, and find solutions
that will significantly impact the research capability and funding capacity of
the HBCUs participating in this project. The project includes one, in-person,
interactive conference and two (2) virtual workshops (one pre-conference and one
post-conference). Activities planned for these convenings are based on the
identified needs of the universities surveyed and current research findings.
Understanding the challenges and roadblocks that hinder and often prevent HBCUs
and MSIs from competing for, and managing, federal grant awards and identifying
measurable, sustainable solutions to these problems will significantly transform
HBCU’s and MSI’s research potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.