* 2324359
* Conference: The 41st Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Kbenesh Blayneh, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2024
* USD 42,660.00

The Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations
(SEARCDE) will take place November 18-19, 2023, at Florida A&M University (FAMU)
in Tallahassee, Florida. The annual conference was initiated by scientific
members of the Department of Mathematics at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University in 1981. Over the years, it has been hosted at various
institutions in the southeastern and mid-Atlantic regions, serving as a
traditional platform for junior and senior researchers, as well as advanced
undergraduate and graduate students, to convene. The conference's primary focus
is to facilitate the sharing of the latest research findings, explore emerging
trends and challenges in the field of differential equations and related applied
sciences. The 41st SEARCDE conference is of particular significance as it
signifies a collaboration between FAMU and the nearby Florida State University,
promoting their faculty members' internal research activities. By fostering this
collaboration, the 41st SEARCDE strives to continue its tradition of being a
scientific platform that fosters the exchange of innovative ideas, facilitates
research network expansion, and drives the entire scientific community forward.
Furthermore, the conference offers an enriching experience to all participants,
with a special focus on encouraging representation from members of
underrepresented groups.

Differential equations are of utmost importance in addressing a wide range of
real-world challenges, spanning from climate modeling to drug development and
control systems. With its focus on tackling these trending issues, the 41st
SEARCDE conference has organized three impactful plenary talks centered around
the themes of (1) Inverse problems for partial differential equations, (2)
Control theory in fluid dynamics and material science, and (3) Approximation
theory for differential equations and/or partial differential equations.
Complementing these talks, the conference will also feature stimulating invited
and contributed presentations that explore diverse topics in differential
equations and mathematical modeling, encompassing analytical, numerical, and
experimental perspectives. Examples include (1) Sensitivity and perturbation
analysis of differential equations in models of biology and physical
oceanography, (2) Analysis of semi- and/or fully discrete schemes for
evolutionary systems, and (3) Parameter estimation for models in immuno-eco-
epidemiology. Taking place at FAMU, a renowned historically black university,
the 41st SEARCDE conference is committed not only to showcasing scientific
contributions but also to fostering diversity and inclusion, with the ultimate
goal of increasing representation of STEM minorities in the Southeastern-
Atlantic region. By providing a platform for experts and juniors to exchange
knowledge and insights, the conference endeavors to advance research in
differential equations and empower a broader community to tackle real-world
challenges through innovative techniques. Further information about the 41st
conference can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/searcde-2023/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.