* 2324984
* EAGER: Nuclear Transmutation in Metal Organic Frameworks through Neutron Absorption
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Zachariah Heiden, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,978.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Qiang Zhang and Zachariah Heiden of Washington State University aim to develop
an innovative way to create unique mixed-metal structures in metal-organic
frameworks through nuclear transmutation and study their stability under
irradiation. Metal-organic frameworks are made by linking metal ions with
organic molecules to form structures that can be one, two, or three-dimensional
in nature. Such structures can be considered as microscopic scaffolds with holes
or pockets. These pockets can be up to 90% of the volume of the structures,
which means they are highly porous like a sponge. Traditional methods have
struggled to create these structures with specific mixed metal species, but this
new transmutation approach could be the key to overcoming this significant
limitation. If successful, the materials resulting from this approach are
expected to have unique properties that could potentially bring significant
advances to various fields such as sensor technology, catalyst development, and
materials that can absorb specific substances. A vital aspect of this project is
the investigation into how these materials behave under extreme conditions. This
knowledge could help in creating materials that can withstand harsh environments
such as outer space, or that can improve nuclear waste management. The project
will offer unique opportunities for students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, to get hands-on training and experience in porous
materials synthesis and nuclear reactor operation under the guidance of Drs.
Zhang and Heiden.

The funded research aims to apply nuclear transmutation within metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) to introduce secondary metal centers and study their stability
under neutron irradiation. The resilience of these new materials under neutron
radiation will be rigorously assessed based on their elemental composition,
structure, and neutron dose. The level of activated isotopes, which is
determined by the neutron dosage, can be controlled by adjusting the neutron
irradiation flux while monitoring decay processes. The anticipated consequence
of incorporating these secondary metal centers into the MOF structure is a
significant alteration in both the stability and electronic properties of the
target MOFs. For instance, the introduction of chromium into vanadium MOFs is
expected to enhance material stability. The formation of chromium within
vanadium MOFs is also expected to alter the electronic properties of the MOF, as
the size, acidity and redox chemistry of Cr ions are different from those of the
V ions. The project will probe the coordination chemistry and structural
dynamics of these materials under neutron flux. This high risk/high potential
reward project has the potential to uncover innovative methodologies for
developing advanced materials with enhanced properties and functionalities,
thereby potentially making a significant contribution to the field of materials
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.