* 2324987
* Conference: Field of Dreams Conference 2023-25
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kyle Frantz, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This award will fund participation in the Field of Dreams Conference from
2023-25. This meeting brings together approximately 200 undergraduate and
terminal MS students, about 85% of whom belong to underrepresented minority
groups as defined by NSF. The awarded funds will support the participation of
approximately 150 of these student attendees each year, and many are
participants in the Math Allianceâ€™s Facilitated Graduate Admissions Procedure
(F-GAP), which helps students navigate the graduate school application process.
F-GAP has been placing an average of 70 students in graduate programs per year
since 2013-14. The meeting also attracts about 150 faculty members, most of whom
are Math Alliance Mentors, about 50 doctoral students (many former attendees to
Field of Dreams as undergraduates), as well as representatives of industry,
government, professional organizations, scientific institutes, and other
quantitative science professionals. The Field of DreamsConference is the
capstone event for the National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the
Mathematical Sciences (Math Alliance) and serves many important community
building roles. A major focus of the conference is preparing students for entry
into and success within graduate programs, and this goal is addressed in part by
a series of panels focusing on important information for students as they
consider their path forward. There are also sessions for mentors to exchange
best practices, meetings of affiliated regional alliances, plenary addresses,
and an REU & Internship Fair. A major conference event is the Graduate Program
Fair, where students meet representatives and students from many graduate
programs. Panels prepare the students to maximize their success in gathering
information at this fair. In recent years there have been as many as 70 tables
at this event.

The Math Alliance is a national mentoring community consisting of Mentors
(faculty) and Scholars (students) focusing on broadening participation in the
quantitative science professions. The primary goal is to increase the number and
proportion of students from historically underrepresented minority groups who
enroll in and graduate from doctoral programs in the broad STEM disciplines
which depend strongly on mathematics and computational science. Our community
seeks to support these scientists as they make their way through their
undergraduate education, the graduate application process, graduate programs,
and into the quantitative science professions. The Math Alliance provides a
national supportive community, and builds a national cohort of peers from
similar backgrounds who are advancing through graduate programs and careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.