* 2324304
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 2: Project Pythia and Pangeo: Building an inclusive geoscience community through accessible, reusable, and reproducible workflows
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* James Munroe, Code for Science and Society Inc
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 344,941.00

This project builds upon the demonstrable success of two community-driven open
geoscience efforts: Pangeo and Project Pythia. Pangeo has advanced
transformative platforms and paradigms for “Big Data” geoscience in the cloud;
Pythia has built open, interactive learning resources for Python-based
geoscience workflows built on public cloud datasets that “just work” for users.
The central goal of this project is to reduce barriers to scientific progress by
building community around shared scientific workflow knowledge, using the Pythia
Cookbook format. “Cookbooks” imply collections of recipes for transforming raw
ingredients (publicly available data) into scientifically useful results.
Cookbooks are based on Jupyter notebooks but explicitly tied to reproducible
computational environments and supported by a rich infrastructure enabling
collaborative authoring and automated health-checking – essential tools in the
struggle against the widespread problem of notebook obsolescence. Open-access,
cloud-based Cookbooks are a democratizing force for science. By growing the
collection of Pythia Cookbooks while growing the community of users,
contributors, and maintainers, this project will grow the capacity of current
and future geoscientists to practice open science within the rapidly evolving
open science ecosystem.

Project Pythia exists to house, share, and accelerate the development of high-
quality learning resources for Python-based computing in the geosciences. This
project will advance geoscience research and education by developing,
documenting, and propagating best practices for highly scalable reproducible
data analysis in the cloud using the open-source ecosystem. The Pythia team will
develop science-driven exemplar Cookbooks demonstrating highly scalable versions
of common analysis workflows on high-value datasets across numerous geoscience
domains, with content chosen to accelerate community awareness and
participation. Content will span disciplines including Atmospheric Science,
Physical Oceanography, Hydrology, Glaciology, Climate Science, and applications
of Machine Learning. Infrastructure will be deployed for performant data-
proximate Cookbook authoring, testing, and use, on both commercial and NSF-
funded cloud platforms. Both the Cookbook collection and the community of user-
contributors will broaden and grow through annual workshops, outreach, and
classroom use, with recruitment specifically targeting under-served communities.
Priorities will be guided by an independent steering board; sustainability will
be achieved by nurturing a vibrant, inclusive community backed by automation
that lowers barriers to participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.