* 2324893
* I-Corps: Thin Flexible Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Per Stromhaug, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high energy density power source, a hydrogen-fed thin flexible
fuel cell (TFFC). The proposed technology may address the growing need for a
higher performing, sustainable portable power source. Advanced portable systems
continue to grow in power requirements and batteries are limiting their
usability. For example, commercial drones use lithium-based batteries due to
size and weight limits. These batteries provide a maximum flight time of 30
minutes, which disrupts workflow significantly. The TFFC may help to expand
hydrogen fuel cell portable applications for clean, sustainable energy. In
addition, the TFFC ultimately may contribute towards a shift towards lightweight
hydrogen fuel cells in a wide array of verticals that require an energy-dense
power source in a customizable form factor.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a new type of hydrogen fuel
cell. The proposed technology, a thin flexible fuel cell (TFFC), uses an
architecture that eliminates the heavy metallic parts (bipolar plates) used in
conventional fuel cells, reducing weight, and significantly increasing energy
density of the overall power system. The TFFC is a proton exchange membrane
(PEM) fuel cell that is uniquely suited to lightweight applications because all
the structural and packaging components that are conventionally fabricated from
metals have been replaced by lightweight polymers. The resulting structure
possesses power density that far exceeds those of existing fuel cells. The
structure is ultra-thin (~ 1 mm) and flexible so that it can be formed into
arbitrary shapes. The form factor enables highly efficient passive cooling
through area-proportional convective heat transfer, obviating the need for
active cooling components such as liquid coolants, radiators, pumps, etc. The
result is a simple, highly reliable, lightweight, compact, low-cost power source
that may be integrated into an unmanned aerial vehicle airframe that can operate
over a wide range of ambient temperatures and conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.