* 2324421
* SAI: Integration of Electric Vehicles and the Electric Grid
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Tyler Svitak, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

This project explores how people can benefit from improving the flow of energy
and information between electric vehicles (EVs) and the electric grid. Many
Americans are experiencing frequent power outages and rising energy costs. EVs
offer a promising solution as they can serve as backup power sources during
outages, charge at cheaper times, support the grid, and promote the integration
of renewable energy. However, to fully harness the advantages of EVs,
encouraging EV charging practices that prioritize grid stability and economic
incentives is vital. This SAI research project combines economic, behavioral,
and technical concepts to develop a Vehicle-Grid Integration (VGI) system that
maximizes the advantages of EVs in addressing power outages, reducing energy
costs, and creating a strong and sustainable energy system. This project
explores the potential benefits of VGI, the costs and challenges associated with
its implementation, and how best to share the benefits among people.
Additionally, this project examines how people most prefer to participate and be
compensated for using their buildings and EVs as resources to make the electric
grid more resilient.

Building on existing collaborations with policymakers, industry, and nonprofits,
this SAI project is organized into four research thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on
finding pricing mechanisms and institutional arrangements that promote user-
friendly VGI services. Thrust 2 performs power flow studies to ensure the power
grid can handle VGI and designs a system for optimizing EV charging and
discharging schedules. Thrust 3 examines socio-economic disparities in
benefiting from VGI and explores consumer willingness to participate in
bidirectional EV charging. Thrust 4 develops a machine learning model and a
synthetic dataset that includes data on how consumers adopt and use VGI
services, as well as the impact of these adoption and usage patterns. By
combining data from laboratory experiments, surveys, interviews, and real-world
implementations of VGI infrastructure, this project offers a model for
predicting the effects and patterns of widespread adoption of VGI systems across
the country.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.