* 2324950
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type 1: Software-Hardware Recycling and Repair Dataset Infrastructure (SHReDI) for Sustainable Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sara Behdad, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2026
* USD 249,957.00

Electronic waste (e-waste) is the fastest-growing waste stream worldwide, with a
significant portion ending up in landfills. This is particularly concerning
since electronics manufacturing uses materials from regions with insufficient
environmental and social safeguards. Furthermore, valuable materials in e-waste,
including gold, silver, copper, and platinum, are often consigned to burning or
landfills. This collaborative project aims to enhance e-waste recovery by
transforming electronics design practices and optimizing e-waste logistics. The
project’s novelties are in the development of low-cost wireless tags and
computational models for accurately quantifying the costs and environmental
impacts associated with e-waste recovery and recycling. Researchers at Oregon
State University and the University of Florida will develop wireless tags that
will provide recyclers with easy-to-read information about material types,
quantities, and recommended recycling processes based on the decision-making
models developed during this project. The project’s impacts are higher recycling
rates and improved recycling efficiency for electronic waste. Additionally, the
tag information will allow tracking of recycled e-waste based on producers,
enabling public policy that accurately assigns recycling costs to electronics
manufacturers. The project also includes a wide range of educational and
outreach activities, emphasizing mentoring students from underrepresented groups
and enhancing access to research outcomes through curriculum development, K-12
outreach, and undergraduate summer research experiences.

The research objective of this project is to develop an integrated circuit (IC)
hardware system, along with data collection and decision support metrics, to
establish a quantitative information ecosystem for electronic device reuse and
recycling. This collaborative project brings together investigators with
complementary expertise in integrated circuit design, sustainable manufacturing,
remanufacturing, and e-waste management. The project envisions leveraging
critical device data such as material content and usage behavior to quantify
reusability metrics and develop decision-making models to inform consumers,
repairers, and recyclers on end-of-use strategies. The integrated hardware-and-
modeling research tasks will extend the boundaries of active radio-frequency ID
(RFID) design and enable mathematical models for critical constraints imposed by
e-waste reverse logistics. By utilizing individual device data from RFID tags,
decision-making models will be developed to enhance remanufacturing operations
and formulate strategies for managing producer responsibility more effectively.
By combining highly scalable and easily deployable hardware with end-of-life
decision support models, the project will demonstrate the feasibility of a
circular ecosystem that can significantly increase the reuse and recovery rates
of e-waste.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.