* 2324593
* Tailoring Quasi-Solid-State 'Water-in-Swelling-Clay' Electrolytes for High-Voltage, Durable Aqueous Zinc-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Kyeongjae Cho, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2026
* USD 587,580.00

Batteries play a critical role in renewable energy storage and energy
transition. To address the intermittent nature of wind and solar power
generations, high-performance batteries are necessary to connect these renewable
energy sources-based electricity generators to electric power grid. Aqueous
zinc-ion batteries have recently attracted tremendous research interest because
of their advantages such as low safety risks, abundant elemental resources, low
cost, and eco-friendliness. However, their widespread use is limited due to
their lower energy density and limited cycle life compared to state-of-the-art
lithium-ion batteries. This project aims to develop high-voltage, durable, and
cost-effective aqueous zinc-ion batteries by designing novel ‘water-in-swelling-
clay’ electrolytes to address these issues. The knowledge obtained from this
project will have a direct impact on alleviating power supply issues for
efficient grid-scale energy storage and accelerate potential applications of the
unique material design to other energy and environmental engineering fields such
as adhesion and absorption. The project includes integrated outreach activities,
such as research programs for local K-12 students and teachers, which can help
students to acquire relevant knowledge and skills. This project will also enable
the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students, including
those from underrepresented groups, in the fields of materials and
electrochemical energy storage.

This project seeks to establish a fundamental understanding of the structure-
property correlation of new, low-cost quasi-solid-state ‘water-in-swelling-clay’
electrolytes to achieve high voltage, high energy, and long cycle life of
aqueous zinc-ion batteries for grid-scale energy storage. The rational
electrolyte design strategy of tuning the atomic structures and interfacial
chemistries of the swelling clay by chemical modifications is expected to
effectively suppress water activities (e.g., decomposition), resulting in
enhanced electrochemical performance of battery cells. The objectives of this
proposal are to: (1) reveal fundamental mechanisms by multiscale modeling to
understand and control the interactions among water molecules, clays, and ions
that lead to high working voltage and enhanced energy density and cycle life of
‘water-in-swelling-clay’-based zinc-ion batteries, and (2) validate the modeling
results by developing such high-voltage, durable aqueous batteries. The research
approach is to integrate first-principles calculations, molecular dynamics
simulations, phase-field modeling, and experimental validation of the advanced
quasi-solid-state electrolytes, followed by the demonstration of high-
performance battery cells. The gained fundamental knowledge promises to expedite
the commercialization of aqueous zinc-ion batteries as competitive alternatives
to lithium-ion batteries and address pressing issues in other aqueous
electrochemical energy storage systems such as fuel cells and beyond-lithium
batteries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.