* 2324880
* Collaborative Research: LTREB Renewal - River ecosystem responses to floodplain restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Marc Peipoch, Stroud Water Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2028
* USD 14,450.00

Floodplains are the areas alongside rivers that are affected by water movement.
Floodplains provide many important benefits to people, yet they are also
susceptible to changes such as flooding, pollution, and other disturbances.
Understanding the effects of long-term changes in river ecosystems affected by
metal pollution is extremely important. This project studies changes over ten
years in the Upper Clark Fork River in Montana following a large project that
restored vegetation and removed contaminated soil after damage from extensive
mining in the riverâ€™s headwaters. Changes in land use and wastewater treatment
are also altering nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations along the river. Since
2013, nearly 17 km of river has been restored and three core data sets have been
collected, which were initiated decades before the restoration. The long-term
measurements and the spatial scale of the study provides an opportunity to
observe the ecological processes involved in restoration practices. Several
undergraduate and graduate students are educated as part of this project, data
are made available to the public, and results are shared with many stakeholders
in this river system through the Clark Fork Science Forum.

The study system of the Upper Clark Fork River in Montana, has several unique
qualities that enable this project to make significant scientific advances.
First, the system has received high inputs of metals that have since ceased.
This enables investigation of the ecosystem dynamics over time in response to
this cessation. Second, the investigators have closely observed ecological and
biogeochemical responses over decadal timescales, which is the appropriate
timeframe to study the types of slow processes involved in river ecosystem
recovery. The project generates core data sets including: 1) influences on
organic matter and sediment metals, 2) changes in upstream-downstream gradients
in sediment metals, 3) metabolic responses to floodplain reconnection in
restored reaches during the spring flood pulse vs. summer baseflow, 4) changes
in metal bioavailability caused by interaction with dissolved organic matter,
and 5) measurements of nitrogen, phosphorus, and dissolved organic carbon in
restored and unrestored parts of the river. Ultimately, this project
investigates river ecosystem responses over large spatial (>200 km) and temporal
(> decadal) scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.