* 2324897
* Enzyme-Activatable Substrate Probes for Fluorescence Imaging and Quantification in Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Robin McCarley, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 91,209.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor McCarley of Louisiana State University is
developing optical methods for detecting specific proteins in biological cells
in a highly efficient and selective manner. To meet this challenge, the McCarley
group is designing and making, and implementing in human cell studies, a new
series of smart dye molecules that are sensitive to the presence of specific
protein analytes within the cells. The highly interdisciplinary approach
provides an enriched learning environment for a team whose training and
diversity make it possible to capably address measurement science challenges
that span the physical and biological sciences. The focus of this project is
development and evaluation of new dye molecules whose fluorescent signal can be
switched on, or the existing fluorescence can be changed to another energy, as a
result of target analyte action on the dye molecules. The responsive dyes in
this project are designed to selectively respond to the presence of particular
enzymes, for example cancer-linked enzymes that are highly populated only within
human cancer cells. High-integrity detection and differentiation of cancer cells
from normal cells with the fluorescent dyes is being demonstrated by use of
microscopy and cell counting methods. The broader impacts of this project
include proven routes for the high-fidelity detection and imaging of cancer
cells; the interdisciplinary training of scientists in a diverse, rich
educational environment, that will enable them to address the ever-growing
complexity of scientific challenges; dissemination of the work to scientific
peers and the public through professional society meetings and public
presentations; and the opportunity to influence female pK-12 students through
high-impact outreach programs.