* 2324601
* I-Corps:  Wearable Magnetoelastic Generator for Atrial Fibrillation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Jun Chen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a magnetoelastic generator (MEG) bracelet for cardiac monitoring.
Current devices need an external power supply and intermittent charging and
provide monitoring for up to two months. Implantable devices can do so for two
years. In contrast, the proposed bracelet employs a self-powered two-step energy
conversion method that continuously transforms pulses into high-fidelity,
analyzable electrical signals without requiring a power source. This allows for
uninterrupted monitoring. Currently used devices are not continuous and
inconvenient to use because they require the patient to measure their pulse
deliberately. The proposed device's continuous data collection feature
eliminates the problems of battery drainage and intermittent charging periods.
Additionally, this device may be used as a non-invasive and continuous
diagnostic tool.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a device to monitor atrial
fibrillation. It uses human arterial pulse waves and converts them into high-
fidelity and analyzable electrical signals, working in a self-powered manner.
The device utilizes the giant magnetoelastic effect in soft systems, making it
adaptable for wearable bioelectronics. The proposed textile wearable
magnetoelastic generator (MEG) consists of two types of fibers and operates on a
two-step energy conversion, including mechanical-to-magnetic and magnetic-to-
electrical conversions. A weaving of those fibers will complete the cycle of
mechanical-to-electrical conversion. This makes the device self-powered and
eliminates the need for an external power source such as a battery. In addition,
since magnetic fields can pass through water without significant performance
loss, the device is intrinsically waterproof. Previous research testing the
efficiency of the materials and reliability of the MEG in-vitro compared
favorably with traditional blood pressure monitors with a 1.2% difference. In
addition, the proposed technology may be implemented to measure heart rate,
respiratory rate, and movements, leading to the development of more accurate,
efficient, and non-invasive diagnostic tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.