* 2324719
* Conference: 2023 National Association of Plant Breeders (NAPB) Annual Meeting to be held July 16-20, 2023 (Greenville, SC)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Christopher Saski, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Plant breeding plays a vital role in addressing the three priorities for U.S.
agriculture: 1) plant health and production and plant products; 2) food safety,
nutrition, and health; and 3) bioenergy, natural resources, and the environment.
The development of improved plant breeding practices will be crucial in
overcoming the challenges faced by agriculture in the next decade. Climate
variability and the need for secure, sustainable, and nutritious food supplies
are among the key issues that must be addressed. Each year, the National
Association of Plant Breeders (NAPB) holds an annual conference that highlights
cutting edge interdisciplinary research and the methodologies and technologies
applied by today's plant breeders. In addition, the meeting provides
opportunities for training young scientists on the latest methods of developing
improved plants for sustainable production and provides a platform for
participants to network and develop productive collaborations to ensure
discoveries are translated into commercially relevant products. NSF funds will
be used to provide travel awards to students, postdoctoral associates and early
career investigators, especially those from underrepresented groups in STEM, to
participate in the annual NAPB conference to be held July 16-18, 2023, in
Greenville (SC).

By participating in the annual NAPB conference, students, postdoctoral
associates and/or early career investigators will have the opportunity to 1)
present their research findings and receive feedback from their peers; 2)
network with established plant breeders and professionals in the field; 3) learn
about cutting-edge research in the field and contribute to advancing the
discipline; 4) foster collaborations and partnerships with individuals from a
variety of backgrounds and perspectives; and, 5) gain exposure to public- and
private-sector priorities and needs. By creating a more inclusive and diverse
conference, the plant breeding community will benefit from a wider range of
perspectives, experiences, and ideas to enable more innovative research, better
problem-solving, and improved plant breeding practices. Ultimately, this will
lead to more sustainable food production and better agricultural practices for
communities around the world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.