* 2324706
* Conference: Potential Theory Workshop: Intersections in Harmonic Analysis, Partial Differential Equations and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Maria Pereyra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,669.00

The project is to support participation of US based mathematics undergraduate
and graduate students in the "Potential Theory Workshop: Intersections in
Harmonic Analysis, Partial Differential Equations and Probability" to be held
from September 28th till October 6th, 2023 at CIMAT in Guanajuato, Mexico. The
workshop's webpage is:
https://potentialtheory2023.eventos.cimat.mx/home_potential Analysis is a
foundational area of mathematics which has been in constant development over the
last century, and which plays a crucial role in numerous other areas of pure and
applied mathematics. The aim of this workshop is to strengthen the interactions
between the harmonic analysis, partial differential equations and probability
communities in Mexico and the US. The planned activities include a series of
talks from leading experts, a school consisting of three mini-courses with
problem sessions, a plenary talk, different panels geared toward advanced
undergraduate students and graduate students and poster sessions for the
students to show-case their research.

This project supports the travel and local expenses for 15 US based
undergraduate and graduate students to the school. One of the planned main
outcomes is exposure of US based junior researchers (undergraduate, graduate
students and postdocs) to the forefronts of research in harmonic analysis, PDEs
and probability highlighting their interconnections and to give them an
opportunity to network with peers from the USA and Mexico and with established
mathematicians from Mexico, Canada, the USA and Europe. This project is designed
to establish/strengthen connections and increase the flow of people and ideas
within North America. The diversity of participants has been of importance for
the organizers throughout: when deciding on the minicourse instructors, plenary
speaker, invited speakers, panelists, as well as participants supported by this
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.