* 2324853
* Collaborative Research: Transformation, interaction and toxicity of emerging 2D nanomaterials free-standing and embedded onto nanocomposite membranes for PFAS degradation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Nirupam Aich, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2025
* USD 254,833.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a class of chemical compounds
containing strong carbon-fluorine bonds and have been produced for public and
industrial usage since the 1940s. The detection of these chemicals in various
environmental matrices and living organisms (including humans) along with their
high stability and toxicogenic potential have raised significant public health
concerns. Conventional water and wastewater treatment processes are ineffective
at removing and degrading these chemicals due to their highly stable carbon-
fluorine bonds along with varying hydrophobicity and polarity. The goal of this
proposed project is to design a new class of reactive nanocomposite membrane
filters that will simultaneously separate these compounds from water and degrade
them to less- or non-toxic byproducts. To achieve this goal, the principal
investigators will combine expertise from nanomaterials, membrane separations,
and ecotoxicity using novel planar two-dimensional nanomaterials to fabricate
catalytic nanofiltration membranes with high water flow rate, stability, and
antifouling properties. This will enable removal and degradation of these
chemicals which are priority pollutants as well as other emerging chemicals in
this family of compounds. At the same time, the 2D nanomaterials and resulting
byproducts will be tested for their toxicity to model organisms to determine the
sustainability and effectiveness of this new treatment process. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the development of
fundamental knowledge about the new 2D nanomaterials and their interactions with
these fluorinated compounds for the development of an integrated membrane
reactor system that could serve both as a centralized water treatment system and
a point-of-use filter for the treatment of water contaminated with these
compounds. This project will further benefit society through education and
training of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students. This project
is jointly funded by the CBET Nanoscale Interactions Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding for the
sustainable design of 2D inorganic photocatalytic membranes for effective
degradation of the priority persistent pollutants of emerging concern, Per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances. Novel 2D nanomaterials with differing electronic and
physicochemical properties, non-metallic phosphorene and metalloid hexagonal
boron nitride that have shown evidence for degradation of these compounds, will
be employed. This research project aims to address the knowledge gap on how
these properties affect transformation, stability, and toxicity of the 2D
hexagonal boron nitride and phosphorene nanosheets in free-standing form in
aqueous media and after incorporating them onto nanocomposite membranes. The
research team will examine the degradation potential of the 2D nanomaterials and
their mechanisms of interactions with these compounds, identify breakdown
products, and evaluate toxicity of their degradation products using a model
organism, Caenorhabditis elegans, to verify that the breakdown products are less
toxic than the initial chemicals. To achieve this, state-of-the-art nanoscale
characterization techniques, molecular and thermodynamic modeling, analytical
chemistry, and molecular biology techniques will be employed. Findings will
provide knowledge about the potential transformation of non-carbon 2D
nanomaterials and the overall stability of 2D nanomaterials which will be useful
to understanding other non-carbon 2D materials with varied electronic and
physicochemical properties. Furthermore, while the chemistry of blending non-
carbon 2D nanomaterials onto polymeric membranes for the removal and destruction
of emerging water pollutants is the focus here, the same chemistry can be used
to fabricate air filtration membranes that would be able to potentially capture
and destroy airborne toxins, such as viruses. This project will also strengthen
the ongoing educational and outreach activities of the principal investigators
by integrating research and education, mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students, reaching out to community organizations, and engaging underrepresented
students in STEM fields. Technology dissemination to end users will be
accomplished through peer-reviewed manuscripts and conference presentations.
This project is jointly funded by the CBET Nanoscale Interactions Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.