* 2324301
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Designing Coherence and Entanglement in Perovskite Quantum Dot Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Oleg Prezhdo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 10/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

With the support of the DMREF Program and the Division of Chemistry, Libai
Huang, Jonathan Hood and Christina Li at Purdue University, Jianshu Cao at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Oleg Prezhdo at the University of
Southern California are leading a project on designing a new class of quantum
materials —one that can enable “wave-like” transport of information and energy
from tiny semiconductor particles known as quantum dots. Quantum dots derived
from lead halide perovskites, a type of semiconductor material, exhibit
extraordinary efficiency in absorbing and emitting light. The principal goal is
to understand how these quantum dots can work together, how they communicate,
and how to shield this communication from disruptions, a phenomenon known as
decoherence. The ultimate aim is to pave the way for the creation of new
materials capable of transmitting information and energy in a unique, efficient,
and wave-like manner. Such a breakthrough could revolutionize solar cell
technology and quantum communications. As part of the project, the team is also
committed to sharing their knowledge with a broad audience. This project will
also contribute to a more diverse scientific community by offering unique
training and educational opportunities for the next generation of scientists and
engineers, with a specific focus on increasing participation from
underrepresented groups and, as a collaborative, three-institution team,
exploring this exciting nexus of quantum chemistry, physics and materials
science.

The DMREF project aims to design a new quantum materials platform by exploring
the collective properties that arise from coherent and entangled interactions
between colloidal lead halide perovskite quantum dots (QDs). The team will use
their expertise in ultrafast microscopy, quantum optics, excited-state
calculations, quantum dynamics theory, and QD synthesis to answer fundamental
questions about how these collective states emerge and how they can be sustained
in a solid-state environment. This project is expected to deliver knowledge
advancements through a concerted effort to create, characterize, and model the
quantum states that would potentially emerge from the collective interactions of
QDs. With the goal of establishing robust coherence and entanglement, the team
will control coupling across QDs in superlattices and measure the extent of
coherence in space and time. Additionally, the strategic placement of these QDs
within optical cavities is anticipated to be a critical step towards achieving
coherence and entanglement. These insights will enable exploration of the
extremely large design space available for perovskite structures, superlattices,
and photonic structures. As such, the studies here will lay an important
foundation and, in the longer term, has the potential to contribute to
groundbreaking advances in quantum materials based on colloidal QDs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.