* 2324173
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Accelerated Design, Discovery, and Deployment of Electronic Phase Transitions (ADEPT)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Wei Chen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 798,131.00

Non-Technical Description: The world has seen an enormous increase in global
connectivity, information processing, and information storage driven by advances
in technologies that rely largely on traditional semiconductors. Their
underlying material platforms, however, are facing enormous challenges. A future
generation of electronic devices can be established using materials which exist
in multiple electronic states. Materials and devices that can be switched from
an insulator to a metal by an external trigger would revitalize the U.S.
semiconductor ecosystem, providing new paths to low-power computing systems and
integration into systems for 6G and beyond applications. The project goal is to
design and discover materials exhibiting such insulator-to-metal transitions
(IMT) that enable room-temperature operation and display large changes in
electrical resistivity. The research team, which comprises interdisciplinary
expertise in computational and experimental materials physics, data science, and
device engineering, aims to enable a culture shift in materials research,
development, and deployment through training a well-equipped and diverse
workforce with proficiencies in data-driven discovery of advanced materials.
Leveraging Materials Genome Initiative principles, the team will deliver a
tightly integrated codesign methodology to facilitate modeling and synthesis of
new IMT materials with superior properties, and ultimately guide the design
towards record-setting device performance to strengthen American leadership in
future computing, storage and communication technologies and industries.

Technical Description: The goal of the Accelerated Design, Discovery, and
Deployment of Electronic Phase Transitions (ADEPT) project is to implement an
accelerated discovery and codesign engine for efficient deployment of insulator-
metal transition (IMT) materials traditionally marred by sparse prior data and
system-level constraints. Achieving this goal requires moving beyond
conventional, linear approaches to materials discovery, transforming them into a
cyclic and iterative process. The project formulates new computational
approaches that fuse computational data with high-throughput materials synthesis
and characterization data to overcome key challenges of (i) Materials Discovery
from Sparse & Expensive Data, (ii) Efficient Decoding of High-Dimensional
Experimental Data, and (iii) Property-Performance Mismatch upon Integration.
Their confluence hinders the advancement of novel material platforms for future
microelectronic and wireless communication technologies. The project goal will
be executed by creating integrated protocols that transform the standard
sequential discovery steps (hypothesis generation, synthesis, characterization)
into closed-loops fashioned to overcome these challenges: (1) AI-Aided Virtual
Screening and Adaptive Discovery, (2) Accelerated Synthesis and Characterization
Analytics, and (3) Materials Integration, Device Fabrication, and Codesign.
Success with this framework will allow for the realization of material
objectives within device constraints and deliver the following outcomes: (1) new
classes of single and two-phase IMT materials (2) distributed in open-access
databases, (3) theories of IMT behavior, (4) novel IMT thin film synthesis
methods, (5) contactless characterization methods to improve throughput, (6)
adaptive learning methods to achieve codesigned materials and devices, and (7)
quantitative understanding of device performance to benefit future scalability
and manufacturing with industrial partners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.