* 2324353
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Topological Learning with Multiparameter Persistent Homology
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Peter Bubenik, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 09/30/2026
* USD 75,369.00

Experimental data may have an underlying shape whose determination can be
crucial for scientific advances. In many cases, the data is sufficiently complex
that state-of-the-art methods do not provide an adequate summary of its shape.
The subject of this project, topological data analysis, uses ideas from
theoretical mathematics to address this challenge. Topological data analysis has
been successful in settings where the shape varies as a single parameter
changes, but is in need of further research in settings where multiple
parameters vary. The goal of this project is to develop mathematical summaries
of the shape of data in the multiple parameter setting that may be easily
combined with other tools in data science. In summary, this project will use
ideas in mathematics, computer science, and statistics to advance theory and
develop tools that are of broad use to scientists and engineers. A conference at
the University of Florida will be organized in order to advance careers of young
STEM researchers.

A main tool of topological data analysis, persistent homology is now well
established. The subject of this project concerns a more advanced variant called
multiparameter persistent homology. The goal of this project is to develop new
tools for easily combining multiparameter persistent homology with statistics
and machine learning. Several of the computational approaches to multiparameter
persistent homology produce summaries which may be viewed as signed formal sums
on a pointed metric space. The investigator has shown that these summaries,
called generalized persistence diagrams, have a Wasserstein distance, and may be
viewed as elements of the free Banach space on a pointed metric space. This
project will produce continuous linear functionals for generalized persistence
diagrams and develop a corresponding theory of functional analysis and optimal
transport. The investigator’s persistence landscape is a nonlinear functional
for persistence diagrams. This project will extend the persistence landscape to
generalized persistence diagrams. When a topological signal is detected or a
topological classification is constructed, researchers would like to use this to
learn more about their data. This project will develop methods for selecting a
sub-population responsible for a detected topological signal. It will also use
deep neural network software to produce stable visualizations of the parts of
the data responsible for a learned classification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.