* 2324616
* SAI: Integrating Equity in Emergency Management of Critical Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jose Walteros, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

Every year, wildfires in the United States cause many deaths and bring enormous
economic loss. The frequency and harm caused by wildfires are projected to grow
with changes in the climate and shifting population centers. Wildfires represent
a significant threat to critical infrastructure systems. These challenges are
compounded by the observation that rural and disadvantaged communities are often
the most susceptible to wildfire disasters. Although significant progress has
been made in predicting wildfire propagation, less is known about the complex
interactions between wildfires, socially vulnerable populations, and emergency
management practices. This SAI project focuses on strengthening the emergency
management of critical infrastructure systems, with special attention to the
disproportionate societal impacts of wildfires. Specifically, this project
integrates social scientific theories with mathematical models to yield novel
insights into the design and improvement of emergency management of critical
infrastructure systems. The goal is to develop a new assessment framework and an
integrative decision model that enhances the human-centered governance of such
systems.

One critical challenge in this area is understanding how essential services,
such as electricity, water, and transportation, might fail due to their strong
interdependencies when facing a wildfire. Another major challenge is that the
needs of socially vulnerable communities residing at the interface between
wildlands and urban areas are often unseen. As a result, the disproportionate
impacts of wildfire-induced critical infrastructure failures on these
communities are not adequately considered in emergency planning and practices.
This SAI project aims to develop a human-centered, equity-focused, risk-informed
decision-making framework to address these challenges. The research develops
equity-aware and interpretable models and computational algorithms related to
vulnerability assessment and efficient post-wildfire recovery strategies of
interdependent critical infrastructure systems under deep uncertainties. It also
evaluates the social burden of wildfire-induced critical infrastructure service
disruptions on rural and disadvantaged communities and effectively integrates it
with the new emergency management decision model. The project brings together
expertise and resources from a network of researchers in the social sciences,
engineering, and public policy, along with stakeholders from multiple
institutions, public and private agencies, non-profit organizations, and local
communities.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.