* 2324585
* Conference: Collaborative Convenings: Increasing Capacity in the Social Science Research Enterprise with HBCUs, PUIs, and Other Less Research-Intensive Institutions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Kathie Maynard, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,931.00

The goal of this project is to increase the capacity and competitiveness of the
social science research enterprise. Despite the continued evolution of social
science research, little is known about the barriers and challenges researchers
face when attempting to develop fundable research projects and grant proposals
to secure funding. This project serves as a model for how to create networks and
partnerships between various social science research professionals to facilitate
the development of research support infrastructure to catalyze collaborative
social science research opportunities. This project provides an opportunity for
research-oriented faculty and research enterprise professionals to identify the
challenges and barriers, and to propose solutions about how to broaden
participation in social science research. Social science research professionals
from all types of organizations and institutional backgrounds, including
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) and predominantly
undergraduate institutions (PUIs), are invited to participate in the convenings
and project activities. The shared learnings and products would be disseminated
broadly to constitute best practices about how to capitalize on support
opportunities and service infrastructure to benefit social science research
across academic disciplines and fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.