* 2324861
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type 2: Delphi: Life-time aware design frameworks for sustainable edge devices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Josiah Hester, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2027
* USD 570,000.00

Edge devices like wearable watches and cameras, phones, and sensors in homes,
factories, and farms, have become the foundation of our daily interactions with
technology and the source of significant data for numerous critical sectors like
health and manufacturing. Unfortunately, the exponential growth in sheer numbers
of these devices comes at a significant environmental cost. User and edge
devices alone account for over one-third of the 4% of global carbon emissions
attributed to information and communication technologies. This ecological impact
is projected to worsen as the number of edge devices surges into the trillions
over the next few decades. This project develops Delphi, an end-to-end framework
that prioritizes environmental impact while considering user experience,
performance, and efficiency when designing edge devices. Delphi will enable
sustainable technological growth by allowing for the design of environmentally
conscious edge devices throughout their lifecycle. Via Delphi, software and
hardware designers will be better able to reduce the potential environmental
harms of computing while still offering valuable computational services for
users and society. The project will lay the foundations for devices that can
last for decades, potentially reducing e-waste and transient, short-lived
devices designed to minimize environmental footprint. The project will integrate
sustainability into college courses, provide broader online educational modules,
and host a sustainability hackathon. Delphi tools themselves will be open-
source, open hardware, and come with open datasetsâ€“ all to facilitate further
research and enable carbon-aware design to ensure a more sustainable future for
computing. This project seeks to make carbon and sustainability a first-order
design parameter for future edge computing devices that range from tiny, energy-
harvesting Internet of Things (IoT) devices to higher-performance consumer
electronics. Delphi is a suite of carbon-aware design tools that consider
factors like energy, e-waste, and water usage from the manufacturing of
computational devices, as well as operation carbon factors of machine learning
and software lifecycles. The framework covers sensors, computing, communication,
and power, accommodating various edge devices, and includes probabilistic
analysis of machine learning workflows design and their operational and embodied
carbon impact. The project's research has three major tasks. First, quantifying
device environmental impact by collecting a first-of-its-kind dataset via a
state-of-the-art academic clean room, the Cornell Nanoscale Facility (CNF), with
architectural carbon models for salient device components (e.g., processor,
memory and storage, energy harvesting modules). This task integrates data into
new foundational carbon models, guiding all research tasks. Second, tools for
the design of systems with sustainability as a first-order design target,
alongside performance and quality of service. The task develops Electronic
Sustainability Records for devices on the Pareto-frontier to maintain system-
specific sustainability ledgers to track environmental telemetry across the
operational lifetime of devices. Finally, the third task develops runtime
sustainability managers, including humans in the loop, to reduce device
obsolescence. The software will gracefully degrade and upgrade system
performance based on user choices, static lifetime requirements, and
environmental factors. The comprehensive framework's effectiveness is
demonstrated through short-lived "Ephemeral devices" and lifelong companion
health and wellness wearable devices, nicknamed the "Infinite Bit." These two
device archetypes provide a mechanism for continuous validation as the project
matures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.