* 2324754
* CAREER: Atmospheric Electricity on Earth and Mars
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Jeremy Riousset, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 04/30/2026
* USD 264,489.00

Naturally occurring lightning in the Earth atmosphere releases tremendous amount
of energy in a very short time. Lightnings most commonly occur during
thunderstorms as electrostatic charges accumulate in clouds. Lightnings have
also been found to occur on Mars, believed to be created by dust storms. Though
not as common as on Earth because of low atmosphere pressure, such lightnings
can be a hazard to instruments on Mars with metal objects acting like a
lightning rod. The multiplication of robotic explorers at the surface of the
planet has increased the chances of such electric discharges, increasing risks
for instruments and an ever-more likely human-exploration.

This CAREER research outlines a five-year effort to study the physics and
observability of electrical discharges in atmospheric conditions representative
of Earth and Mars. The investigators suggest a comprehensive study combining
theory and experiments centered on discharges produced in air at pressures
ranging from 6 to 1013 mbar, to examine the differences between discharges
started from a hot, cylindrical or spherical electrode, and the electrification
observed in the tribocharging of regoliths and sand grains. The principal
objective is to further our understanding of the physics of electrical discharge
in diverse environments. In particular, this research seeks to resolve the
following outstanding issues in planetary electricity: (1) Can geometric factors
adequately explain the difference between theoretical and observed lightning
initiation thresholds? (2) Can modeling help assess the nature (glow, streamer,
leader) of atmospheric breakdown occurring in the form of Transient Luminous
Events or putative Martian lightning? (3) Can tribocharging lead to the
initiation of such non-conventional discharges?

The research plan aims to: • produce the formulation of a new, generalized model
of electron avalanche initiated from a hot cylindrical or spherical electrode, •
create a 3-D fractal models of extraterrestrial discharges and estimates of
their electric charges and dipole moments, • make quantitative measurements of
the electrification in a scaled Martian dust event, • disseminate of academic
research outside academia through Astronomy on Tap talks, and • create a summer
camp using LEGO Mindstorms to introduce middle-schoolers to programing and space
science through an innovative and engaging approach.

The success of this project will directly impact the design of future
instruments for the detection of extraterrestrial atmospheric electricity by
identifying the most measurable changes due to non-conventional lightning. It
will also help to assess the risk of initiating discharges from surface objects
in particular in the framework of Martian exploration. It will strengthen the
relationship between academic research and the local community, through the
5-day summer camp, public lectures, and talks at informal venues. Through these
tasks, the investigator will reach audiences of all ages and levels and seek to
inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.