* 2324344
* Unlocking organic polariton lasers with systematic molecular design
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Musser, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,394.00

Non-technical description: This research seeks to alter the properties of
carbon-based organic semiconductors by combining light with materials
engineering to open a route for new technological applications from tunable,
low-power lasers to quantum information devices. Such carbon-based materials are
ubiquitous in our daily lives. For instance, they enable plants to harvest light
through photosynthesis. They feature in lightweight, flexible solar cells and
light-emitting diode (LED) displays of top-end phones and televisions.
Significant research goes into ways to control their properties – emitting light
of the right color or transporting current efficiently – by changing their
molecular structure. However, it is also possible to tune many materials
properties with light, which is the key concept behind this project. When two
mirrors are placed very close together with high precision, they act as tiny
boxes, trapping light. If molecular semiconductors are placed between the
mirrors, they can strongly interact with this light and begin to behave in
entirely new surprising ways, forming new states called ‘polaritons’. These
polaritons can emit light through new physical processes – potentially improving
LED devices – and can undergo chemical reactions through new pathways. In this
research, the principal investigator aims to exploit polaritons for a new
generation of organic semiconductor lasers. Crucially, the project uses
systematic control of the organic material to develop the first rational design
rules to improve laser efficiency and performance. This approach lays the
foundation for versatile, ‘plug-and-play’ organic lasers for communications,
sensing, and new quantum technologies. Beyond these technological impacts, the
project develops a portable mechanical demonstration of the physical concept
behind polariton lasers. The research team aims to run the demonstration at
local community outreach centers. Through hands-on exploration of how the
collective behavior is affected by small structural changes, the demonstration
engages the audience in the scientific method and in cross-cutting ideas of
physics and chemistry like coherence.

Technical description: Strong light-matter coupling to form exciton-polaritons
holds immense promise for materials engineering. When applied to organic
semiconductors, it offers a way to non-synthetically manipulate the molecular
wavefunction and energy structure. This approach can alter fundamental behaviors
like charge and energy transport, allowing functional properties of molecules to
be rewritten at will. These effects range from redirecting chemical reactions to
enabling the formation of Bose-Einstein condensates at room temperature. The
latter have the potential to provide a general platform for low-threshold,
electrically injected lasers. However, critical questions about the nature of
polaritons hold back their rational application: How does the complex electronic
structure of molecular materials impact the polariton energy landscape? What
molecular levers can be identified to control the dynamical behavior of
polaritons? How should devices be structured to maximize unique properties of
polaritons? Focusing on polariton condensation, the research team uses a suite
of ultrafast (fs to ps) time- and angle-resolved spectroscopies to reveal the
molecular basis for the dynamical processes leading to condensation. These
methods are combined with systematic optical microcavity variation, including
control over critical properties of the semiconductor active layer and the
overall device structure. By correlating polariton dynamics and condensation
thresholds across these structures, the project aims to identify the crucial
properties that govern polariton condensation and highlight the structural
features that can be optimized. The ultimate goal of the research is to develop
a roadmap to systematically reduce organic polariton condensation thresholds to
achieve a platform for electrically injected lasing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.