* 2324388
* Conference: Research Analytics Summit: Building Capacity, Empowering Skill Transfer, and Energizing a Growing Community
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Baron Wolf, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The GRANTED initiative highlights the need to encourage academic inquiry and
knowledge creation from a wide variety of higher education institutions,
especially emerging research institutions and minority-serving institutions
(MSI’s). At Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) in particular, there is a
unique opportunity to support innovative epistemological and ontological
frameworks that may offer important insights for dealing with issues like
climate change, food security, and environmental change. With opportunities for
different kinds of knowledge creation and problem-solving, it is critical to
effectively support new models for what counts as basic and applied research.
Using data to better understand, support, and identify unique characteristics of
academic inquiry would be a unique and valuable outcome of the summit, which
would be intentionally inclusive in welcoming diverse institutions into the
research administration community. The potentially new ways of creating and
apprehending knowledge through research at TCUs should not be seen as competing
with traditional modes of academic inquiry. Rather, these frameworks can
complement mainstream western science, offering a new lens for inquiry,
discovery, and understanding.

The goal of this project is to host a national summit that focuses on key areas
related to the use of data-informed decision-making within research
administration, called Research Analytics. This will be the first of its kind
conference dedicated to the field of research analytics and data-practitioners.
Research Analytics is in its infancy at major research administration
conferences. Many professionals working in this space have taken it on as only a
small part of their position duties, and they are often not trained in data
analysis or business intelligence systems. Outcomes of the meeting include a
professional mentoring framework, professional collaboration, professional
development, conference proceeding materials, and possibly identify future
funding opportunities focused on research analytics. The summit will include
participants from a variety of research intensive institutions including a focus
on emerging research institutions, Tribal Colleges and Universities, and other
minority-serving institutions. The summit will help build capacity through
sharing of best practices, skill development, and building of networks. The
meeting will focus on areas related to human capital and technology and skills.
These themes will allow for interconnectivity of leadership, culture,
governance, and technology—to provide informed and strategic decision-making
within the research enterprise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.