* 2324517
* Conference: Distributed RD--Building A National Network of Enterprise Research Support for Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (BANNERS-PUI)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Dean Gerstein, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 100,000.00

This workshop-based project aims to develop a suite of practical recommendations
to mitigate the challenges of grant submission at the nationâ€™s approximately
1700 primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) that grant 4-year or higher
degrees. By examining in-depth the roles of campus administrations, professional
organizations, and informal networks that contribute to this process, the
project is uniquely positioned to identify barriers and solutions. A pilot study
indicates that a few staff in each grant-active PUI perform the same core
research development (RD) functions as a much larger and more specialized RD
staff at large research universities. Yet, these functions are under extensive
strain due to competing priorities and limited resources.

The project team uses recent data from small and large data collections, earlier
literature, and expert consultations to develop concise background materials and
agendas to better understand the nature and variations of RD among PUIs. By
convening a series of regional two-day workshops, approximately 16 participants
(per workshop) representative of PUI types and RD personnel, materials will be
reviewed and specific ideas and priorities developed. Subsequent public webinars
and related channels add to the basis for a report with national recommendations
for evidence development, demonstration programs, and evaluation to promote
systemic long-term enhancement of the PUI research enterprise. By crystallizing
knowledge of unique aspects of PUI RD challenges, promoting strength-based
rather than deficit-based modeling of PUI needs, capacities, and growth paths,
and broadening the participation of currently less active segments of the PUI
universe, the project will provide concrete, independent, expert suggestions on
how to enhance national networks of communication and service to more
effectively support PUI research activities, thus spreading research experience,
knowledge, and resources to new and potentially underserved communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.