* 2324402
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Strategies to Mitigate Implicit Bias and Promote an Ethos of Care in the Research Enterprise: A Convening
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Emily Skop, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 12/31/2024
* USD 22,364.00

This project aims to develop ways to encourage access and broaden participation
in research in higher education. The conference draws upon the topic of a
culture of care. A focus on care reorients the research enterprise towards
recognizing how institutions are made of systems and structures, as well as
individuals. The goal is to find ways to enhance practices and processes that
will facilitate the research opportunities of underrepresented researchers and
ensure the U.S. remains competitive and agile in the face of global challenges.

This conference is a partnership between a national professional society, the
American Association of Geographers (AAG), an Emerging Research Institution, the
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, (UCCS) and a research enterprise
organization, the National Organization of Research Development Professionals
(NORDP). Together, these organizations are well-positioned to catalyze scalable
practices into diverse institutional and organizational contexts, especially at
minority-serving and emerging research institutions. The conference will include
three groups of participants: research enterprise professionals, leaders in
institutions of higher education, and early career faculty. Participants will be
placed in groups of 3 (or triads) with a member from each of the three groups.
The triads will: 1) explore the lived experiences of researchers in navigating
or supporting the research enterprise, and 2) recommend practices that are
expected to broaden and strengthen the research enterprise workforce. The goal
of the convening is to enable practitioners in the research enterprise field to
encompass both knowledge discovery and critical reflection on the ethical,
political, economic, and emotional aspects of research practice and knowledge
production. Ultimately, the conference will offer opportunities to stretch
horizons and expand the capacity of the research enterprise to enhance and
improve science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.