* 2324645
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type II: Multi-Function Cross-Layer Electro-Optic Fabrics for Reliable and Sustainable Computing Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Avinash Karanth, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

With the explosion of computing devices and systems in everyday consumer
electronics, the amount of energy required to power information and computing
technologies (ICT) is reaching close to 5% of worldwide carbon emissions.
Embodied emissions originate from the manufacturing of hardware and from
infrastructure-related energy such as procurement of raw materials, fabrication,
packaging, and assembly. This is distinct from operational energy, which stems
from using the hardware. Sustainability in computing should be based on three
universally accepted tenets – reuse, reduce and recycle – of hardware components
and systems. From a sustainability perspective, we need to reuse or repurpose
existing hardware platforms for multiple functionalities to reduce embodied
emissions, recycle hardware to extend or prolong lifetime reliability, and
reduce the operational or use-phase energy required of the hardware platform.
Therefore, future hardware platforms based on chiplets, - small, integrated
circuits with defined functions - should be carefully designed to balance power,
performance, and reliability when designed for sustainability. This research
project establishes very important connections between electronic computing
systems, photonic technology, computer architecture, machine learning, and
sustainability requirements. The research will foster new research directions in
several areas, spanning computer architecture, silicon photonics, algorithms,
and applications, with the potential to significantly transform the design of
next-generation sustainable chiplet-based heterogenous computing systems. All
the research findings and simulation results will be shared with the community
via conference/journal publication, professional meetings, and a dedicated
website. The team is committed and will continue to expand on outreach
activities, education, training, and broadening participation in computing as
part of the project by making the necessary efforts to attract and train
minority students in this field.

This research will design multi-functional, self-healing and cross-layer
optimized electro-optic fabric for computing architectures and accelerators to
improve reliability, performance and sustainability. The overarching goal of the
project is to enhance the sustainability of computing systems by reducing the
impact of embodied energy and extending the operational lifetime of hardware
systems. The team will explore a combination of electronics and silicon
photonics comprehensively and systematically for both communication and
computation in one integrated system to dramatically improve performance-per-
Watt resource utilization, reliability, and sustainability of future computing
systems. This research will result in (1) novel electrical and photonic
interconnect-based architectures that have multiple functionality for
communication, computation and storage, (2) self-healing and fault-tolerant
electrical and optical fabric that improve the reliability of the heterogeneous
computing chiplets, (3) hardware and cross-layer techniques to dynamically adapt
to application demands to reduce operational energy, (4) an extensive modeling
and simulation framework for evaluating embodied and operational energy of the
proposed architectures, and (5) proof-of-concept testbed implementation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.