* 2324360
* Conference: Creation of a National Job Classification System for Research Administrators
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Jennifer Woodward, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Littlefield
* 12/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

A robust research administration workforce strengthens the research enterprise,
promotes faculty recruitment and retention, assists with balancing research
demands and heavy teaching loads, and increases the participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM. This project aims to contribute to the
development of a national research administrator job classification system
applicable to the wide array of administrative roles that support sponsored
research activities. A national job classification system is needed to extend
access to research administration support across disciplines and address
workforce challenges at all institutions, especially emerging and minority-
serving institutions. The lack of a formal, national job classification system
negatively affects employee retention. This retention problem results in
significant financial loss and diminished productivity. This problem is often
more pronounced in emerging and minority-serving institutions because it can be
difficult for these institutions to hire and retain qualified research support
talent at competitive market salaries. This diminishes their capacity to submit
competitive applications for external funding to support research. A national
job classification system for research administrators will level the playing
field for hiring and retaining research administration staff across all
institutions.

The three-phase conference project, to be implemented in collaboration with the
Society of Research Administrators International (SRAI), uses focus groups,
surveys, and panels to explore current issues surrounding the research
administration workforce and the need to create a national job classification
system. A steering committee of stakeholders, including members from the SRAI,
the College and University Professional Association for Human Resources (CUPA-
HR), and Northern Illinois University, has been formed to provide strategic
direction. The project seeks to overcome barriers to conducting funded research
at all academic institutions by focusing on the support provided by research
administrators for proposal writing, submission to external funding agencies,
and award management; identifying the challenges of recruiting, retaining, and
compensating qualified research administrators to enhance institutional
competitiveness for research funding; and highlighting the need for a formal job
classification framework for research administration roles. Deliverables include
a summary paper for each phase of the conference and a final report summarizing
the discussion about challenges in obtaining funding for research, making key
recommendations for developing a national job classification system, and
creating organizational models to support research administration infrastructure
and financing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.