* 2324818
* eMB: Bridging the Gap Between Agent Based Models of Complex Biological Phenomena and Real-World Data Using Surrogate Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Trachette Jackson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Much has happened in the past three years - to us as individuals, as a united
nation, and as one world. The consequences of human-induced transformations on
our environment and the reciprocal impact of the changing global environment on
humanity have been profound. To address these challenges and improve human well-
being, researchers, scientists, and engineers are generating large amounts of
data on the evolving condition of our world and its inhabitants in novel,
multidimensional forms. Unfortunately, existing mathematical, statistical, and
computational techniques offer only partial tractability in comprehending these
complex datasets. New, thoughtfully developed mathematical methods and modeling
approaches are desperately needed to gain a deep and robust understanding of
these data for human benefit and to mitigate human harm. The successful
completion of this project will result in a robust and scalable computational
framework for constraining large parameter spaces in agent-based models with
real-world data. Agent-based models are widely recognized as a powerful
computational framework for advancing our understanding of human disease, human-
society interactions, and environmental systems. However, their inherent
stochasticity and prohibitive computational expense pose significant barriers to
integrating such models with real-world data. The new approach will provide a
much-needed platform for exploring parameter uncertainty and sensitivity in
multiscale agent-based models representing complex biological phenomena.
Ultimately, the new methods developed here will result in a scalable
mathematical tool for operationalizing computationally complex models designed
to solve formidable biological problems that are of great interest to
biologists, ecologists, clinicians, and health policymakers.

Unlocking the full potential of computationally complex mathematical models to
advance our understanding of interconnected biological systems urgently requires
techniques for integrating these models with multifaceted real-world data.
Multiscale agent-based models (ABMs) are widely recognized as a powerful
computation framework for advancing our understanding of systems ranging from
molecular, cellular, and tissue dynamics to human-society interactions,
infectious diseases, and ecological systems. However, to make meaningful,
reliable quantitative predictions and to gain mechanistic insight, ABMs must be
integrated with real-world data through model parameterization and calibration.
Unfortunately, robust, scalable techniques for addressing the challenges posed
by the inherent stochasticity and heavy computational requirements of an ABM in
integrating it with real-world data are sorely lacking. Hence, there is a
critical need to develop new theoretical and computational approaches to bridge
this gap between ABM parameters and real-world data. This project develops a new
computational framework for parameter estimation, uncertainty quantification,
and sensitivity analysis of multiscale ABMs informed by noisy, sparse, and
multifaceted real-world data. The method utilizes explicitly formulated and
mechanistic surrogate models simultaneously inferred from both the ABM
formulation and the data to link the two in previously impossible ways. The
approach will open new possibilities for ABMs representing complex biological
phenomena to uncover how data sets can hide unexpected or counter-intuitive
underlying mechanisms that have profound implications for predicted outcomes and
planned interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.