* 2324598
* SAI: Modeling Equitable and Accessible Public Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 749,955.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

Substantial resources have been spent (re)designing America’s public
transportation hubs to make them more accessible and easier to use, but people
still find many transportation hubs hard to navigate. This is especially true
for the one in four Americans who have mobility, sensory or cognitive
impairments. Part of the difficulty stems from the failure to understand how
social factors affect the way people with differing abilities interact with one
another as they navigate different environments. Using virtual reality (VR)
simulations of public transportation hubs, this project examines how people who
have impairments or are temporarily encumbered navigate around physical objects
and other people. It also considers how nondisabled people navigate around
people who are disabled or encumbered, and how announcements and signs change
the way diverse people travel through transportation hubs. These findings are
used to create more realistic computer models of how people navigate crowded
spaces, and to test what factors make public spaces more efficient and usable.
Public transportation hubs are the primary focus because improving the usability
of public transportation expands the educational, social, health and
occupational opportunities that are available to all Americans. Improving the
usability of public transportation hubs also helps to decrease America’s
reliance on private transportation.

This project is organized around three interlocking parts. One uses virtual
reality (VR) to explore the navigational choices of people who have varying
mobility and perceptual abilities. A second uses computational simulations of
the navigational choices and flow of diverse people. The third part develops
evaluation metrics for assessing the (re)design of real public spaces that take
into consideration the variability in people and their navigational choices. A
series of experiments on human wayfinding uses VR to embed human participants in
simulated public transportation hubs. Unlike traditional navigation studies,
these experiments focus on how human wayfinding is affected by the presence of
other people. The VR experiments examine how people navigate environments that
are populated by simulated others with varying mobility. They also consider how
people respond when placed in situations that negatively impact their ability to
navigate certain spaces, identify potential routes, or perceive instructions.
The VR experiments also examine how those who use mobility aids navigate virtual
environments that are populated with virtual people. This project aims to
increase the usability of public spaces and transportation hubs for everyone,
regardless of ability, thereby expanding educational, social, health and
occupational opportunities for all.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.