* 2324998
* ANT LIA: Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Patterns and Mechanisms of Trait Diversification in the Antarctic Notothenioid Radiation
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jacob Daane, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 01/31/2025
* USD 593,028.00

Part I: Nontechnical description The ecologically important notothenioid fish of
the Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica will be studied to address questions
central to polar, evolutionary, and adaptational biology. The rapid
diversification of the notothenioids into >120 species following a period of
Antarctic glaciation and cooling of the Southern Ocean is thought to have been
facilitated by key evolutionary innovations, including antifreeze glycoproteins
to prevent freezing and bone reduction to increase buoyancy. In this project, a
large dataset of genomic sequences will be used to evaluate the genetic
mechanisms that underly the broad pattern of novel trait evolution in these
fish, including traits relevant to human diseases (e.g., bone density, renal
function, and anemia). The team will develop new STEM-based research and
teaching modules for undergraduate education at Northeastern University. The
work will provide specific research training to scholars at all levels,
including a post-doctoral researcher, a graduate student, undergraduate
students, and high school students. The team will also contribute to public
outreach, including, in part, the develop of teaching videos in molecular
evolutionary biology and accompanying educational supplements.

Part II: Technical description The researchers will leverage their comprehensive
notothenioid phylogenomic dataset comprising >250,000 protein-coding exons and
conserved non-coding elements across 44 ingroup and 2 outgroup species to
analyze the genetic origins of three iconic notothenioid traits: (1) loss of
erythrocytes by the icefish clade in a cold, stable and highly-oxygenated marine
environment; (2) reduction in bone mass and retention of juvenile skeletal
characteristics as buoyancy mechanisms to facilitate foraging; and (3) loss of
kidney glomeruli to retain energetically expensive antifreeze glycoproteins. The
team will first track patterns of change in erythroid-related genes throughout
the notothenioid phylogeny. They will then examine whether repetitive evolution
of a pedomorphic skeleton in notothenioids is based on parallel or divergent
evolution of genetic regulators of heterochrony. Third, they will determine
whether there is mutational bias in the mechanisms of loss and re-emergence of
kidney glomeruli. Finally, identified genetic mechanisms of evolutionary change
will be validated by experimental testing using functional genomic strategies in
the zebrafish model system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.