* 2324643
* Co-Design of Neural Operators and Stochastic Optimization Algorithms for Learning Surrogates for PDE-Constrained Optimization Under Uncertainty
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Omar Ghattas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 163,682.00

One of the great promises of modeling & simulation is that the models can serve
as a basis for optimal decision making for complex physical systems. In many
cases, the models for these systems are not fully known, and as a result contain
uncertain parameters. This gives rise to problems in optimization under
uncertainty (OUU). In the common situation in which the models take the form of
partial differential equations (PDEs), for example characterizing fluid flow,
solid mechanics, heat transfer, acoustics, and electromagnetics, the problems
are known as PDE-constrained optimization under uncertainty (PDE-OUU). The
recent development of so-called neural operators (NOs) promises to overcome the
intractability of PDE-OUU problems by replacing the PDE model with a rapid-to-
evaluate machine-learned surrogate. This project is developing a new integrated
framework for both construction and training of NOs so that they better capture
the mathematical structure of parameter and decision space and their impact on
model outputs that drive decision making under uncertainty. These NOs will
enable scalable, efficient, and accurate solution of PDE-OUU problems across a
broad range of model-predictive decision-making under uncertainty problems of
great societal or technological importance. Examples of such problems include
those in climate change and natural hazard mitigation, design of new materials,
operation of critical infrastructure, patient-specific disease treatment
planning, and environmental observing system design. To facilitate the adoption
of these algorithms, all software developed in this project will be released in
open source form, building on existing successful libraries such as hIPPYlib.
Two PhD students are being trained at the interdisciplinary interfaces of
scientific machine learning, stochastic optimization, and PDE-constrained
optimization.

Despite their great importance in many technological, scientific, engineering,
and medical fields, PDE-OUU problems are typically intractable when the
uncertain parameter or decision variable dimensions are large, or when the
models are large-scale and complex. However, many current methods for
constructing NOs, as well as stochastic optimization methods to train them, do
not exploit mathematical properties of the underlying models and as such are not
sufficiently accurate to serve as proxies for the PDEs in OUU, particularly when
the training data are limited due to the expense of obtaining them. To exploit
mathematical properties of the PDE-governed maps from joint uncertain parameter
and decision variable input space to model outputs that inform the optimization
objective, this project seeks to extract knowledge of the geometry, smoothness,
and intrinsic low dimensionality of the maps to synergistically co-design (1)
training loss formulations, (2) neural architectures, and (3) stochastic
optimization algorithms for training. The resulting NOs will exhibit greater
accuracy with fewer PDE solves needed for training data, with accuracy measured
over joint parameterâ€“decision space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.