* 2324325
* Conference: Inclusive Collaboration Resources: Enhancing Research Support Infrastructure at Minority Serving Institutions
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Barbara Walker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 07/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This conference will convene research enterprise professionals from minority-
serving institutions (MSIs) across the country to develop a set of best
practices for equitable research collaboration. Research enterprise personnel –
such as research development, pre-award, and sponsored projects professionals –
are influential in catalyzing scientific innovation and productivity through
their administrative work, such as administering seed grant programs, assisting
with proposal development, or building interdisciplinary research teams.
Scientific discovery is enhanced when collaborative teams include diverse
participants in an inclusive environment. Yet, participation in collaborative
teams can lead to inequitable outcomes for diverse participants, such as less
credit in co-authored publications and slower progress in career advancement.
The resources developed through this conference will provide them the tools to
improve the research enterprise at MSIs, strengthen scientific discovery and
innovation through diverse research teams, and contribute to the retention and
advancement of intersectionally diverse participants in the STEM professoriate
and workforce.

Stakeholders in the conference include members of the National Organization of
Research Development Professionals (NORDP), the Society of Research
Administrators International (SRA International), and the National Council of
University Research Administrators (NCURA). This group will develop accessible
knowledge, tools, and training materials about inclusive collaboration for
research enterprise personnel. The intended products – a guidebook and digital
resources – will provide an understanding of the potential pitfalls for
underrepresented participants of diverse science teams and actionable ways to
overcome these barriers through new practices, policies, and professional
development interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.