* 2324346
* Collaborative Research: SUSCHEM: Engineering Polymer-Nanocatalyst Membranes for Direct Capture of CO2 and Electrochemical Conversion to C2+ Liquid Fuel
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jie He, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2026
* USD 259,494.00

There have been rising environmental concerns resulting from the increasing
emission of greenhouse gasses like CO2. One effective way to manage CO2 level is
to directly capture and convert CO2 from air to other carbon forms. The direct
conversion of CO2 using air as feedstock to a reusable carbon product has been
extremely difficult and current approaches often involve an additional energy-
intensive step to produce pure CO2 as feedstock for subsequent catalytic
conversion. This proposal will address the current unmet challenges to allow
direct air capture with a minimum energy input on capture/release and sequential
electroreduction of CO2 to value-added liquid fuels. The concept is based on the
design of a novel bioinspired process. The central component is a cellulose-
based membrane that is used directly for capture and separation of CO2 from air.
This new capture reaction, not yet been studied previously, will provide a very
powerful processing tool for direct air capture of CO2. To convert CO2 to a
reusable form of carbon, a new class of earth-abundant cobalt catalyst
(hexagonal close packed cobalt nanosheets) will be studied. The capture and
conversion will be realized conveniently via the cellulose-graphene-cobalt
system in which local basicity and CO2 proximity to the catalyst are rationally
controlled to facilitate efficient electroreduction of CO2. Through
collaborative efforts between Brown and UConn, the proposed studies will
generate an innovative design of an all-in-one integrated system to realize
sustainable CO2 capture and utilization.

This proposal aims to develop a novel electrochemical system for direct air
capture and conversion of CO2 to ethanal and/or ethanol under ambient
conditions. The system consists of natural cellulose and a new hexagonal cobalt
nanosheet catalyst deposited on graphene, providing a highly conductive and
porous polymer network where the two components work cooperatively in direct air
capture and electroreduction of CO2. Hydroxyl-rich amorphous cellulose can
capture CO2 in the form of metastable hemi-carbonates catalyzed by a base. These
metastable hemi-carbonates can reversibly release CO2 upon pH change or gentle
heating, providing an energy-efficient approach to CO2 capture and release,
which is inspired by natural CO2 concentration mechanisms in photosynthesis. The
released CO2 is in proximity of the robust cobalt nanosheet catalyst assembled
on graphene and integrated into the cellulose membrane, which functions as a
working electrode to carry out the selective electroreduction of CO2 to C2
products. A working flow-cell system will be demonstrated as an engineering
approach to direct capture and conversion of CO2 with air as feedstock. The
study will offer not only a new design concept on cellulose processing method
and new fundamental knowledge on the cobalt nanosheet-promoted C-C coupling in
the CO2 reduction reaction, but also an energy-efficient engineering solution to
direct CO2 capture and conversion.

The portion of this project that will be completed at Brown University is
jointly funded by the Electrochemical Systems Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.