* 2324692
* Collaborative Research: Fluid Dynamics and Infectious Diseases: An Integrated Modeling Framework
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Libin Rong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Emerging and reemerging infectious diseases pose significant threats to public
health worldwide. Despite extensive research and control efforts for these
diseases, the understanding of the complex mechanisms behind their emergence and
spread remains limited at present. This project aims to advance the knowledge of
infectious diseases using an innovative approach based on fluid dynamics. The
insights obtained from this research have the potential to enhance disease
prevention and intervention strategies, improve therapeutic treatment, and
inform epidemic/pandemic management practices. The project is a collaboration
between the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga and the University of Florida
and offers valuable educational and outreach opportunities. It will engage
students from math and engineering backgrounds at the two institutions,
providing them with research training at the intersection of applied math, fluid
dynamics, public health, and computational science. The project will also place
a special emphasis on recruiting and supporting students from underrepresented
groups, promoting diversity in the field.

The major goal of this project is to develop an innovative mathematical and
computational modeling framework that integrates fluid dynamics and infectious
diseases across multiple scales. This innovative framework represents a cutting-
edge approach in infectious disease research. The proposed research will address
the spatial spread of infectious diseases at the population level, explore the
interactions between pathogens and individual hosts within the human body, and
establish connections between disease dynamics at different scales. The research
tasks involve the application of computational fluid dynamics, infectious
disease modeling at both the within-host and population levels, and multi-scale
modeling with high-performance computation. By leveraging these methodologies,
the project seeks to gain a deeper understanding of the pathogenesis,
transmission, and propagation of infectious diseases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.