* 2324844
* I-Corps:  Ultrahigh resolution human tissue imaging platform
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Yongxin Zhao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a deep learning-empowered, ultrahigh-resolution human tissue
imaging platform. The proposed technology is designed to enable biomedical
researchers and pathologists to obtain nanoscale insights into human tissues and
observe subtle disease-related changes in biopsies. The goal is to provide a
tool to support biomedical research, pre-clinical drug development, and predict
cancer patientsâ€™ prognosis and treatment outcomes. It is envisioned that this
platform may be used for the development of tests to identify early on which
cancer treatments will be effective for certain patients, and provide immediate
guidance for clinicians to make optimal decisions before disease conditions
worsen or metastasize. The potential societal impact of this technology is
significant as it may improve diagnosis, treatment response prediction, and
healthcare outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of super-resolution optical
imaging technology. The proposed technology overcomes the fundamental resolution
limits of conventional optical microscopes by utilizing tissue expansion, a
process whereby the tissue is chemically embedded into a water-swellable
hydrogel and physically expanded. This allows for a more detailed view of the
nanoscopic details of tissue using a traditional fluorescent microscope commonly
accessible in clinical research labs. The proposed process is designed to expand
biological specimens up to 11-fold and facilitates imaging with effectively ~25
nm resolution using conventional optical microscopes or with ~15 nm effective
resolution when combined with Super Resolution Optical Fluctuation Imaging. The
proposed platform can extract actionable information from pathology specimens by
combining deep learning. Such information is otherwise unavailable using
existing pathological imaging techniques, such as bright field and florescent
imaging. In addition, the proposed platform may be compatible with commercial
multiplexing imaging platforms and may offer a powerful assay to reveal the
complex spatial omics maps and signaling pathways of healthy and diseased
tissues, which is essential for pre-clinical development. The proposed
technology may be used with a broad range of biological specimens and allows for
a more detailed view of nanoscopic structures in tissues using fluorescent
microscopy commonly accessible in biomedical research laboratories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.