* 2324787
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 2: Sustainable Open Science Tools to Democratize Use of 3D Geomaterial Data
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James McClure, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 417,579.00

The climate crisis and its human impact have created an urgent need to curate
and analyze a wide range of geosciences data. Characterizing geomaterials in
terms of their microstructural and transport properties is crucial for Earth
system understanding and for sustainable resource management. The structure and
composition of soil play a foundational role in plant, microbial, and
agricultural ecosystems. Deeper below the soil, rock microstructure and mineral
heterogeneity are critical to understanding fluid/solid reactions to improve
groundwater resources management, carbon sequestration, rare-earth mineral
recovery, and contaminant transport. Modern 3D imaging provides a window to the
microstructure of soil and rocks; recent advances in machine learning and
simulation can improve our understanding of how these materials influence the
world around us. A wealth of volumetric datasets of geomaterials at different
length scales are available, but most are not broadly accessible due to gaps in
the infrastructure required to curate and analyze them. As computational and
data workflows become increasingly complex, there is a clear need to develop and
maintain reproducible and scalable open science infrastructure to support
scientific communities.

This project will create cloud-based open science tools for curation and
analysis of geomaterial image data. The benefits will reach geoscientists as
well as a wide-ranging community of scientists working on diverse porous
materials. Developed modules will be directly applicable to materials science
(solid foams), chemical engineering (fuel cells, electrodes), and medicine
(bones, cell biology, micro-vascular networks). The tool suite will be deployed
with corresponding training and educational materials through a repository,
Digital Rocks Portal (DRP), which has curated data available for reuse.
Resources will be open and modular so users can adapt and implement them in
diverse computing environments. Analysis workflows will be tested using image
data across multiple scales from an ocean drilling project (NSF award 2140397).
Use cases will be redistributed among the wide community of users of the NSF-
sponsored University of Texas High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography facility
(UTCT). Students and researchers working on this project will be exposed to
interdisciplinary work combining geology, engineering, data curation and
computer science. The DRP will continue to be used in courses at multiple
universities, and the tools created will be published with digital object
identifiers (DOIs) and presented at conferences and training events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.