* 2324008
* PARTNER: Expand AI2ES for 4D space-time organization of precipitation processes and extremes, visualization tools, and workforce development
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,572,358.00

This project is an ExpandAI Partnership between San Diego State University, the
University of California Irvine, and the AI Institute for Research on
Trustworthy AI in Weather, Climate and Coastal Oceanography (AI2ES). In this
project, two minority-serving institutions collaborate with an AI Institute to
lead new activities focused on scaling up already-established AI research and
education programs at their institutions and to pursue shared, complementary
goals around developing AI with use for society in mind and for developing the
next generation of AI education and workforce talent. The project will also
build community and new centers of excellence in AI where such activities were
not previously well developed.

The ExpAI2ES project expands research, educational activities, and workforce
development in two Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI). In collaboration with
AI2ES, these organizations lead a partnership in AI basic research and AI
applications to environmental science. The research focus of ExpAI2ES is on AI
modeling of the space-time organization and multiscale structure of
precipitation and other atmospheric variables, with special emphasis on extremes
and uncertainty quantification. The research also develops 4-dimensional data
visualization tools, such as the 4-dimensional visual delivery (4DVD) software,
that can support a wider application of progressive education pedagogy for
atmospheric sciences and AI. These research and educational advances will
effectively address imminent challenges in climate change, environmental
sustainability, and costly weather extremes and hazards, while engaging a
diverse and untapped pool of talent. The Progressive Education for Atmospheric
Science (PEAS) framework to be established in this project will help develop new
course material and improve the educational offerings of AI courses for relevant
institutions. The project’s novel “PEAS+AI” educational framework will be
further extended to the training of school teachers who together with students
can use the proposed 4DVD technology for climate data visualization and
discovery. The engagement with real environmental data combined with the modern
video-based 4DVD AI tools will inspire students towards STEM careers to work on
the pressing problems of climate science and environmental sustainability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.