* 2324510
* I-Corps: A platform for collecting and analyzing biological and behavioral markers of preschool emotional and behavioral health
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Ellen McGinnis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new scalable, objective assessment that relies on a child’s
physiological and behavioral responses, rather than solely upon observation of
symptoms by a guardian to transform the identification and screening of pre-
adolescent children. This tool is scalable, brief (~5 minutes), accessible and
automated for no/low provider effort, easily usable (no language barriers for
users as it is tone/beep-prompted), with underlying models and biomarkers
validated in published peer-reviewed research. Providing annual endpoints
satisfies parental and provider interest in longitudinal tracking of childhood
mental health, subsequently decreasing the number of children overlooked during
this vulnerable age phase (4-10 years old) without greatly extending annual
well-visit appointments. The outcomes of this work would be revolutionary in its
availability, as there is no other technology-based routine mental health
assessment tool for young children currently on the market. There is no other
research or commercial institution that has aggregated as much data on early
childhood mental health behavioral assessments and associated biomarkers. These
specifics give a competitive edge over any potential forthcoming competitor in
this space.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of routine screening of young
adults and children to lay the necessary foundation for better clinician
connectivity. The significant technical innovations include the development of
novel, machine learning based algorithms for robustly gathering quantitative
information about pre-adolescent children’s physiological responses during
structured mood induction tasks using only data from a mobile phone. This
approach leverages numerous studies to demonstrate the feasibility of this
digital screening method and in so doing collected one of the largest pre-
adolescent mental health physiological response datasets. The combination of
this novel measurement modality and a unique, large, and expanding clinical
dataset provide an innovative foundation prepared to develop the proposed
transformative digital identification tool.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.