* 2324923
* CSR: Small: RUI: Octopus OS:  A High-Performance Cloud OS with Accurate Resource Abstraction.
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2026
* Jianchen Shan, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 11/30/2026
* USD 327,984.00

This project aims to develop a high-performance cloud operating system (OS),
called Octopus OS, that can adapt to the dynamic cloud environment. Instead of
running on a physical machine, the OS now is often running in a virtual machine
(VM) in the modern cloud where the resources are highly dynamic due to resource
sharing and VM migration. However, the traditional OS cannot manage the
virtualized resources efficiently due to being unaware of the resource dynamics,
leading to low resource utilization and poor application performance in the
cloud. Therefore, the proposed Octopus OS would create and manage the accurate
abstractions of the dynamic resources, and develop new algorithms to fully
leverage the unique characteristics of the virtualized resource, which would
greatly improve application performance and resource utilization in the dynamic
cloud. This work can advance the cloud OS by serving as a framework for
optimizing the utilization of various virtualized resources. The outcomes will
be released for public use. Hands on projects will be created during the project
development to enrich existing courses related to OS and cloud computing. This
project will involve students from underrepresented groups and promote research
in computer systems for all undergraduates.

Four steps will be taken to achieve the project goal. First, the mismatches in
major virtualized resource abstractions (i.e., CPU, memory, and cache) will be
analyzed in a controlled environment to understand their impacts, including
resultant system abnormal behavior and application performance degradation.
Second, accurate resource abstractions will be created to fix the identified
mismatches using probing techniques. Specifically, a set of micro-benchmarks,
called vProbers, will be developed to profile the dynamic nature of the
virtualized resources without relying on the hypervisor support or application
porting, making this solution practical in the emerging multi-cloud environment.
The accurate resource abstractions probed within Octopus OS can also be
leveraged by cloud application and language runtime, and are critical to provide
resource visibility for cross-cloud optimizations. Third, the new abstractions
will be exposed to Octopus OS to make it virtualization-aware. New algorithms
will be developed to fix existing system abnormal behavior and unlock the
potential performance benefits of the dynamic resources. Fourth, experiments
with resource-demanding benchmarks in various public clouds will be conducted to
evaluate the ability of the proposed Octopus OS to adapt to the dynamic
resources in the multi-cloud environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.