* 2324991
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Analytic versus Data Driven Models in Steganography: Empowering Each Other
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jessica Fridrich, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 290,204.00

Steganography is a secret communication method that achieves privacy by hiding
the actual message in some other innocuous looking object. Digital media, such
as images, are ideal for this purpose because they can be slightly modified to
encode a secret without making these modifications visible to a human or
detectable by a computer. Steganography thus offers privacy to citizens in
countries that censor communication channels or prohibit the usage of
encryption. Modern steganography and the detection of its use heavily rely on
machine learning and artificial intelligence. While these "black box" systems
offer superior performance to existing analytical methods, comparatively little
is known about the performance limits of such tools and even less about how and
why these systems work. This project aims at addressing these deficiencies by
combining conventional analytical modeling tools with modern machine learning in
order to obtain insight into how modern artificial intelligence systems work in
detecting steganography, establish their limits, and discover new fundamental
knowledge about steganography in digital media.

The key idea of the project is to combine the explanatory power of conventional
analytic modeling tools with the flexibility of machine learning, leveraging
their complementary strengths to address some of the most fundamental open
problems in this field. Artificial but realistic image datasets will be used to
compute limits and assess optimality of modern data-driven steganographic
algorithms and steganalysis detectors. Machine learning models suitably
restricted in terms of the task being learned, the form of the training
examples, and the learnable architecture will be used for knowledge discovery
and for building novel analytic models relevant to practitioners. Together,
these will lead to deeper understanding of the limits of practical covert
systems and their detection. This will facilitate development of better counter-
deception methods and defenses against steganography when used by terrorists,
criminals, and spies for planning and coordination of disruptive activities.
This, in turn, will advance both the research frontier and the practical impact
of steganography, while methods based on the research may be useful for related
fields including digital forensics and data provenance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.