* 2324092
* GEO OSE Track 1: Enhancing the accessibility of novel geostatistical inversion workflows for cryosphere research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Emma MacKie, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 253,946.00

Many Earth science data sets require spatial interpolation in order to be used
in scientific studies. It is often important that these interpolations are done
in a way that satisfies certain physical and statistical properties. These
“geostatistical” methods are widely used in the mining and petroleum industries,
but there is no free software that makes these methods available to students,
academics, and environmental researchers. This project addresses this
accessibility barrier by creating freely available geostatistics software. This
software will include novel methods for combining physical and statistical
information. These algorithms will be fast enough so that they can be used for
very large data sets. To make it easy for other researchers in different
disciplines to use these tools, the software will be installed in several
different online scientific computing hubs. The software will be accompanied by
online educational materials. The software will be used to create robust maps of
the topography underneath Antarctic glaciers by combining a variety of different
measurement sources. These topographic maps will help improve the rigor of ice-
sheet and sea level rise models.

This work will build upon the existing GStatSim Python geostatistics software
and educational Jupyter Book to perform high-speed physics-informed
geostatistical simulations. The research team will develop a novel Markov Chain
Monte Carlo approach for performing geophysical inversions where geostatistical
simulations are iteratively perturbed until the outputs of a geophysical forward
model converge with measurements. Parallel processing techniques will be used to
improve the scalability of this method. This will enable users to generate
ensembles of large-scale geostatistical simulations at high speeds while
accounting for both spatial and physical constraints. This method will be tested
and applied to two case studies: 1) the simulation of sub-ice-shelf topography
using gravity observations, and 2) the simulation of subglacial topography with
mass conservation constraints. These case studies will provide critical
parameters for ice-sheet models. To facilitate the use of GStatSim in the
cryosphere community, these tools will be hosted on the GHub and CryoCloud
computing platforms. This software will also be linked to the Earth Science
Information Partners toolbox page in order to make this package accessible to
broader geosciences audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.