* 2324471
* Autoignition-assisted flame regime of sustainable aviation fuel, ammonia and dimethyl ether blends
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Omid Samimi-Abianeh, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2026
* USD 345,000.00

This project aims to study the combustion behavior of a new class of sustainable
and environmentally friendly fuels for energy applications. Such new fuels will
help reduce carbon emissions in the energy, transportation, and industrial
sectors. One of the critical components of the new fuel is ammonia (NH3), a fuel
with high hydrogen content. While ammonia can be stored and transported more
safely than hydrogen, ammonia combustion differs from traditional fossil fuels
like gasoline, diesel, and aviation fuels. Therefore, this research project aims
to investigate a combination of ammonia and a highly reactive and biomass
derived Dimethyl Ether (DME) to replicate the practical combustion behavior of
traditional fossil fuels.

Flame speed and ignition delay are two fundamental fuel mixture characteristics
that play significant roles in the combustion process. Both characteristics have
been studied extensively for their importance in designing and developing
advanced combustion systems. However, the combustion regime in which the flame
and autoignition simultaneously affect the combustion process is not well
understood. This combustion regime is called autoignition-assisted flame and has
a different morphology and characteristics with respect to traditional laminar
premised or diffusion flames. In this combustion regime, the flame propagates
over a pool of intermediate species, which are produced due to the low-
temperature chemistry of the mixture. The research objective here is to
understand and quantify the autoignition-assisted premixed laminar flame of
ammonia and DME blends at elevated gas temperatures and pressures. The flame
regimes across various gas temperatures, pressures, equivalence ratios, and
Damkӧhler numbers will be investigated experimentally and numerically. The Rapid
Compression Machine–Flame (RCM-FLAME) apparatus is used to study the flame
regime with several optical diagnostic techniques. The proposed project has four
transformative aspects: (1) quantification of flame propagation speed over a
wide range of physico-chemical conditions, (2) experimental investigation of the
effects of first-stage and second-stage autoignition on flame propagation speed,
(3) the effect of stretch on outwardly propagating spherical autoignition-
assisted flames, and (4) accuracy of kinetic models developed in simulating the
combustion of ammonia-DME mixtures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.