* 2324342
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Technology-Assisted Accessible Clothing: Soft Robotic Interaction Technologies and an Assessment Framework for Clothing Accessibility
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,099.00

This research will investigate strategies to quantify, evaluate, and improve
physical accessibility of everyday clothing using minimalistic, garment-based
assistive soft robotics. To this end, a collaborative effort brings together
experts in apparel design, soft robotics, human-computer interaction/human
factors, and rehabilitation to explore open questions both in design for
accessibility and in garment-based robotics. The project will lay the groundwork
for a large-scale study to pursue a future of universally accessible clothing
that seamlessly blends everyday garments and soft robotics, and which
accommodates users with a variety of abilities, limitations, needs, and
objectives. Project outcomes will ultimately lead to new approaches to both
evaluate and robotically customize/support body-garment interfaces for a wide
range of wearable systems, from everyday clothing to robotic exoskeletons to
orthoses/prostheses.

Project goals will be pursued through two specific thrusts: (1) Formulate a set
of generalizable user-identified evaluation criteria / metrics for assessing
accessibility of garments; (2) Design and implement a self-tightening /
fastening "robotic belt" as a proof-of-concept prototype of a soft robotic
"garment" to establish preliminary evidence of the feasibility and
transformative potential of the approach. The novel garment accessibility
evaluation metrics and soft-robotic technology proof-of-concept combined will
set the stage for the development and deployment o several garment-based soft-
robotic accessibility solutions and evaluation of their impact at improving
accessibility of everyday clothing compared to existing passive accessibility
solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.