* 2324810
* SBIR Phase I:  Accelerated carbon sequestration
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jon Richards, EARTHEN CARBON LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,390.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
novel soil organic matter (SOM) amendment techniques focused on improving
nutrient supply to crops, sustaining agriculture, and providing long-term, deep
soil carbon sequestration to help combat climate change. New methods of
developing persistent organic matter amendments in soil are urgently needed in
the US and globally. The result of this work will be to introduce new soil
fertility and carbon storage services that permanently sequester carbon in
agricultural soils at an unprecedented rate. The approach is synergistic with
other economic co-benefits, such as increasing crop yields, reducing fertilizer
loads, reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations as related to
farming, and expanding biorefineries and forest management capabilities. These
high-quality agricultural soil amendment services may eventually have a positive
impact on the global environment. This project seeks to develop a novel, soil
organic matter amendment technique. The research and development will enable
acquisition of critical benchmarking and verification data. Critical
prototyping, initial verification, and benchmarking in a representative
agricultural soil will be conducted so that the technique can then later be
extended to other farms. This proposal seeks to: 1) demonstrate viable
integration into operations on commercial farms, 2) demonstrate that the method
is scalable to fields and acre-scale applications, and 3) perform initial
stability tests to verify the carbon is chemically stabilized using in situ CO2
gas analyzers, 4) track carbon content changes, 5) perform laboratory
experiments compared against controls to verify it is not vulnerable to oxygen
exposure from root intrusion, and 4) validate soil fertility improvements
including changes in soil properties like soil water-holding capacity, cation
exchange capacity, and base saturation. The project will use field- and lab-
incubated biweekly CO2 loss rates to estimate the mean residence time (MRT) of
carbon and compare treatment plots against controls. The results will be
validated with random field locations and control plots of land.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.