* 2324899
* Planning: Planning the future of Corey Marsh Ecological Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Rivera, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,951.00

This planning grant will support development of a 10-year strategic plan for
Corey Marsh Ecological Research Center (CMERC), an ecological field station
established in 2018 by Michigan State University (MSU). This 350-acre property
was previously the MSU Muck Soils Research Farm, an important site for
agricultural research for over 70 years, before closing in 2012. After 2012, the
property was quickly reclaimed as a wetland, albeit a degraded one with altered
hydrology and invasion of non-native plants. When CMERC was founded, it was with
the broad vision of establishing a long-term multi-disciplinary research program
on inland wetland ecosystems that integrates undergraduate education and
training and community engagement. Given CMERC’s history and current state, it
is an ideal location to study health of inland wetland ecosystems, particularly
in the face of human land-use activities and global climate change. Its
proximity to the main MSU campus makes it an accessible space for teaching and
learning activities and training undergraduate students in field-based research.
With a vibrant community engagement program, students can gain formative
experiences communicating science and working with diverse interest groups.
Further, CMERC has been actively engaged with Indigenous communities to listen
and learn about the history of the land and how to better incorporate
traditional ecological knowledge approaches to understand a diverse ecosystem.

The planning grant will support a strategic plan that prioritizes activities for
the center overall, as well as for its three focal areas: research, learning,
and community engagement. Specific objectives are to (1) formalize a mission and
vision statement for CMERC, (2) build strategies to ensure its financial
sustainability, (3) develop clear goals for long-term research on the wetland
ecosystems that are forward thinking and provide opportunities for hypothesis-
driven research, and (4) develop core principles for being inclusive, equitable,
and just in all activities. The strategic planning process will include (1)
identification and recruitment of participants from diverse backgrounds and
perspectives, (2) information gathering from other biological field stations,
including virtual meetings with directors and on-site visits, (3) facilitated
retreats with planning participants, (4) creation of working groups, and (5)
drafting, reviewing, and finalizing the strategic plan. Anticipated outcomes
will include a written strategic plan that will guide the next 5 – 10 years of
activities in research, teaching and learning, and community engagement with
discrete metrics to track our success. This plan will serve as a living document
and will be publicly available on the CMERC website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.