* 2324307
* Investigation of Past Atmospheric Methane Variability with Stable Isotopes in Antarctic Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 532,387.00

Atmospheric methane contributes to the greenhouse effect and therefore Earthâ€™s
temperature. Humans have caused an almost three-fold increase in methane since
the industrial revolution. As the planet warms, changes on the Earth surface and
in the atmosphere will further change methane levels. How these feedbacks will
change over time is not well known. Studies of past variations in methane, by
measuring ancient air trapped in ice, provide examples of these changes and help
build better predictions of future change. In this project researchers will use
measurements of different chemical forms of the carbon and hydrogen in methane
to better understand reasons for past changes. The proposed research will
develop laboratory measurement methods for hydrogen isotopes, use the different
chemical forms of methane to understand the changes in atmospheric methane that
happened when past ice ages ended and the Earth warmed, and use unique, very old
ice samples (> 1 million years) from Antarctica to understand what controls
methane levels in the atmosphere when climate was as warm or warmer than today.

Developing new methods involves testing an existing system for purifying methane
for measurements of hydrogen isotopes by mass spectrometry. The system is
already operational and calibrated for carbon isotopes in methane. Next, the
researchers will measure hydrogen isotopes in methane from samples from Taylor
Glacier and Allan Hills, Antarctica, that cover two transitions from ice ages to
interglacial warm periods. These data will be used to constrain where the
methane increase that happened at these times originated, because hydrogen
isotope ratios are sensitive to the latitude of the methane source. Finally, the
researchers will measure both carbon and hydrogen isotopes in samples from 1 to
3 million years in age from the Allan Hills Blue Ice Area in Antarctica.
Comparisons between these measurements and existing data for younger samples may
reveal important differences between the mixture of source types that make up
the methane budget in these different time periods. For example, prior to 1
million years ago, the apparent lack of large Northern Hemisphere ice sheets
during glacial periods, and resulting higher glacial sea levels, would have had
impacts on the global wetland methane source. Additionally, warmer temperatures
might have increased CH4 emissions from wetlands but also increased production
of the hydroxyl radical and methane destruction in the stratosphere. The project
will support a post-doctoral researcher who will collaborate with the Ice
Drilling Program at Dartmouth College to create virtual field labs used in high
school and college classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.