* 2324460
* EAGER: Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer for isothermal Compressed Air Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Eric Loth, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Increasing renewable energy in the nation’s power grid is leading to rapid
growth in wind energy. However, intermittency issues (the wind doesn't always
blow) is a critical challenge. Development of economical, long-duration,
utility-scale storage is important for our nation and world. While compressed
air energy storage allows these utility-scale long-duration aspects, key
challenges remain in terms of efficiency. To solve these, a fundamental
understanding of the controlling parameters and physics for isothermal
compression and expansion efficiency at high pressure ratios is needed. The
proposed research project will enable isothermal compressed air energy storage
by identifying the key parameters and thermo-fluid physics that control round-
trip efficiencies relevant to full-scale systems. The disseminated findings can
be used to direct development of this technology for effective long-duration
wind energy storage, which can ensure a resilient and deeply decarbonized US
power grid that enhances our nation's energy security and independence. In
addition, this project supports graduate student research in renewable energy
while fostering diversity and inclusion.

The goal of this project is to identify and characterize the primary
underpinning multiphase flow and heat transfer factors that control efficient
isothermal compressed air energy storage. In particular, the proposed work will
employ an optically accessible experimental setup for both compression and
expansion that allows pressure ratios of up to 50:1 to identify relevant
multiphase flow and heat transfer physics. In addition, this one-year highly
focused experimental effort will characterize isothermal round-trip efficiency
in terms of the key non-dimensional parameters. The project aims, for the first
time, to: 1) experimentally test the hypothesis that the newly developed Crowe
number and heat exchanger mass loading are the primary non-dimensional numbers
that characterize isothermal efficiency, 2) experimentally demonstrate that high
round-trip storage efficiency can be achieved at high pressure ratios (ca.
50:1), and 3) identify the key multiphase flow and heat transfer physics that
are critical to efficacy of this type of energy storage. This new research can
be transformative for isothermal compressed air energy storage technology
development, which can help solve the wind energy intermittency issues in order
to allow the nation to achieve a deeply decarbonized grid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.