* 2324854
* DESC: Type I: Towards Greener AI Computing: Designing and Managing Sustainable Heterogeneous Edge Data Centers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Spyros Tragoudas, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 587,749.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has recently emerged as a prominent field of
research in computing, with enormous potential to positively influence society
and it is projected to grow considerably in the coming years. The AI market is
anticipated to expand tenfold into a sector worth hundreds of billions of
dollars within the next five years. However, the rapid expansion of AI
technologies has resulted in considerable environmental impact and raised
concerns about their associated operational and embodied carbon footprints. The
former is associated with their ongoing operation and maintenance while the
latter with the entire life cycle of the devices. This project aims to
substantially improve the sustainability of modern edge data centers by
mitigating the environmental impact of AI and boosting the efficiency of data
processing. It will advance beyond AI, towards the development of sustainable
edge data centers. It will also promote the adoption of sustainable practices in
the computing industry as a whole. As a result, it will contribute to a broader
paradigm shift towards embracing more eco-friendly practices in the computing
domain and it will strengthen efforts in driving the digital infrastructure’s
transition towards a greener and more sustainable future.

The central aim of this project is to improve the sustainability of edge data
centers used for AI computing through extensive, multi-layered optimizations.
Unlike conventional centralized data centers, edge data centers are designed to
be closer to end-users and can harness renewable energy for their operations.
This minimizes the need for extensive data transmission and enables a more
localized computing infrastructure. This project moves beyond traditional
optimization methods and targets vertical solutions as multiple parameters
affect operational and embodied carbon footprints. More specifically, the
operational carbon footprint can be lessened by harnessing renewable energy
sources, enhancing power usage efficiency, and strategically distributing
workload across various computing components. On the other hand, the embodied
carbon footprint can be decreased by downscaling energy-efficient hardware
accelerators, implementing low-footprint circuit designs, and enhancing system
reliability to extend its lifespan. To cover all these aspects, this project
will follow a carbon-first vertical approach that will initially develop robust
circuit-level and architectural-level hardware accelerators for edge data
centers, then will improve the system’s utilization, and will eventually
efficiently manage edge data centers at the run-time level with renewable energy
sources. Overall, the development of reliable hardware accelerators and
efficient utilization of computing resources will lead to more energy-efficient
data centers, by reducing their carbon footprint and improving their overall
sustainability. Furthermore, integrating renewable energy sources in the
management of edge data centers will promote the use of clean energy and reduce
reliance on non-renewable sources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.