* 2324432
* WORKSHOP: ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at ICAD 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Bruce Walker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 23,478.00

This is funding to support a "ThinkTank" (workshop) of ten promising graduate
student scholars along with about six distinguished research faculty mentors, in
conjunction with the 2023 International Conference on Auditory Display
(ICAD'23), which will be held on June 26-30 at Linköping University in
Norrköping, Sweden. ICAD is the premier international forum for presenting
research on the use of sound to display data, monitor systems, and provide
enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual reality systems. It is unique
in its singular focus on auditory displays and the array of perception,
technology, and application areas that this encompasses, which include for
example data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory graphs, speech
interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual, cognitive,
technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments. This year's
conference theme is "Sonification for the Masses"; more details about ICAD 2023
are available online at https://icad2023.icad.org/.

The ICAD ThinkTank is a doctoral consortium that promotes scholarship and
networking among new researchers in this important emerging interdisciplinary
area. This full-day workshop will take place on June 26 immediately preceding
the conference proper, The event will develop a supportive community of scholars
and a spirit of collaborative research, by providing participants with a
friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum in which to present their
research ideas, to listen to ongoing work from peers, and to receive
constructive feedback from a panel of distinguished experts. Panel feedback is
designed to help students understand and articulate how their work is positioned
relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The
ThinkTank will also offer invited speakers and discussion groups (e.g., to
provide students with relevant information about important issues for doctoral
candidates, whether they are considering academic or industrial career paths).
Student participants will present their work via posters during the conference
technical program, and via extended abstracts published on the ICAD 2023
website. Thus, the ThinkTank will help shape ongoing and future research
projects that have clear and important implications for development of assistive
technologies and universal access. It will bring together students from diverse
disciplines (such as engineering, computing, music, and psychology), so that
they can experience the broad spectrum of approaches to auditory displays,
assistive technologies and universal design. It will afford participants
exposure to a larger community, allowing them to bond among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of
dimensions, including nationality and culture, scientific discipline, and
institution, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field. This year, the organizers expect that up to ten U.S.-based ThinkTank
Scholars will have their travel and attendance heavily subsidized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.