* 2324459
* Conference: NSF GRANTED: A workshop series to establish the Middle-Tennessee Research Administration and Innovation Network (M-TRAIN)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Joanne Spitz, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project will be implemented as a series of conferences to bring together
research-performing institutions in Middle Tennessee (TN) to collaboratively
address the best ways to enhance the research enterprise of the region, which is
home to emerging research institutions, including historically black colleges
and universities (HBCUs), rural-serving institutions, public and private
entities, and faith-based institutions. National investment in research in this
region cannot reach its full potential without strategically planned growth of
the workforce and resources that support the research ecosystem. Although
emerging research institutions in Middle TN have demonstrated research
excellence, there remain further opportunities to enhance their ability to
submit proposals for research funding, proactively collaborate with neighboring
institutions for large multi-institutional opportunities, or develop important
partnerships with corporate and government organizations. The sheer diversity of
the research-performing institutions in the area underscores a need for
intensive communication, intentional inclusion, and careful deliberations that
will result in the creation of enduring partnerships. To meet this need, the
project team will create the Middle TN Research Administration and Innovation
Network (M-TRAIN), a network whose diverse composition promises to be a national
model for research enterprise collaboration. The planned convenings will
catalyze growth in the regional research enterprise by connecting disparate
research performers while addressing the unique needs and strengths of the
individual institutions. As federal research opportunities requiring
institutional, and often regional, collaborations are becoming more common, such
a model is critical to ensure national competitiveness in science and
engineering research participation.

The Core Partners of M-TRAIN reflect the institutional diversity of Middle TN,
including Vanderbilt University (research-intensive private Institution),
Tennessee State University (public HBCU), and Fisk University (private HBCU).
Middle TN is home to 35 colleges and universities, with a mix of public and
private organizations, including five rural-serving institutions and four HBCUs.
This institutional diversity will inform M-TRAIN conference discussions to
identify the strengths and needs of the research development infrastructure at
regional institutions, further building trust and relationships, and determining
best practices for synergistic and collaborative approaches as participants
pursue opportunities for scientific and economic innovation. Workshop topics
will include broadly: research development, research administration, research
compliance, and research translation. Objectives are to build and expand
research administration infrastructure across the region and enhance inter-
institutional cohesiveness and collective readiness to respond to the increasing
number of funding opportunities seeking a regional response.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.