* 2324579
* Collaborative Research: GEO OSE Track 2: Building a multiscale community-led ecosystem for crustal geology through the integration of Macrostrat and StraboSpot
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Daven Quinn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 11/30/2026
* USD 700,253.00

Understanding the form and structure of the rocks that make up the Earth’s crust
provides a window into Earth’s evolution and a structural framework in which to
situate measurements of its properties and past environment. Macrostrat and
StraboSpot are two software platforms and data systems that provide tools for
tracking crustal rocks. Macrostrat provides a broad framework in which to
integrate crustal stratigraphy (rocks organized by age) and mapping (rocks in
spatial context) into a multiscale descriptive model of the crust. StraboSpot
provides mobile apps and tools to collect field- and sample-based datasets, and
a data system in which to store and access them. The platforms are complementary
in their aims and function: Macrostrat lacks effective tools for users to input
geologic maps and stratigraphic columns, and StraboSpot lacks a framework for
synthesizing data from many researchers. This project integrates the two data
systems to build user-facing functionality for data ingestion and
contextualization, allowing data collected by individual researchers to
contribute to integrative crustal models. Such synthesized results will
contribute to a publicly accessible data framework that is used by hundreds of
thousands of geologists and enthusiasts each year.

Macrostrat and StraboSpot are established geoscience data systems that each
support a broad community ecosystem of users. Macrostrat has revolutionized the
digital delivery of geologic maps by integrating hundreds of isolated map
publications into a single harmonized multiscale product. The StraboSpot app and
data infrastructure supports the capture of new geologic data while preserving
documentation elements (e.g., photos, measurements) that have not been
previously carried through the mapping pipeline. This project integrates these
data systems by building data pipelines from StraboSpot to Macrostrat for
geologic maps, stratigraphic columns, and geological cross-sections. The
software teams and approaches that contribute to these platforms will also be
integrated, increasing efficiency and reducing duplicate work. Linking the data-
capture capabilities of StraboSpot with Macrostrat’s sophisticated geological
framework will harness the output of geological field studies to produce
multiscale models of Earth’s crustal framework. This integration will address
the fundamental data limitation of crustal research, which inhibits
characterizing the upper crust in four dimensions (3 spatial dimensions and
time) and impacts the effectiveness of geological process modeling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.