* 2324375
* Epitaxial Film Growth and Characterization of Stable and Metastable Gallium-Aluminum-Oxide Polymorphs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lisa Porter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 488,607.00

Nontechnical description: Ubiquitous in every-day life, semiconductors are
critical components in industrial manufacturing, communications, transportation,
energy conversion and transmission, and many other applications. The U.S. CHIPS
and Science Act, which provides more than $50 billion to increase domestic
research and manufacturing of semiconductors, further highlights the critical
importance of semiconductor research to U.S. national security and the economy.
This research project creates scientific knowledge to produce a novel
semiconductor alloy system and forms a platform for the development and
manufacturing of future semiconductor devices that can operate in extreme
environments. The capability for semiconductor devices to operate at higher
temperatures and higher powers translates to substantial energy savings and more
efficient and robust renewable energy technologies, such as long-range electric
vehicles. As part of the future workforce, graduate and undergraduate students
gain a broad set of skills in new processing methods and advanced
characterization tools that are needed in the semiconductor industry. Outreach
activities also educate middle/high-school students about semiconductors and
related materials to inspire them to consider careers in STEM. The materials and
growth recipes resulting from this research advance semiconductor R&D
activities: external research groups can produce or acquire semiconductor films
through training on the equipment located in Carnegie Mellon University’s clean
room user facility, requesting fee-for-service films from clean room staff, or
through an established research collaboration with the principal investigator.

Technical description: This project is a research investigation on the growth
and characterization of different phases, or polymorphs, of gallium-aluminum-
oxide (AGO) epitaxial films, which have enormous potential for high-efficiency
power-electronic devices that can operate in extreme conditions. The ability to
alloy gallium oxide with Al to form different polymorphs of AGO with unique
properties and tunable, ultra-wide bandgaps that depend on Al content presents a
vast materials system with potential to form a platform for both established and
novel semiconductor devices. As such, an ultimate goal of this project is to
achieve unprecedented control over the phase content and microstructure of AGO
semiconductor epitaxial films. However, the understanding of how to control the
growth of one phase versus another in this material system is very limited.
Using chemical vapor deposition to produce the films, this research contributes
to the understanding of how thermodynamic and kinetic variables can be used to
control the growth of stable and metastable polymorphs of AGO as a function of
Al content. Prior experimental and theoretical studies serve as points of
reference and inform the experimental approach. Advanced materials
characterization tools are employed to identify the micro-/ nano-structure,
phase content and composition in the films and reveal such phenomena as
interdiffusion and phase transitions within the film and at the film/substrate
interface, which determine the nature of the resulting film growth. Electrical
measurements of films showing optimum structural characteristics uncover
properties that are relevant for future electronic devices based on these
materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.