* 2324457
* Conference: Growing the Research Administrative Infrastructure to Support EPSCoR (RAISE) - Vermont
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jeralyn Haraldsen, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 95,388.00

The project, “Research Administration Infrastructure to Support EPSCoR - Vermont
(RAISE-VT),” will identify ways to increase research capacity in the research
enterprise that entice talented STEM graduates to remain in Vermont, appeal to
the current workforce, motivate upskilling or reskilling, and tap into a
national pool of remote workers. Developing and implementing innovative
solutions to bolster the human capital that includes creating workforce
development strategies that retain the state’s talent in research administration
careers has the potential to transform Vermont’s research enterprise.

RAISE-VT will create new knowledge through a statewide research
administration/development needs assessment and a series of virtual stakeholder
engagement sessions that will inform the development of the capstone RAISE-VT
workshop agenda. The goals of the RAISE-VT workshop are to identify and explore
perceived barriers and existing gaps in human capital to inform the creation of
career pathways, such as internships or certificate programs, for entry into
research support careers; identify best practices, capacity-enhancing tools, and
processes to catalyze the growing research enterprise in Vermont; establish
ongoing, information-sharing mechanisms among stakeholders to define and grow
the specialized research administration and research development workforce;
develop recommendations to attain measurable improvements in the research
administration and development sectors in Vermont that can be adapted to other
regions and EPSCoR jurisdictions. The planned outcomes and products from RAISE-
VT include strengthened collaborative interactions among administrative research
staff within Vermont and across the nation, establishing the RAISE-VT website,
and a report summarizing workshop activities, participation, survey results, and
major recommendations. Workshop resources will be distributed broadly through
national and regional professional organizations, the NSF EPSCoR program,
conference presentations, and the RAISE-VT website. When successful RAISE-VT
will create a scalable research administration workforce development model that
can be replicated nationally to enable faculty and students from other low-
population states, EPSCoR jurisdictions, and similar regions to competitively
participate in the National research enterprise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.