* 2324707
* DESC: Type I: Dynamic Optimization for Leaps in Sustainability-Centric Computing System Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Donald Docimo, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2026
* USD 539,439.00

The manufacturing, operation, and disposal of computing systems are increasingly
impacting the environment. Traditionally, computing systems are designed to
maximize energy efficiency and job performance, while elements such as
greenhouse gas emissions and electronic waste continue to trend upward. These
factors are dependent on the underlying dynamics of the computing systems, and
time-sensitive reactions have the potential to address these issues. This
project tackles the sustainability of computing systems using dynamic system
optimization, setting an explicit focus on critical sustainability metrics for
designing future computing systems. An emphasis is placed on pushing forward the
scientific understanding of sustainable computing systems, and to impact future
critical structures such as datacenters. This project serves to support not only
the computing field, but also provides advancements in the design and controls
fields. The outcomes of the project also support education of scientific
communities and the public alike through expansive multimedia resource
development and student training.

Three aims are defined for this research. The first aim is to improve and
reformulate models of sustainable computing systems for integration within
optimization, addressed by development of a methodology to convert data-driven
surrogate models into dynamic analysis-friendly formats. The second aim is to
understand and quantify the impact different representations of sustainability
metrics have on optimization problem solution feasibility. This is pursued
through categorization of sustainability metrics for automatic generation of
solvable optimization problems. The third aim is to develop and evaluate the
capabilities of dynamic system optimization for sustainability-centric computing
systems, using a novel framework. Validation is performed through a combination
of numerical and experimental case studies, ranging from server cooling to
datacenter design. The potential contributions of studying computing systems
through dynamic system optimization are large, discrete jumps in sustainability
metrics, such as reductions in emissions, waste heat, and electronic waste.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.