* 2324614
* Collaborative Research: NSF/MCB-BSF: The effect of transcription factor binding on UV lesion accumulation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Raluca Gordan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 699,744.00

The DNA sequence of the human genome varies among people. However, these
variations or mutations are not evenly dispersed throughout the genome.
Variation is highest where regulatory proteins bind to DNA, a process that is
poorly understood despite the fact that these changes can significantly impact
human biology. This project will determine whether genomic variation is
increased because protein binding makes DNA more susceptible to damage, and
subsequently mutations, or because proteins block repair of damaged DNA leading
to mutations. Assessing these possibilities requires development of innovative
methods. This project will not only answer the question of whether proteins make
DNA more susceptible to damage or harder to repair, but the newly developed
methods will be a major leap forward in quantitative measurement of DNA damage.
To ensure the broader impact of the newly developed methods, investigators will
reach out to the next generations of scientists in two ways. A workshop entitled
“What is Damaging My DNA” will be offered to high school students to engage the
younger generation. In addition, an intensive summer workshop entitled
“Computational Thinking for Academic Professionals” will be offered to academic
scientists who need training handling larger datasets, such as those in this
project.

Transcription factor (TF) proteins bind to specific DNA sequences across the
genome to regulate gene expression. Surprisingly, recent genomic studies
indicate that TF binding sites are characterized by increased DNA damage and are
highly enriched for somatic mutations, suggesting that TF‐DNA binding is
mutagenic. This project hypothesizes that that TFs induce unique patterns of
lesion accumulation within binding sites, which are dictated by the ability of
TFs to enhance lesion formation and to occlude access to the nucleotide excision
repair machinery. UV light will be used as a source of DNA damage to develop
high‐throughput in vitro techniques and quantitative models for: the affinity of
TFs from different families for lesion-containing DNA and ability to compete
with repair proteins; and the modulation of DNA damage formation by TF binding.
These models will be used to predict genome‐wide DNA damage and repair in human
cells and to develop cell‐based assays of damage and repair in genomic contexts.
Successful completion of this work will link increases in mutation rates in TF
binding sites to the molecular mechanisms by which TFs increase UV damage
frequency in the human genome.

This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation, with joint funding from Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Israeli
Binational Science Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.