* 2324502
* Conference: Enhancing CCC-CSU-UC Collaboration (EC3)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Maria Teresa Napoli, Fresno City College
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,578.00

The project, Enhancing CCC–CSU–UC Collaboration (EC3), mobilizes knowledge
across the State of California’s public higher education environment. It seeks
to create systematic pathways for the exchange of knowledge, resources, and
talent across California’s three higher education systems. The State’s public
higher education environment is composed of the University of California (UC,
10), California State University (CSU, 23), and Community Colleges (CC, 115)
campuses. By creating systematic pathways across UCs, CSUs, and CCs, the project
expands collaborations, diversifies voices in research-agenda building, and
engages non-research institutions (CSUs, CCs) as stakeholders in the new or
enhanced vectors for collaboration. Increased collaboration can have an immense
equity and diversity impact because under-represented populations are
disproportionately large in the CCC and CSU systems. The goal of EC3 is to
create systematic and open pathways to deploy inert knowledge, talent, and
resources between and among the CCC – CSU – UC higher education segments. Nine
community colleges, the Foundation for California CCs, five CSU campuses, and
five UC campuses will forge pathways for collaboration that create more
opportunities for faculty and students to thrive. The effort has three
objectives: (a) identify best practices that enhance intersegmental
collaboration; (b) identify best practices that can help to shape future NSF
GRANTED funding opportunities; and (c) form a community of professionals ready
to apply to those new opportunities. The work addresses domestic shortages in
both STEM professionals and STEM higher education in the U.S. The majority of
students, and among them a disproportionate amount of low-income and/or
underrepresented, enter the postsecondary education system in California through
its community colleges. Strengthening the pipeline from community colleges into
CSUs and UCs will increase and diversify talent in the scientific enterprise.
Every state in the country has two-year colleges, four-year colleges and
universities, and flagship research universities, so the results of this project
could serve as a model and will be of national interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.