* 2324944
* Self-assembled DNA crystals as scaffolds for macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,999.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Nature uses self-assembly in order to organize
molecules into functional materials, with biological cells being a prime example
of the great potential in this approach. DNA and RNA are two of the most
promising molecules for constructing tailored self-assembling systems because
they encode information in a programmable way, so many independent strands can
be designed that come together in a predictable manner. The molecular properties
(e.g. the dimensions, geometry, and rigidity) of these nucleic acids are also
well known, and they can form branched junctions that allow them to assemble in
2D and 3D space. One key goal of nucleic acid-based nanotechnology is to build
3D crystals with programmable void spaces to host various guest molecules. This
project aims to show, for the first time, that molecules like RNA or proteins
can be specifically positioned in these crystals, by tethering them to strands
that make up the lattice. The first goal is to incorporate RNA into the
crystals, both to see how it changes the assembly of the lattice, but also to
solve the structure of small, unknown RNA motifs like aptamers. In the second
goal, proteins will be attached to the crystals, not to solve their structure,
but rather to create a dense 3D array of these molecules (e.g. for catalytic
reasons, by incorporating enzymes). Finally, the third goal of this project is
to create nano-crystals (which are roughly a billion-fold smaller than the
crystals typically obtained), laden with either small interfering RNA (siRNA) or
functional proteins. These crystals can be used to effectively deliver these
cargoes into cells, given the extremely high density they can carry. Taken
together, the goals in this proposal will create a new system of 3D scaffolds
for solving RNA structures, attaching proteins to make catalytic materials, and
more efficiently delivering important functional molecules into cells. The
project will also have significant societal and educational impact by developing
an online curriculum and teacher training for K-12 education and a new self-
assembly online game for exploring how these systems work. This program will
engage undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented minority students to gain
knowledge and pursue research in the science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) fields, and help develop a new course for teaching nanotechnology to a
broad range of students.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY The goal of this project is to use self-assembled, 3D
DNA crystals as functional macromolecular scaffolds that can immobilize guest
molecules, such as RNA and proteins. These DNA crystals are programmable in both
their lattice geometry and the size of the pores and channels that comprise
them, and guest species can be site-specifically positioned by tethering them to
the strands that assemble to form the crystal (either covalently or via
supramolecular effects). This project will create crystals that incorporate RNA
as well as DNA, and determine the effects on crystal symmetry of this change. In
addition, the cavities of the crystal will be used to host both RNA and DNA
aptamers, and to solve their structure (including ones that are currently
unknown) using X-ray crystallography. Small aptamers in particular are difficult
to solve in any other way, and thus this method will facilitate the
determination of more such structures. Another goal of the project will be to
create a high density of functions proteins (both model systems like GFP, and
enzymes like horseradish peroxidase), by attaching them to molecules that site-
specifically bind the minor groove of DNA. Although the proteins will not be
tethered rigidly enough to solve their structure using crystallography, the
lattices can serve as catalytic materials, as affinity scaffolds for protein
purification, or ways to protect the proteins from degradation. The third key
goal of this project will be to scale down the size of the crystals to 100-200
nm in size (compared with traditional such crystals, which are hundreds of
micrometers). These nano-crystals will be used to deliver functional cargoes
(such as siRNA or functional proteins) to the interior of cells, and the regular
lattice will provide an extremely high loading capacity, e.g. ~1,000 molecules
for a crystal approximately 100 nm in diameter. Taken together, the work will:
(1) create a new set of scaffolds for determining RNA and DNA aptamer structure;
(2) enable functional materials with controlled attachment of proteins in 3D
space; and (3) design a new category of nanoparticles with extremely high
loading capacity of proteins or siRNA for effective delivery to cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.