* 2324599
* Conference: ASE60: Synergistic Interactions between Theory and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Alexei Borodin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 47,725.00

The conference "Synergistic Interactions Between Theory and Computation" will be
held at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, July 27-29,
2023. This meeting will focus on the nexus between theory and computation,
particularly on computational "tricks'' that lead to deep theoretical insight,
and on the use of deep theoretical results in fast, high-performing computation.
Three specific areas of interest are random matrix theory, numerical linear
algebra, and modern scientific computing. Established experts and promising
junior researchers will present the latest advances and state-of-the-art
techniques. We seek a fruitful exchange of ideas and the opportunity to interact
across disciplinary boundaries. This interaction will be facilitated by the
presence of numerous researchers who work at the intersection of two or more of
these areas. In addition to the presentations, we have scheduled a poster
session for young participants so they can publicize their results and receive
feedback and guidance from the experts in the audience.

Random matrix theory, with its myriad modern applications from randomized
numerical linear algebra to signal processing and from optimization to machine
learning, is informed and deepened by computational and numerics tricks of the
sort that have yielded tridiagonal theoretical models for beta-ensembles and
calculating limiting distributions via Kolmogorov's backward equation. On the
other hand, the use of randomization in numerical linear algebra is a fast-
growing subfield, due to the importance of working with extremely large datasets
for which classical, deterministic algorithms are too slow. The new methods make
extensive use of random matrix tools, while the need to properly address machine
learning and optimization applications has in turn guided the modern development
of random matrix theory. Finally, modern high-performance computing needs to
deal with sparseness, structure, and fast and accurate approximation on the back
end, and must allow the users to write code that reads like mathematics on the
front end; modern programming languages like Julia are designed to allow for
high-level mathematical abstraction with high-performance code. We aim to bring
together the three aforementioned communities in order to foster
interdisciplinary research and hopefully start and nurture collaborations among
both experts and junior participants that will bear fruit in the years to come.
The conference website is at: https://math.mit.edu/events/ase60celebration/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.