* 2324286
* CAREER: Electrochemical Dynamic Midinfrared Metasurface for Ultra-Low Power Wearable Thermoregulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Po-Chun Hsu, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2027
* USD 429,504.00

Thermal comfort is one of the most essential fundamental needs for human health
and productivity. The seasonality of cardiovascular diseases and influenza
demonstrates the importance of stabilizing our thermal environments. However,
because of its necessity, indoor temperature control is also associated with
enormous energy consumption and carbon emission. This proposed work aims to
break the health-energy dilemma by developing a wearable radiative
thermoregulation device that can localize heat management around the human body.
Like a chameleon that can change its visible color, the wearable device can act
like a second skin that changes the level of radiative heat loss into the
environment to offset the adverse ambient temperature change. The thermal
radiation is tuned by an electrochemical reaction that uses less than 1 V as
operation voltage. This working principle is similar to a battery but with the
focus on its mid-infrared optical property change. Like a battery that can
maintain its state of charge for a long time, the device can also maintain its
heating/cooling state with ultralow energy consumption, which is orders of
magnitude more efficient than traditional active devices such as electric
blankets. To promote diversity, equity, and inclusion, the project will organize
the annual workshop series called LITE (Light, Infrared, and Thermal Energy) for
underrepresented students by collaborating with the Step Up to STEM program at
North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics. The workshop series aims to
inspire high schoolers’ interest in photonics, thermal science, and general STEM
fields by providing introductory lectures and immersive hands-on experiments
such as thermal vision VR goggle DIY sessions. In photonic technical terms, the
device adopts a metal-insulator-metal configuration and the working principle of
a midinfrared metamaterial perfect absorber. It uses electrochromic conjugated
polymer, such as polyaniline, as the active material. By electrochemically
biasing the polymer, its carrier density, plasmon frequency, and permittivity
are tuned dynamically and reversibly, thus varying the device state between a
metamaterial absorber and a simple metallic reflector, which is equivalent to
emissivity tuning based on the Kirchhoff’s law of thermal radiation and the zero
transmittance. This project will involve multiscale and multidisciplinary study
in materials science, photonics, heat transfer, and wearable device engineering.
Specifically, the project will develop the correlation among polymer synthesis
condition, structural characterization, charge transport measurement, mid-
infrared permittivity, metamaterial absorber designs, and heat transfer
measurement. The proposed research will scale up the adaptive metamaterial
absorber and implement Kirigami paper cutting technique to provide
stretchability, breathability, and conformal deformability from 2D thin film to
3D shapes for wearable applications. The wearable metasurface thermoregulation
will further advance the emerging field of multimodal and multispectral light
and heat management for the health-energy nexus. The in-depth study of
electrochemically active polymers will also become an enabler for adaptive
optical metasurfaces, sustainable energy science, and personalized preventive
medicine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.