* 2324859
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type I: Extending lifetimes of partially broken machines to repurpose e-waste
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 258,001.00

The goal of this project is to improve sustainability of computing hardware by
extending the lifetimes of computing equipment even when they start to partially
break down. The carbon emissions from producing computing equipment is high and
it is wasteful to simply throw away computers when most of the functionality may
still work. Yet this is a common practice due to high diagnosis and repair
costs. This project investigates a new approach where instead of repairing
devices, the remaining working components are utilized as-is. Software systems
are not designed to handle partially broken machines, so the investigators will
develop new approaches for managing these partially broken machines, both for
consumer-grade hardware and datacenter-grade hardware. One key component the
investigators will focus on is Solid State Drives (SSDs), which by design will
wear-out with use. By incorporating device age into scheduling decisions, this
investigation will discover how to extend their effective lifetimes through
intelligent age-aware scheduling and management.

The results of this research will enable an alternative option for utilizing
failing hardware instead of repair or disposal. Utilizing this otherwise useless
equipment will provide additional compute capacity, which would reduce the
amount of new hardware that needs to be produced. This fits within the Design
for Environmental Sustainability in Computing (DESC) program where the focus is
on the entire lifecycle of computing equipment and its corresponding
environmental impact. Specifically, extending the lifetimes of computing
equipment reduces the amount of equipment that needs to be produced, thereby
lowering the associated carbon emissions and toxic byproducts from the
manufacturing process. The investigators will engage with both industry and
academic researchers to raise awareness of the problem and disseminate results,
including incorporating sustainability topics in the curriculum at the
investigators' respective institutions. The investigators will also involve
undergraduates and high school students where applicable to allow for broader
and more diverse participation in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.