* 2324520
* Conference: Research Developers as Hubs of Support to Launch and Level Up Faculty's Research Careers and Nurturing Institutional Ecosystems
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Melanie Bauer, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The proposed meetings will increase understanding of how research-related
supportive activities assist early-career faculty and enhance their diverse
institutional environments. Emerging research institutions, and the faculty who
work there, have unique obstacles for launching and sustaining research
projects. The project aims to develop guidance and resources tailored to new
faculty, staff, and administrators at these institutions who can access them
with no/minimal startup costs or time investment to advance their success in
research.

In partnership with state and national professional societies, the convenings
will capture ideas for answering several questions in service of emerging
research institutions, their diverse professoriate, and the Research Development
(RD) professional knowledge base: 1) How can staff and administrators with
various position descriptions engage in research development activities to
coach, connect, and champion the faculty they support, especially those early in
their research career?; 2) What are actionable metrics for individual faculty in
terms of planning their research activities and for institutions in terms of
strategic investment in their research enterprise?; and 3) How do you leverage
the resources and expertise held by local, state, and national networks to the
benefit of demographically diverse, early-career faculty in all types of
institutional settings? Participants across these convenings will include RD and
Research Administration professionals; university, college, and departmental
leaders; and early-career faculty members. After the conclusion of the
convenings, an executive summary report and list of recommendations will be
generated (and shared out to professional networks) organized around the guiding
question themes of planting RD support seeds, accessing actionable metrics, and
leveraging multiple knowledge bases toward supporting new faculty and emerging-
research/minority-serving institutions. Through collaborations with national
professional societies and a broadly relevant focus on early-career faculty and
emerging research institutions, this project has the potential to produce
recommendations, resources, and an engaged stakeholder community ("alliance‚Äù)
focused on growing research infrastructure and capacity that could be nationally
transformative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.