* 2324515
* SAI: Data-Driven Governance for Broadband Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jared Schachner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

The United States is at the start of a massive investment in the nation’s
broadband infrastructure. A major focus of this investment is on improving
equity in broadband access, adoption, and use. To inform the effort, reliable
data are needed to identify areas of the nation that are underserved or
unserved. A major challenge is that existing data and performance metrics are
not well-suited to drawing conclusions about how to target new broadband
investments to ensure that all Americans are connected to high-speed broadband
at a price they can afford. This project responds to the challenge by developing
and validating new sampling and modeling approaches for measuring broadband
performance at the scale of meaningful human geographies, such as blocks,
neighborhoods, villages, communities, townships, and cities. For these new
approaches to be of use and to inform policy implementation requires a better
understanding of how governance processes that incorporate data as a source of
knowledge unfold and take root in practice. This project therefore also
identifies the factors that constrain or enable the adoption of novel Internet
measurement data. The research informs ongoing broadband investment efforts and
empowers broadband governance stakeholders with the knowledge and tools to
gather their own longitudinal Internet performance data.

Working in six diverse communities, this project examines how the provision of
high-quality data on Internet performance to local broadband stakeholders
affects decision-making on deployment of broadband infrastructure investments.
Local stakeholders work with the research team to deploy new Internet
measurement software to gather continuous measurements on Internet performance
from households in each community. This work is complemented by a qualitative
research study, combining interviews and participant-observation, to understand
how broadband stakeholders respond to this new information in their decision-
making. The framework developed by this project accounts for the values,
interests, and fears embedded in stakeholder organizations, including government
agencies, advocacy organizations, community groups, and Internet Service
Providers. By developing new sources of Internet measurement data and achieving
a better understanding of how those data are best incorporated into policy
implementation decisions, the national investment in broadband infrastructure is
more likely to reach the places where it is most needed.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.