* 2324724
* GEO OSE Track 1: SUNCAST: Software Unified Collaboration for Advancing Solar Tomography
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Gelu Nita, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,949.00

The Software UNified Collaboration for Advancing Solar Tomography (SUNCAST)
project aims to revolutionize the understanding of the solar corona volume. The
solar corona plays a vital role in the space environment and can impact
technological infrastructure (e.g., telecommunications). SUNCAST will develop a
powerful software framework that combines cutting-edge algorithms with high-
quality data from ground-based and space-based observations. This framework will
provide researchers and the public with unprecedented insights into the physical
diversity of the solar corona. By making the software open-source and user-
friendly, SUNCAST will enable scientists, students, and educators to collaborate
and explore the vast potential of solar physics. The project will also provide
training opportunities for students and early career scientists, fostering the
next generation of solar researchers. In addition to its scientific
significance, SUNCAST will have broader impacts on education, diversity, and the
enhancement of solar research infrastructure. This project offers a major leap
in the quest to understand the complexities of the Sun and its impact on the
Earth.

The SUNCAST project aims to develop a comprehensive, open-source software
framework for solar coronal tomography. This framework will integrate state-of-
the-art algorithms, multi-wavelength observations, and advanced 3D modeling
techniques to create a centralized platform for data analysis and modeling. By
upgrading and scaling the existing software to a cloud-based, high-performance
computing architecture, SUNCAST will enhance its accessibility, speed, and
efficiency, enabling wider use and faster results. The software will be designed
using modern software engineering practices to ensure its long-term
sustainability. By leveraging existing software resources developed by the team
and collaborators, SUNCAST will build upon a strong foundation of expertise and
knowledge. The open-source nature of the software, combined with its user-
friendly interface, will facilitate collaboration among researchers and promote
interdisciplinary research. The plug-in architecture will allow seamless
integration of user-contributed customized codes, expanding the functionality
and utility of the framework. SUNCAST will also provide training programs to
empower researchers with the necessary skills to utilize the software
effectively. Through these efforts, SUNCAST will advance the field of solar
tomography, promote best practices, and foster the development of a diverse and
skilled workforce in solar research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.