* 2324405
* Conference: GRANTED Building a Regional Research Ecosystem among Emerging and Minority Serving Universities and Community Partners
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Shari Garmise, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,846.00

This project, a series of convenings among emerging research universities and
community partners in the Central region of the Commonwealth of Virginia, will
develop, organize, and support efforts to build a regional research ecosystem.
This regional collaborative effort will strengthen human capital assets and
technology transfer and public-private research partnerships by working across
the region to increase access to researchers, mentors, research administrators,
and tech transfer specialists. The convenings will also assist in the
development and sharing of common training and professional development
opportunities.

Previous collaborative efforts suggest that the following goals will have
maximum impact on the research enterprise in the Central region of the
Commonwealth of Virginia: 1) Increase knowledge of technology transfer and
intellectual property protection; given the diversity of regional universities
and partners, this also creates opportunities to explore the potential of
technology transfer opportunities for social sciences and humanities research
and how translation of research serves the non-profit and for-profit business
sectors. 2) Building human capital, which includes the research administrative
workforce, research leadership, and student research training and leadership. 3)
Build public-private and community partnerships for research and translation;
working to coordinate networks, projects, and resources. Primary participants in
the project are Virginia State University, Norfolk State University, Longwood
University, Virginia Commonwealth University, and Activation Capital. The
national professional organization, Teaching Institute for Excellence in STEM
(TIES), is also a collaborator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.