* 2324941
* DESC: Type I: Enabling Carbon-Zero Colocation Data Centers via Agile and Coordinated Resource Management
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shaolei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Multi-tenant colocation data centers (a.k.a. colocation) are critical
infrastructures to support the booming artificial intelligence industry and
digital economy. Rapid expansion in both number and scale of data centers
results in formidable energy demand. While both colocation operators and tenants
are eager to achieve carbon sustainability and ultimately "carbon-zero", turning
this vision into reality faces significant challenges. Given tenants' siloed
server management in a colocation, this project aims to answer, how can the
combined energy demands be reimagined to make use of the intermittent renewable
energy supply to reduce the carbon footprint? How can centers dynamically
provision tenants' servers for operational carbon efficiency while addressing
the negative impact on servers' lifespan to avoid increases in embodied carbon
footprint? And, how can tenants' server power consumption be modulated in an
agile manner to track intermittent renewables at a fine granularity? To address
these challenging questions, this project proposes to develop (1) a
computationally-efficient mechanism to coordinate the allocation of intermittent
green energy to different tenants; (2) a learning-based algorithm to dynamically
provision tenants' servers to minimize the operational carbon footprint while
keeping the embodied carbon footprint low; and (3) an agile server power
modulation framework that combines hardware power knobs (DVFS, Sleep states)
with software power knobs (multi-power binaries) to enable faster and greater
power adaptation to track green energy availability.

This project has broader impacts on the industry and the scientific community.
To keep the momentum for an environmentally sustainable and healthy data center
industry, this project extends the exploration of optimizing owner-operated data
centers to a critical and under-explored segment of data centers --- multi-
tenant colocation data centers where tenants' server management is siloed. It
can catalyze a shift in the management of future data centers and ultimately
transforms the way that the artificial intelligence industry and digital economy
evolve. This project also includes a significant educational component and
provides abundant opportunities to nurture and attract students from under-
represented groups to engage in computer science. The research results will be
transitioned into the existing curriculum. Further, leveraging the large
population of minority students in the PI's institution, this project will bear
a profound impact on the education and careers of minority students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.