* 2324882
* Capacity: BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Globally harmonized re-analysis of Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) proteomics datasets enables the creation of new resources (DIA-eXchange)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Deutsch, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 789,416.00

The research community has generated millions of datasets that were used to
answer scientific questions of interest, and deposited those datasets into
public data repositories as part of the mandated data sharing policies of
funding agencies worldwide. Especially for datasets generated to measure the
protein content of biological samples, substantial additional information can be
extracted from these public datasets using newer techniques, newer versions of
software, and newer reference information during re-analysis. This project will
develop a software infrastructure for globally harmonized re-analysis of an
emerging type of proteomics dataset to extract new information from older data.
The infrastructure will improve our ability to turn proteomics data into
knowledge about global relative protein abundances and about interactions
between proteins inferred from how protein abundances are correlated. The
project will also provide opportunities for students to learn skills in
scientific data analysis. This project is an international collaboration with
the Proteomics Team at EMBL-EBI (Hinxton, UK) and the Institute of Systems,
Molecular and Integrative Biology (ISMIB) at the University of Liverpool (UoL;
UK).

This project will make the datasets generated by the method known as data-
independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry proteomics more findable,
accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). This will be accomplished by
developing an indexing system for the libraries of mass spectra that are used to
analyze the data from DIA experiments. The project will further develop
benchmarks and guidelines to advance the field, and then develop data analysis
pipelines to process thousands of public experiments at scale and make the
results available to the research community. The resulting protein abundance
maps across thousands of experiments will enable the development of protein
interaction maps via inference from protein co-expression patterns extracted
from these datasets, something that can only be accomplished by thousands of
datasets analyzed in unison. Students will be given opportunities to participate
in the work in order to build their skills, and all software and data products
will be made publicly available to further advance the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.