* 2324589
* Conference: GRANTED DCL: Arizona Regional Coalition of Leaders in Advanced Research Administration (CLARA)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Valerie Keim, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,998.00

The Arizona Regional Coalition of Leaders in Advanced Research Administration
(CLARA) seeks to leverage existing knowledge of experienced individuals to
create high-quality, free onboarding, continuing professional development
libraries, and an active professional network for research administration
practitioners. Research administration practitioners provide investigators with
administrative research support including submitting, negotiating, and managing
projects funded by external organizations. For most institutions of higher
education, the federal government is the largest source of funding. Expertise in
navigating these processes allows the scientific experts to advance research in
their discipline and focus on educating and mentoring students rather than the
administrative side of research. Additionally, experts in research
administration can assist to decrease the risk of developing compliance issues
which can be costly to manage and can also lead to unethical research practices
or actual harm to individuals impacted by specific research studies.

The establishment of CLARA will help advance knowledge-building in several ways.
CLARA will develop and document the process of establishing a scalable, truly
collaborative regional coalition. The three state universities governed by the
Arizona Board of Regents currently host a semi-annual research administration
conference. The existing collaboration will be leveraged to engage with emerging
research and minority-serving institutions. As CLARA grows, it will develop and
share knowledge on best practices for pooling resources at a regional scale,
workforce development best practices for recruitment, onboarding, and retention,
and creating a compliance driven research ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.