* 2324528
* CAREER:  Intra-Urban Variability in Carbon Deposition: Rates, Pathways, and Determinants
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Alexandra Ponette, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,504.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS) PROGRAM

ABSTRACT

This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award will support research that
will contribute new knowledge about urban carbon cycle science by assessing the
role of vegetation in the capture, cycling, and fate of carbon in urban
environments. As a major source and sink for carbon, urban areas are a frontier
in understanding changing environments and the carbon cycle. The investigator
will study the extent to which city trees function as urban air filters,
capturing carbon particles from the atmosphere and then depositing them into
soils for long-term storage. Because of carbon?s powerful influence on
atmospheric radiative mechanisms, understanding its removal and input into the
soil is key to developing and implementing short-term environmental mitigation
strategies. In addition, understanding the factors that contribute to carbon
removal in urban areas could help improve air quality for urban residents. The
research will be conducted at the edge of the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan
area and will quantify the filtration of carbon particulates. The project will
open new pathways into science, technology engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
for geography and education majors, and it provides research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students. Project results will have socioeconomic
implications by providing opportunities to impact urban architecture and
configuration while understanding the complex urban forms that drive
biogeochemical patterns and processes.

The investigator will quantify rates, pathways, and determinants of carbon
deposition at fine spatial scales in a rapidly growing city that is
representative of many urban areas in semi-arid regions of the world. The
investigator will explore answers to three core questions: (1) What is the
spatial variability in the deposition rates of black carbon on urban tree
canopies? (2) What is the role of throughfall and litterfall in the flux of
carbon to the soil? (3) What are the urban form components that control spatial
patterns of black carbon deposition? High-resolution light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) data, geospatial data, and field-measured vegetation characteristics
will be integrated to determine the most important factors contributing to
spatial variability in the filtering of carbon particulates. A statistical model
will be developed to provide estimates of carbon removal by trees at the city
scale. The LiDAR-based scaling approach is potentially transformative, because
it has broad applicability to a range of scientific questions across diverse
ecosystems.