* 2324469
* Conference: Charting &amp; Expanding Needed Trails to Research Administration &amp; Leadership (CENTRAL)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Majed Dweik, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,800.00

The Charting & Expanding Needed Trails to Research Administration & Leadership
(CENTRAL) conference, hosted by the Association of Public and Land-grant
Universities at Alabama A&M University, will develop a comprehensive map of
career pathways which produce the nation’s senior research officers (SROs). As
it is a national need to bring the benefit of research leadership to an
expanding breadth of institutions across the nation, more university research
leaders are needed to reflect the diversity of both their institutions and the
citizen populations with which they engage. Charting the pathways that produce
senior leaders, and identifying ways institutions and associations might remove
roadblocks from them, will enable the diverse aspiring leaders of today to
assume the mantle of tomorrow’s leadership needs.

To accomplish this goal, the CENTRAL Conference will convene up to 75 experts in
the research leadership, training, and administration fields at the Alabama A&M
University. Experts and speakers will be selected from the Association of Public
and Land-grant Universities (APLU), National Organization of Research
Development Professionals (NORDP), and Center for Advancing Research Impact in
Society (ARIS) to identify the career pathways of senior research officers.
CENTRAL will host interactive discussions to 1) Identify key paths that
individuals take to arrive at senior research leadership roles, recognizing that
the paths for diverse candidates have additional attributes and constraints, and
2) identify the roles that institutions and associations play in introducing
individuals to the opportunities and barriers of pursuing research leadership
and recruiting them to a career in senior research leadership and
administration. This project serves to build the foundation of knowledge
required for future research leadership development programs which address
roadblocks to producing future research leaders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.