* 2324022
* DMREF: Discovery, Development, Design and Additive Manufacturing of Multi-Principal-Element Hexagonal-Close-Packed Structural Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Daryl Chrzan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,781,906.00

Presently, the field of metallurgy is undergoing a renaissance spurred on by the
realization that useful structural alloys can be formed by mixing many different
types of atoms in roughly equal proportions. These materials are referred to as
“multi-principal-element” alloys (MPEAs), and this approach has already given
rise to the discovery of new strong and ductile alloys. However, these examples
have been based on only a small subset of the atoms in the periodic table, and
only a limited number of underlying crystal structures. The initial discoveries
are encouraging, but the true potential of MPEAs is yet to be tapped. In this
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project,
advanced materials theory and high-throughput computation and experiments are
combined with the tools of machine learning to accelerate the discovery and
development of a relatively unexplored class of MPEAs in which the atoms of the
alloy are arranged in a hexagonal pattern. This research area is ripe for
transformative discoveries for targeted applications including the focus of this
project: stronger and lighter alloys for low temperature structural applications
inspired by the conditions encountered in space exploration. The project
emphasizes alloys that can be fabricated through additive manufacturing,
commonly referred to as metal 3D printing. Hence the alloys will be available
for immediate technological applications because additive manufacturing offers
great opportunities for rapid fabrication of components with complex geometries
and tailored structures at the microscopic scale. These research goals will be
achieved by harnessing the power of materials data while educating the next
generation of materials researchers, and accordingly, the project is well
aligned with the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative.

In more detail, the project focuses on discovering and developing MPEAs
crystallizing in the hexagonal-close-packed (HCP) structure. The initial focus
is on alloys formed from the elements titanium, scandium, yttrium, zirconium,
and hafnium. The composition space will be explored theoretically through
computation of a set of identified descriptors including formation energies,
lattice parameters, elastic constants, stacking fault and twin energies. The
approach will leverage new classes of universal interatomic potentials for
initial screening, with candidate systems investigated in more quantitative
details using density functional theory based methods coupled with approaches
designed to average over the wide variety of compositional arrangements
encountered in MPEAs. Simultaneously, MPEAs will be synthesized using directed
energy deposition laser systems and a concentration gradient approach that
allows synthesis of a broad composition range within one sample. Ductility will
be characterized using rapid nanoindentation screening and cryogenic micro-
tensile testing. The resulting data will be used to develop and improve machine
learning models that will, in turn, lead to suggestions for new materials. These
materials will then be synthesized, and the process repeated. This iterative
process will, ultimately, establish correlations between computable data and
observable mechanical properties that enable the discovery and development of
additively manufactured HCP MPEAs for low temperature applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.