* 2324505
* SAI: Supporting Equitable Building Decarbonization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Amanda Webb, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 745,553.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

Reducing carbon emissions from homes is essential for meeting U.S. climate
targets. It can also play a critical role in reducing social inequalities.
Residential buildings are responsible for 21% of energy use in the U.S., and
this resource use places greater burdens on residents in underserved communities
who often live in less efficient housing and spend a higher proportion of their
income on utility bills. Retrofitting residential buildings to simultaneously
reduce energy use, lower carbon emissions, and address energy inequality is not
only an engineering task but also a social challenge. However, most current
research on building decarbonization focuses on technological solutions and does
not center the perspectives and experiences of impacted communities. This SAI
research project meets this need by establishing a community-engaged process and
integrated modeling platform to help residents in underserved communities
identify, plan, and implement decarbonization retrofits. By bringing together an
interdisciplinary research team in partnership with the local community, this
project democratizes scientific data for community needs and aims to advance
public awareness and agency around building decarbonization.

Decarbonization retrofits are typically evaluated using building energy models.
These models provide a wealth of information that is used mainly by building
designers, but this information also has enormous potential value to the public.
This project integrates community-engaged, participatory research methods from
psychology with building energy modeling tools from engineering to support
equitable decarbonization. A core component of this project is its demonstration
testbed, which engages residents in single-family homes currently under
renovation in Cincinnati, Ohio as primary stakeholders and co-development
partners. The psychosocial and technical needs for and barriers to building
decarbonization in underserved communities are first identified and jointly
contextualized through surveys, focus groups, and building energy audits. An
innovative building energy modeling platform is developed in collaboration with
the community to predict household carbon emissions and to understand retrofit
costs and benefits. This modeling platform is then used in community workshops
to examine how it can enhance local agency, decision-making, and action around
decarbonization. A key outcome of this project is its replicable model for
engaging the public with scientific models and data, which can be used to aid
community-driven decarbonization planning in other locations.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences, the Directorate for Engineering, and the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.