* 2324915
* Collaborative Research: DESC: Type I: A User-Interactive Approach to Water Management for Sustainable Data Centers: From Water Efficiency to Self-Sufficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Mohammad Islam, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,957.00

Amid the increasingly common megadroughts and global freshwater supply
challenges, the massive water footprint of data centers makes them a critical
and valuable player in the collective effort toward water sustainability. As
such, it is imperative to adopt new approaches for data center management that
explicitly address the water footprint as a sustainability metric. Nonetheless,
existing research on data center water efficiency only takes users' compute
demands as an external and uncontrollable input, keeping users entirely agnostic
to their water footprint. This not only misses a significant opportunity for
user-side demand management but also prevents environmentally conscious users
from proactively exploiting their workload flexibility to contribute to data
center water sustainability. To overcome this limitation and bridge the gap
between data center operators and users, this project proposes a new user-
interactive approach to data center water management, where users are provided
with clear visibility of their fine-grained water footprints that enable their
active contribution to water sustainability. Specifically, this project
develops: (1) a fair and accurate water accounting system for data centers both
at the user and facility levels; (2) a scalable user-interactive resource
management approach that extracts users' scheduling flexibilities for water
sustainability; and (3) an efficient online algorithm that achieves data center
water self-sufficiency by leveraging alternative water sources such as rainwater
harvesting.

This project contributes to several key goals of the Design for Environmental
Sustainability in Computing (DESC) program. It enables environmentally conscious
clouds to tap into users' workload scheduling flexibility and offers
unparalleled visibility into the water footprint of a user's digital presence by
developing new user-level sustainability metrics. These insights can encourage
and empower a new generation of sustainability-aware users and drive digital
infrastructure providers to adapt and enhance their business practices to align
with environmental sustainability objectives. Additionally, by alleviating the
stress on freshwater sources and utilities, this project contributes to water
conservation efforts and environmental resilience in drought-prone regions. To
increase the widespread impact of this project, the tools and products developed
will be shared publicly and integrated into existing curricula. Finally, this
project actively promotes inclusivity and diversity by involving women,
underrepresented minority groups in STEM, and persons with disabilities,
fostering a collaborative and inclusive research environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.