* 2324608
* Conference: GRANTED Initiative Collaborative Planning WORKSHOP: Convening to Explore Research Enterprise Solutions for Academic Institutions in Insular or Remote Areas
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Richard Nader, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The University of the Virgin Islands (UVI) and partner institutions, the
University of Hawai’i-Hilo, University of Alaska-Fairbanks, University of Puerto
Rico, Mayaguez, and University of Guam, join in this common endeavor to reveal
and propose solutions for the challenges facing remote and insular universities
for conducting and broadening participation in research. This project will seed
partnerships and solutions to challenges such as geographic isolation and
retaining and cultivating diverse STEM talent that are focused on sustaining the
research support systems needed to advance these institutions’ unique research
and innovation potential.

UVI and its partners will convene a series of meetings to propose innovative
solutions to overcoming barriers and propose novel ways to develop talent and
cultivate innovative ideas from faculty, staff and students. The identification
of scalable solutions, through focused discussion among peers, can assist
emerging and developing research universities (E&DRI’s) at the edges of the U.S.
Research and Innovation Ecosystem, to overcome challenges of geographic
distance, financial limits, and limited human capital dedicated to research
support. Each of the partners is a designated Minority-Serving Institution, and
has unique and indigenous talent. This collaborative effort is well positioned
to reveal strategies leading to the inclusion of a portion of the “missing
millions” located in geographically isolated regions. Doing so will strengthen
the U.S. Science & Technology enterprise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.