* 2324411
* A Study on Burning Iron Particles as Carbon-Free Circular Fuels with co-Generation of Value-Added Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mohamad Metghalchi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2026
* USD 191,175.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Energy transition from fossil fuels to renewables is necessary to mitigate
climate change and, thereby, advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare. However, renewable energy, mostly solar or wind, is not always
available at the location or the time when demand is high (e.g., in high earth
latitudes, winter months, evenings). Hence, a cost-competitive and effective
renewable energy carrier must be able to store available energy and transport
energy to be used where and when it is needed. This would enable storage and/or
transportation of renewable energy over long distances. Surprisingly to most
people, a promising energy carrier candidate is iron powder. The iron fuel cycle
could offer an abundant green energy source and storage methodology to help meet
the world’s growing energy needs. Submillimeter sized iron powder can be
manufactured from scrap metal with existing industrial techniques, it can be
transported to either existing or dedicated electric utility or industrial
furnaces, where it can be ignited and burned like pulverized coal. During
combustion, these iron particles generate iron oxide particles of sizes similar
to the input iron particles. The energy emitted during combustion (heat) can be
used to generate steam which, thereafter, can spin a steam turbine and generate
electricity. Spent iron oxide particles can be reduced back to iron, using green
hydrogen and energy, both of which can be obtained from solar panels or wind
turbines. This research is advancing the science of powdered iron as a “circular
fuel” and is fully characterizing the products and any generated byproducts
(such as nanosized oxide particles) while also identifying appropriate
applications for the latter materials, such as in supercapacitors, lithium
battery anodes, catalysts, environmental cleanup agents as well as materials for
medical imaging, targeting, drug delivery, and biosensing. This research is
educating graduate and undergraduate students in the benefits and challenges of
sustainable energy harvesting and storage, as well as combustion generated
materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Iron is a compelling candidate for a carbon-free circular fuel due to its
abundance, high energy density, and strong ability to store and transport
energy. Iron can be ignited and burned at elevated temperatures (>2000 K) and,
thus, it can be a direct replacement for coal in coal-fired boilers. By
leveraging existing infrastructure for carbon-free power generation, iron fuel
can be transformative to the utility industry. It generates zero emissions of
carbon dioxide (CO2), zero emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO2), zero emissions of
unburned hydrocarbons HC) and ultra-low emissions of nitrous oxide (NOx).
Currently, the iron fuel cycle has incomplete scientific understanding and
results in the generation of some nanomaterial byproducts, typically considered
a waste stream. Instead, it is hypothesized that these iron-based nanomaterials
can yield high-value products. The proposed research is generating fundamental
understanding of the physical transformations that occur during the burning of
iron particles and the conditions that produce value-added iron-based
nanomaterials. The goal of the project is to determine process-structure-
property relationships in two distinct streams of use-inspired products:
submillimeter-sized oxide particles that can be recycled back to iron, and nano-
sized particles with considerable monodispersity and tailorable properties.
Success is being assessed by generating a comprehensive data set on thoroughly-
measured iron combustion parameters, fully characterizing the produced
nanoparticles and completing an energy/exergy analysis to identify
irreversibilities within the fuel cycle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.