* 2324772
* Artemis Scholarship Program for Women in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2029
* Darla Schumm, Hollins University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2029
* USD 999,998.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
and mathematicians by supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need through the formation of
the Artemis Scholarship Program at Hollins University, a women’s college located
in Roanoke, Virginia. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships of up to $8,200 to 18 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, environmental science, chemistry, and
mathematics. The Artemis will provide scholarships and supports that increase
the preparation, retention, belonging, and self-efficacy of women in STEM
through pre-orientation, faculty and alumnae/i mentoring, a research course,
research and internships, cohort activities, leadership training, and career
development services. Faculty mentors will receive professional development to
improve their ability to support scholars. Hollins’ pool of prospective scholars
has a high percentage of both minority students who are underrepresented in
their participation in STEM fields of study and first-generation students. Thus,
improving their retention and graduation in STEM majors is likely to broaden
participation in the targeted disciplines. Beyond the scholars, other STEM
students will benefit from the new 2-credit leadership course, a January term
research design and methods course, and a summer research experience.
Recruitment will bolster the pipeline of low-income high school women interested
in STEM and improve their awareness of STEM careers and project scholarships
will increase the accessibility of a Hollins’ education for low-income women by
reducing their financial burden.

The project objectives are to (1) recruit and enroll 18 eligible students in the
targeted majors; (2) eliminate their unmet financial need up to $15,000; (3)
increase their academic self-efficacy and reduce imposter syndrome; (4) increase
their connections with peers, faculty, and alumnae; (5) increase their
understanding of career paths; and (6) guide scholars through their degree
programs and into graduate study or the STEM workforce. Artemis will add to the
knowledge base by evaluating the effectiveness of pre-orientation activities,
academic supports, faculty and alumnae mentoring, a research course, research
and internships, social activities, and leadership training in fostering senses
of belonging, self-efficacy, and self-advocacy and reducing imposter syndrome in
women in STEM. A detailed participatory evaluation, coupled with reflective
focus groups, will involve the scholars in investigating the effectiveness of
leadership training, mentoring, and other key project components. Outcomes and
project components will be disseminated to communities of interest. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.