* 2324243
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP NETWORKING)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Michael McGarry, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This travel grant provides support to US-based graduate students to attend the
IFIP NETWORKING 2023 conference in Barcelona, Spain from June 12 to June 15,
2023. The International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Networking
2023 Conference (NETWORKING 2023) is organized by the IFIP Technical Committee
on Communication Systems (TC6). The primary objectives of the IFIP Networking
conference are to engage members of the networking community from both academia
and industry, to discuss recent advances in the fields of computer and
communication networks, and to outline key issues, identify trends, and develop
a vision for the future Internet. Attending the IFIP NETWORKING 2023 conference
provides US-based graduate students the opportunity to discuss their research
with an international community, meet other researchers from around the world,
and ignite possible future international research collaborations. All of these
opportunities are extremely valuable to developing researchers.

For many students, a travel grant is the only opportunity to obtain funding to
attend the conference. This travel grant will be used to promote attendance by
students who would otherwise not attend NETWORKING 2023. A portion of the travel
grants will be reserved for first-time attendees who may not have papers at the
conference, and for students from under-represented groups. The support from NSF
is critical to strengthen US-based presence in the conference since it would
increase the number of US-based graduate students whom can attend NETWORKING
2023, including those from under-represented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.