* 2324487
* SAI: Stormwater Resilience in Urban Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Hao Huang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.

The changing climate is expected to increase the frequency of heavy rainfall
events, causing more floods and decreasing water quality over time. Within many
urban areas of the U.S. there has been historically poor investment in
stormwater infrastructure with unequal impacts among communities that vary in
socioeconomic status. The result is growing disparities in water quality,
reliability, and infrastructure within urban areas. New policies and innovative
stormwater management approaches are needed to prepare for future urban flooding
and to ensure equitable water management. Drawing from expertise in social
science, hydrological modeling, environmental engineering, and landscape
architecture, this SAI project improves public understanding, assesses
stormwater infrastructure disparities, and identifies viable policy options
moving forward.

Flood prediction and stormwater management requires hydrological models to
simulate the movement of water from precipitation into streams through
hydrological processes under various control and land management scenarios. This
is an inherently data-driven process, relying on measurements of precipitation,
discharge, land usage, water usage, and hydrography that vary significantly
throughout a watershed. Common approaches to collecting such data are not
sufficient for understanding local-scale flooding, especially urban flooding
caused by rainfall. This project addresses the challenge by utilizing two forms
of citizen science to improve urban stormwater infrastructure management. One
relies on crowdsourced data collection for identifying stormwater flooding
events. The other involves citizen-engaged hands-on water quality testing.
Chicago is used as the development site because of its vulnerability to flooding
and its historical pattern of communities that vary substantially in
socioeconomic status. To prepare the next generation of engineers, scientists,
and advocates to address the most salient issues in stormwater management, a
novel training program is developed to provide students with a background in
public policy, hydrologic and climate science, and social justice issues.

This award is supported by the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
(SBE) Sciences and the Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.