* 2324156
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Computationally Driven Discovery and Synthesis of 2D Materials through Selective Etching
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Majid Beidaghi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,219,164.00

Non-technical Description: The discovery of novel two-dimensional (2D) materials
is a very attractive research direction that can have a profound impact on a
variety of applications in energy, environmental science, catalysis, and
electronics. The selective electrochemical extraction of atoms from layered 3D
structures promises a significant expansion of the world of 2D materials beyond
the widely explored layered structures with weak interlayer interactions. To
advance a new process for the synthesis of 2D materials and accelerate their
discovery, a multidisciplinary team of chemists, physicists, and materials
scientists will combine state-of-the-art computational, experimental, and
machine-learning techniques in a closed-loop paradigm inspired by the Materials
Genome Initiative. The project also includes high school outreach programs and
interdisciplinary training of the next-generation workforce to cover a broad
spectrum from synthesis and characterization to theory and modeling of
materials.

Technical Description: This DMREF project will provide the enabling fundamental
knowledge required to develop a very selective electrochemical removal process
for the synthesis of novel 2D materials of various compositions and structures.
Initially focusing on a family of 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides
(MXenes), our team will design a computational discovery methodology with
experimental validation and closed-loop optimization of predictive models,
focusing on the identification of promising 3D precursor phases and relevant
etching conditions. The developed toolset will allow us to evaluate if the
extraction of atomic layers is possible under electrochemical conditions,
whether electrochemical etching will be selective and is not limited by
kinetics, and whether the desired 2D structure will be stable in contact with
electrolyte. Establishing relations of physics-based descriptors to experimental
results and outcomes of simulations will allow us to carry out screening of
large combinatorial material space. To validate the computational predictions,
our team will perform high-throughput electrochemical etching of materials and
low-throughput detailed materials characterization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.