* 2324640
* Conference: A Collaborative Approach towards Building Sustainable Research Capacity
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Yossef Elabd, Tarleton State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 04/30/2024
* USD 99,979.00

This workshop brings together diverse public research institutions and other
organizations to discuss and develop potential solutions to the challenges
related to enhancing institutional research capacity at campuses that are not
currently research intensive. The issues faced are varied and include outdated
infrastructure, software, and methodology, as well as staffing shortfalls that
lower their ability to support research. Participating emerging research
institutions will benefit from the opportunity to learn from established
research leadership and administrators at research-intensive institutions. The
workshop will produce a working draft for a shared online resource support
center that will provide users access to a helpdesk and other research
administration resources in a broad effort to advance research capacity.

Participating institutions include R1 to R2s, both rural and urban
institutions, Hispanic-serving institutions (HSIs), minority-serving
institutions (MSIs), Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
Native American Serving Nontribal Institutions (NASNTIs), as well as Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) institutions. Each
participant brings unique experiences and challenges to the conversation and
provides valuable insight into creative solutions for mitigating barriers to
research capacity. Workshop participants will be led through a challenge set
format to identify common challenges and share available tools, knowledge, and
effective practices with the overarching goals of enhancing competitiveness and
catalyzing the development of new approaches and transformative ideas that are
scalable, implementable, and collectively strengthen the nationâ€™s research
enterprise. Upon completion of this conference, participating institutions will
have identified possible challenges and mitigation strategies to research
capacity building and drafted a framework needed for developing, implementing,
and scaling a sustainable shared virtual resource center for use by research
leadership, administration, and staff. In addition, each participant will have
gained an improved understanding of how to engage in productive partnerships
within and outside the institution to support the effective translation of
research activity into commercial products and partnerships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.