* 2324524
* Conference: CLASP: broadening participation and deepening its community of practice
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Amy Cuhel-Schuckers, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 100,000.00

The Colleges of Liberal Arts Sponsored Programs Community of Practice (CLASP) is
a free and open resource that currently represents more than 330 predominantly
undergraduate institutions, particularly institutions that fit within the
“liberal arts college” framework (PUI LACs) across the nation. CLASP will hold a
series of convenings to improve its ability to meet the needs of sponsored
research professionals, often the only such professional at PUI LAC
institutions. At these convenings sponsored research professionals will: develop
strategies for building the capacity and effectiveness of research
administration across a diverse range of institutions; build protocols that
improve outreach to, and support for, institutions that serve significant
numbers of students underrepresented in the sciences; and create procedures for
representing and advocating for the research contributions of this subset of
Emerging Research Institutions.

In partnership with the Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton
College, the research team will survey and convene the CLASP membership, both
virtually and in person, to: 1) develop tools and scalable models advancing
research at predominantly undergraduate institutions that fit within the
“liberal arts college” framework (PUI LACs); 2) broaden participation within
this Community of Practice to support the needs of organizations such as
minority-serving institutions, and 3) reduce systemic barriers to accessing
information about and from external funders. These findings will provide early
insight into how to increase partnership, knowledge sharing, and enhance
communication between research administrators at PUI LACs of all sizes and
types. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.