* 2324239
* Conference: NSF GRANTED: Improving the Research and Innovation Enterprise Across the Southwest Region
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Hannah Torres, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Littlefield
* 06/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Competing for federal funding resources remains challenging for underserved and
under-resourced institutions. As collaborative opportunities become more common,
the challenge is even greater to assure that all institutions of higher
education can play a meaningful role in the research and innovation that drives
both local and national economies. Full participation of two-year, rural, and
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) in the research and innovation
enterprise is needed to ensure that opportunity reaches and has an impact on all
communities. This conference seeks to identify barriers and promote
collaboration to overcome them. Outcomes of this conference will include:  (1)
greater collective understanding of the challenges facing the entire research
enterprise in the Southwest United States; (2) the formulation of next steps for
individual and collective action to overcome barriers; (3) engagement of more
under-resourced institutions, and researchers at those institutions, in
authentic research endeavors; (4) growth in regional capacity to develop,
propose, and implement research and innovation that meets the individual needs
of the institution as well as those of the larger region; and (5) a regional
research development (RD) and research administration (RA) career landscape with
increased job satisfaction and retention. The long-term impacts of this work, in
line with NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare, will be increased academic and
economic success as the research and innovation enterprise increases the
capacity and effectiveness of its ability to address local and regional
priorities. 

This proposal supports a network of institutions meeting at a two-day conference
at the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. The target audience includes
stakeholders from the Southwest region – New Mexico, Texas, Arizona, Southern
Colorado and Southern Utah. Participation is focused on two-year, primarily
undergraduate, and minority serving and tribal institutions as well as
representatives across the research enterprise, with a particular focus on staff
who work in smaller research offices or as the sole research
administration/development contact at their institution. The meeting contains a
series of listening sessions and panel discussions that build from gaps and
barriers towards collaborations and shared training and career pathways.
Specific topics include: (1) understanding barriers to research and innovation
capacity building from the perspective of Southwest institutions; (2) staffing
the research enterprise; (3) building successful research and innovation
collaborations; and (4) research and innovation in the Southwest including the
innovation landscape and collaborating with New Mexico’s National Laboratories. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.