* 2324974
* RUI: Biophysical investigation of SH3 domain binding partners: How the binding motif and surrounding disordered sequence affect the finding pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* K Aurelia Ball, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2026
* USD 449,640.00

The communication within cells that allows cellular processes to occur is
mediated by interactions between proteins. The goal of this research is to
understand how these fundamental interactions are controlled at the local site
of interaction, as well as the surrounding regions. Understanding the details of
these interactions would allow researchers to predict and modify cell behavior.
Results of this project will provide deeper insights into how protein binding
interactions function in different contexts, including in the presence of
multiple sites that can bind the same protein partner, and help explain how a
common interaction can specialize to perform many different cellular functions.
Undergraduate students working on this project will have the opportunity to
learn both computational and experimental biophysics skills. To allow a larger
number of students to engage in undergraduate research, the investigator will
offer a research-based lab course that will expose students to techniques in
computational biophysics and molecular dynamics simulations. In this course,
students will develop and carryout a research project contributing to the larger
project goals. The investigator will also offer a two-credit course on
Minoritized Identities in Science that will encourage natural science majors to
consider and grapple with ideas about identity in science and how to make the
sciences more inclusive. Students will create specific interventions to improve
the experience of underrepresented students in science. The course will prepare
students to be leaders on the topic of identity and inclusivity in science.

Cellular signaling interactions often involve binding of intrinsically
disordered protein regions to small domains. The affinity and specificity of
these interactions depend on the binding motif within the disordered region, but
are also affected by the flanking regions and surrounding context. Additionally,
the binding pathway, rather than just the structure of the bound state, can be
important for understanding the functional adaptation of these interactions.
Focusing on SH3 domain binding as a model system, the PI have previously shown
that the disordered proline-rich peptide ArkA binds to the AbpSH3 domain in a
multi-step process using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. In this project,
the PI will now examine how this binding pathway varies in different
biologically relevant contexts by systematically studying this pathway at
increasing levels of complexity using MD simulations, NMR spectroscopy, and ITC.
The first aim will focus on the effects of altering the flexibility and
electrostatic interactions of the binding motif itself by simulating the binding
with ArkA prolines in the cis conformation, with salt screening electrostatic
interactions, and with mutations to charged AbpSH3 residues involved in binding.
In the second aim, different physiologically relevant IDR sequences will be
compared to explore the effect of the motif-flanking regions on binding. In the
third aim, the binding process in the context of multiple binding motifs will be
examined. The completion of this project will add a new level of complexity to
the understanding of how disordered protein regions bind to SH3 domains, as how
both the binding motif and the surrounding sequences influence the binding
pathway, and ultimately biological function will be revealed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.