* 2325976
* Conference: Travel Grant for the 27th Annual International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2023)
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Gurkan Bebek, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

RECOMB is an international scientific conference bridging the computational,
mathematical, and biological sciences. The RECOMB conference series was founded
in 1997 to provide a scientific forum for theoretical advances in computational
biology and their applications in molecular biology and medicine. RECOMB 2023
will be the 27th Annual Meeting, held in Istanbul, Turkey. RECOMB features
keynote talks by preeminent scientists, together with presentations of refereed
research papers in computational biology, special sessions, and poster sessions.
This project requests travel support for student conference participants from
any US university, with priority going to graduate students who will be
presenting paper or posters. Overall, students will be educated on cutting-edge
developments that will further drive the research methods and results of the
field of computational biology. Students and scientists will return to their
labs to apply what they have learned as they advance their own research efforts
or begin investigating new areas, they were exposed to because of attending
RECOMB. NSF investment in this project will help further students’ careers and
our nation’s competitiveness in an expanding, global industry, and will benefit
the public through new discoveries made by highly trained scientists.

The meeting and proposed travel fellowships will have value for educational
purposes, creating a unique training opportunity for 10 U.S.-based students of
computational biology. Awarded travel fellowships will cover registration,
hotel, and travel costs for a selected group of student presenters. Preference
will be given to students with proceedings papers that are accepted for oral
presentation at the conference and secondarily to those making poster
presentations of accepted abstracts. Selection will be made by the conference
chairs based on letters of application submitted via the conference website and
reviewers’ evaluations of the work to be presented. Women, minorities, and
persons with disabilities will be especially encouraged to apply with the goal
of achieving diversity at the meeting and directly benefitting diverse groups.
As much as possible, participant support cost requested in this grant will be
used specifically to fund the travel expenses of students from these three
underrepresented groups to increase their access to training opportunities. By
attending the RECOMB meeting, students will gain the latest skills in
computational biology, the field that has the potential to unlock the secrets
for understanding life. The field comprises a vibrant, growing industry, with
skilled computational scientists in high demand at pharmaceutical, agricultural,
environmental, consumer products, biotech, software, hardware, and service
companies. Students’ participation is vital for the growth and continuation of
the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.