* 2325547
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for the Sixth Conference on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Ameet Talwalkar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This grant supports student travel for selected students to attend the Sixth
Conference on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys 2023), which will be held at
the Miami Convention Center in Florida, United States, June 4th to 8th, 2023.
MLSys focuses on research at the intersection of machine learning and systems.
It aims to elicit new connections amongst these fields, including identifying
best practices and design principles for learning systems, as well as developing
novel learning methods and theory tailored to practical machine learning
workflows. Students will benefit from the opportunity to engage in the
technical, professional, educational and social exchanges that MLSys fosters.

Graduate and undergraduate student attendance is vital to the growth of the
MLSys community. This grant helps to sustain student participation, particularly
those from institutions where travel funds may not otherwise be available.
Emphasis will be given to directing support towards underrepresented minorities,
including women, African-Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Native
Pacific Islanders. Students will have the opportunity to interact with mentors
and peers of varying gender, ethnicity and background. Support will increase the
attendance of talented undergraduate students, attracting them to graduate
studies and future research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.