* 2325924
* Building a Sense of Belonging for Talented, Low-Income Students through Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2029
* Richard Avery, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2029
* USD 996,266.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Dakota State University (DSU). Over its six-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to twelve unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Artificial Intelligence, Computer Science, Cyber
Operations, or Mathematics. DSU is the technology campus in the South Dakota
Board of Regents State University system and holds three prestigious
designations from the National Security Agency and the Department of Homeland
Security relating to the project's focal disciplines. Students will receive
scholarships of up to $15,000 per year for up to five years, depending on their
financial need. A summer bridge program, study tables, and an undergraduate
research seminar are the key planned activities of this project. One out of
every five students currently enrolled in the eligible scholarship majors at DSU
are Pell Grant eligible, which provides a substantial population of potential
scholars and demonstrates the project's potential to broaden participation in
STEM fields at DSU and in the wider workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This
project will help address the national need for qualified professionals educated
in highly technical fields including advanced computing, artificial
intelligence, and network security (cyber operations). Each of these areas are
in extremely high demand and are critical priorities for national security and
other critical sectors of the domestic workforce. This project will collect data
to explore what scholars need from support mechanisms and how they want that
support delivered. This will allow the creation of a support network that better
aligns with students' needs and preferences. It is expected that aligning
support mechanisms with scholars needs will result in increased participation,
which will in turn improve graduation rates and overall student outcomes.
Recruitment efforts include engaging with Native American high school students
participating in the Oglala Lakota College Summer IT Institute, veterans with
National Cryptographic University credits, and rural South Dakota high school
students with credits from the Governor’s Cyber Academy. Project outcomes will
be disseminated broadly to institutions and professionals looking to develop
effective supports for low-income students in STEM, particularly rural
institutions and those that serve significant indigenous populations. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.