* 2325465
* I-Corps: Medication Adherence System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Mohsen Dorodchi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enhance
the capabilities of nurses and caregivers as well as anyone who needs to
administer/verify the medications (injection and pill) and prevent potential
human errors. It is very essential as medication administration errors are known
to be detrimental to patient safety, compromise patients’ confidence in the
healthcare system, increase patient’s healthcare costs, and adversely affect the
patient’s quality of life. This will help society by promoting trust between
patients, families, and healthcare providers. Moreover, the broader impact of
this project goes beyond the healthcare providers, nurses, caregivers, nursing
home nurses, and similar ones to the general public as taking wrong medication
could occur to anyone. Furthermore, the tool would provide new data on the
number of times mistakes were prevented for training of the medical staff as
well as all general public on the possibility of such errors.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an artificial intelligence-
enhanced medication administration software for Augmented Reality devices
(including smartphone and Augmented Reality glasses) to enable mobile, accurate
and automatic verification of medication at the point of care. Via this
Augmented Reality application, patient identification and medication information
retrieval are the first steps, where patient identification is verified through
face or barcode recognition, and medication information is retrieved from the
electronic health record system. The system verifies medication name and time
through barcode scanning or neural network, and a custom-designed deep learning
framework recognizes injection dose/volume. This system also provides heads-up
instructions and reminders for injection routes, and automatically saves images
and verified information into the records system for documentation purposes. To
improve the system’s robustness to the adverse environment, such as imperfect
viewpoint, ambient light/background, and low resolution of the object, a multi-
stage image processing procedure is also incorporated by drawing inspiration
from simple human intuitions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.