* 2325895
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Quantifying the response of biodiverse freshwater ecosystems to abrupt and progressive environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Jeffery Stone, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2028
* USD 338,197.00

Coastal freshwater ecosystems are well-known for being biologically diverse and
they provide important services to humans worldwide. With continued global
warming, these coastal systems are at risk of undergoing dramatic environmental
changes associated with rising seas. Future sea-level rise scenarios suggest
either a gradual or a rapid upland migration of marine waters, yet the response
of freshwater systems to these novel environmental conditions is unknown.
Establishing an understanding of how ecosystems respond to marine water
inundation is difficult to constrain using only modern observations. The low-
lying freshwater ecosystem in eastern Guatemala, which is made up of two
interconnected lakes and several important wetlands (known as the Izabal/Golfete
system), has undergone two significant environmental changes during the recent
past, one associated with a rapid and a second with a gradual inundation by
marine waters. These two historical natural experiments provide an unparalleled
opportunity to investigate how the Izabal/Golfete system responded to different
degrees of environmental stress. This project will constrain these changes using
sedimentological, geochemical, biological, and genetic methods. We aim to reveal
how the environment and biota responded to these two scenarios of marine water
inundation, providing crucial information to assess how this and other at-risk
ecosystems will respond to future sea-level rise. We aim to provide essential
data for managers and entities to safeguard these important biological hotspots,
establish strong international relationships, and engage with local communities
and governmental and educational institutions in the US and Guatemala.

Future sea-level rise models suggest that marine flooding of coastal freshwater
ecosystems will increase in frequency, yet the response of these biologically-
diverse systems to different degrees of marine inundation is unknown. This
project will use the Izabal/Golfete system, a freshwater ecosystem in eastern
Guatemala, to assess how variations in marine inundation affected the
environment and its functional diversity. Our study is therefore in an unrivaled
position to make contributions to our understanding of how ecosystems function
and respond to marine flooding events. We will do this by collecting sediment
cores, surface sediment, fish, and water samples and generate high-resolution
time series of environmental and biological changes using sedimentological,
inorganic and organic geochemical, micropaleontological, and genetic data. The
combination of datasets will allow us to model functional diversity through
temporally different environmental stressors and transitions, allowing us to
understand and forecast the response of freshwater ecosystems to marine
inundation events. Finally, the highly integrative, multi-institution, and
international nature of this project will be of significant benefit to the
participating students, will allow us to establish several outreach programs in
US and Guatemalan schools and museums, and will provide a foundation for
understanding the impacts of potential change to the regional system in eastern
Guatemala and other similar systems worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.