* 2325367
* Applied Graduate STEM Education through an Innovative Hands-On Industrial Work Experience
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Matthias Pleil, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 472,369.00

Career preparation for graduate students in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) programs traditionally focuses on knowledge and skills
related to academic careers in science research such as critiquing and writing
scientific journal articles or presenting at technical conferences. While such
skills are important for success in academic careers they do not provide
students with necessary knowledge, skills, and abilities demanded by industry.
Students considering industrial careers require significant additional training
before they can succeed individually in private sector careers and provide value
to the company. This gap in graduate student training creates a stressful
environment for both students and employers as STEM graduates transition from
academic students to industry professionals. This is especially true in the
semiconductor or microsystems area where the CHIPS and Science Act is creating
an abundance of high-tech jobs that demand a highly skilled workforce. This
National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of New Mexico will develop a transformative pedagogy for graduate
STEM education to enhance knowledge, skills, and abilities of STEM graduate
students to increase industrial job readiness. The project will bridge the gap
between academic degree programs and industry needs by reducing the need for
industry training and easing transition of STEM graduate students to industrial
careers in the semiconductor and microsystem workforce. More broadly, results
from this project will provide guidance and inform approaches on how to better
prepare STEM students for industrial jobs. The end goal is to produce students
that can provide value to the microsystems industry by accelerating and
strengthening the pipeline of talent between universities and industry.

Typically, students prepare for industry careers through internships. Internship
participation, however, is often limited due to the demands on students
supported faculty research grants, visa requirements for foreign students, the
proximity of high-tech jobs to universities, and concerns that such experiences
might extend time to degree completion. As a result, graduate internships in the
microsystem area are not common. This project will develop and test a novel
multi-course curriculum that models an industrial internship or start-up company
experience for students otherwise immersed in an academic environment. The
courses will utilize problem-based learning combined with industrial-based
problem solving, which will create a unique hybrid environment, beyond typical
lectures, where students can obtain hands-on, industry-relevant knowledge,
skills, and abilities. Industrial mentors will advise on curricular development
and collaborate in the program evaluation. Evaluation will include assessment of
learning outcomes such as microsystems industry-relevant: interdisciplinary
problem solving and teamwork skills, science communication, and career
readiness.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.