* 2325980
* PhysTEC: Community Models that Transform Physics Teacher Education
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Robert Hilborn, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2028
* USD 486,370.00

The severe shortage of, and lack of diversity among, high school physics
teachers in the US stifles workforce and economic development. Each year, less
than 25% of the need for new physics teachers can be met by teacher preparation
programs. For more than 20 years, the Physics Teacher Education Coalition
(PhysTEC), a collaboration of the American Physical Society (APS) and the
American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT), has worked to address this
shortage by supporting undergraduate physics teacher education (PTE) programs
whose graduates have both strong content knowledge and pedagogical training. In
this award, PhysTEC will scale up and build the capacity of the community of
physics departments and teacher education programs. They will transform the
coalition to bring more ownership and agency to community members. Research and
evaluation will help the PIs to understand what works and they will disseminate
findings broadly in the community and beyond. Previously funded sites’ ongoing
efforts will be supported through capacity building grants, convening the
community through conferences, recognizing excellent physics teachers, and
celebrating teacher education programs and networks that prepare many highly
qualified physics teachers.

This project features many research- and evidence-based strategies that have
been developed through prior PhysTEC iterations. Processes and intervention will
be redesigned to be more inclusive and responsive to the varied contexts in
which PTE programs exist. Five key approaches will be used: (1) extending the
PhysTEC model to support diverse kinds of institutions and networks of
institutions; (2) building capacity for a broader range of funding and support
options for PTE programs; (3) sharing a deeper understanding of the needs,
stories, and people within the PhysTEC community; (4) promoting community agency
and leadership; and (5) supporting teacher graduates of PhysTEC programs. The
PIs will conduct research into how faculty develop identities related to PTE,
including how the new Network Cohort model influences these identities. All the
activities will be evaluated regularly, with an emphasis on building evaluative
capacity among the sites and networks to sustain their efforts. Given PhysTEC’s
mission to ensure all students could learn physics from a highly qualified
teacher, activities are designed to equitably address the acute physics teacher
shortage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.