* 2325042
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Storytelling Interventions to Support Graduate Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Angela Minichiello, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 219,984.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Boise State University and Utah State University pilots a storytelling
intervention to enhance professional identity and sense of belonging and reduce
impostorism among students pursuing graduate degrees in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Traditionally, STEM graduate training has
focused more on instilling technical content expertise and less on cultivating
feelings of belonging and STEM identity critical to graduate student retention
and success in STEM programs. This project addresses these missing components by
developing a cohort-based program wherein students learn and apply storytelling
techniques through writing and sharing transformative stories about themselves.
Aided by a novel collaboration with The Story Collider, a nonprofit organization
that aims to foster diversity and inclusion in science through storytelling, the
project team will develop, implement, and assess the transferability of an
innovative personal storytelling intervention with students at the two
universities. Each project year will culminate in public performances in which
participant cohorts perform their stories to university and community peers and
stakeholders. The open-source storytelling curriculum will be made available
through online repositories for the STEM education community to share and
customize.

This project will expand pedagogical knowledge of effective instructional
practices for developing graduate students into STEM professionals and advance
theoretical knowledge in the fields of STEM education and narrative psychology.
Using storytelling to engage STEM students in reflection at a time when they
encounter intense intellectual and personal challenges, this intervention will
engage STEM graduate students in formal trainings about storytelling techniques
and then facilitate their practice of these techniques within a community of
STEM graduate students. Training and peer interactions culminate in a personal
story that each student may publicly perform. The project examines three
hypotheses: (1) storytelling pedagogy will improve STEM graduate student
professional identity and sense of belonging, and reduce feelings of
impostorism, (2) storytelling performances will reinforce student retention and
transition into STEM fields, and (3) storytelling performances will decrease the
stereotyping among audience members of those who pursue STEM careers. Adopting a
mixed-methods research approach, the project team will answer three research
questions: (1) What are the thematic and structural characteristics of personal
narratives that students write about their experiences in STEM graduate
education? (2) How do students’ development and performance of a personal
narrative about their experiences in STEM graduate education relate to their
professional identity, sense of belonging, and feelings of impostorism? (3) How
do the thematic and structural characteristics of personal narratives relate to
the three professional constructs of professional identity, sense of belonging,
and impostorism? The project team will collect and analyze mixed methods data,
including participants’ stories, focus group interviews, and self-report
measures related to professional identity, sense of belonging, and impostor
phenomenon. Quantitative, qualitative, and mixed data analyses will be used to
determine how the storytelling intervention influences graduate student
experience related to the three professional constructs.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.