* 2325819
* Fundamental measurements of liquid-liquid phase separation in lipid membranes and development of methods to assay domain compositions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Sarah Keller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

Each cell is surrounded by a membrane, and lipids in this membrane can demix
into two coexisting liquid phases. This phenomenon is biologically important.
For instance, when a yeast cell becomes nutrient limited, the membrane of its
vacuole (an organelle) demixes. The current project is organized into five
research themes on the production of artificial membranes and the study of their
demixing transitions. The research will test if asymmetric lipid vesicles (which
can mimic cell membranes) phase separate in the same way that entirely flat and
taut membranes (which are less biologically relevant) phase separate. The
project will have broader impacts of publishing new protocols and computer code,
developing scientific teaching materials, and mentoring the next generation of
scientifically-trained workers. Well-developed outreach activities include
dissemination of scientific results, training of early-career scientists, and
public outreach. Assessment plans for the Intellectual Merit and the Broader
Impacts are presented.

The research centers on the topic of liquid-liquid phase separation in
membranes. Some of the problems the project addresses are technical. For
example, the research seeks to develop a new, more accessible method of
determining ratios of lipids in coexisting membrane phases and to analyze lipid
compositions of vesicles made by a variety of methods. Other elements of the
research are driven by theoretical predictions. For example, Raman imaging will
be used to test predictions of the distributions of lipids across phases and
their boundaries, and fluorescence microscopy will be used to test theories
about asymmetry in the number and type of lipids in vesicle membranes. Other
experiments will be exploratory. For example, one part of the project is to
search for liquid-liquid phase separation in membranes with previously untested
lipid compositions. Together, the different parts of the project present a
balanced portfolio with goals of testing current theory, amassing quantitative
data needed to evaluate simulations, developing methods that enable future
quantitative measurements, and mentoring and training a future workforce that
has strong scientific and technical skills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.