* 2325476
* Planning grant: Expanding academic Careers through Inclusive Transitions in Environmental Science
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Carolyn Hushman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

As the relationships between people and the planet are interwoven with cultural
heritage and community, diversifying the environmental workforce is of pressing
importance. Differences in experience bring unique questions, approaches to
problems, greater collaborative creativity, and innovation; however, the
geosciences are the least diverse STEM field based on graduate student
enrollment. This planning grant, Expanding academic Careers through Inclusive
Transitions in Environmental Science, aims to expand, foster, and embed
institutional support for diverse scholars in the environmental and geosciences
at the University of New Mexico–an R1, Minority Serving Institution (MSI)
situated in an arid, high-desert setting. This award will support activities to
build inclusive career-stage transitions for diverse scholars in environmental
science, empowering them through the theory of self-authorship to disrupt
historical and ongoing power structures within the environmental and
geosciences. In this way, the researchers will develop the necessary conditions
to achieve the principles of Collective Impact at UNM and across a network of
minority-serving institutions in the US Southwest. This project will
holistically support diverse scholars by increasing institutional capacity for
inclusive mentorship and research through training and workshops; create near-
peer networking opportunities to promote social belonging; and develop equitable
and substantive local professional partnerships. This will lay the groundwork
for a full program implementation that would support year-long programming for
two cohorts at critical career transition points: from bachelors to graduate
studies or professional career (post-baccalaureate scholars) and from PhD to
academic faculty or non-academic research career (postdoctoral scholars). This
award will pilot summer programming for cohorts at each of these stages, and
train faculty mentors in inclusive mentoring strategies, including development
and use of a tailored Individual Development Plan for diverse scholars in
environmental science. This planning stage will also be used to develop
professional and academic networks to collaboratively support these goals across
Minority Serving Institutions in the U.S. Southwest. The project is grounded in
critical constructivism and self-authorship theory. Critical constructivism is
based on the assumption that knowledge and understanding of reality–including
identities of self–are based on interactions with and experiences of the world
including those experiences that are socially, culturally, and historically
inflected. The project's transformational programming will support both
cognitive dimensions of self-authorship and interpersonal and intrapersonal
development to facilitate self-authorship, taking the historical power
structures found in the geosciences into account.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.