* 2325822
* Sustained Cascade Mentoring in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2024,02/28/2030
* Pablo Soberon Bravo, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2030
* USD 999,997.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Baruch College. Baruch was formally designated a Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI) in 2022 and is part of the 25-campus City University of New
York (CUNY) system, which is known as both the largest public university in the
nation and the nation's largest urban university. Over its six-year duration,
this project will fund four years of scholarships to 12 unique full-time
students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Mathematics. Scholars will also
benefit from new and expanded services, including cascade mentoring sustained
for Scholars' entire time at Baruch, a variety of social and cohort-building
activities in one of the world's cultural hubs, and career and research
preparation. The cascade mentoring model initially involves faculty mentoring
students, adding peer mentoring as new cohorts join. As an HSI with a relatively
high number of students in Mathematics and related quantitative fields, Baruch
is well poised to diversify the STEM workforce. Additionally, the unique
leadership and instructional experience imparted to Scholars through cascade
mentoring will build the confidence, leadership skills, and sense of belonging
among Scholars to send them to the peaks of their fields. The project will
generate new knowledge on the effects of cascade mentoring on persistence to
graduation among students in Mathematics.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Five
specific objectives guide the work of the project. First is to enroll 12 low-
income, academically talented students (in three cohorts of four students) into
Baruch College’s Mathematics major as S-STEM Scholars. Second is to retain at
least 10 of 12 first-year Scholars into their second year, replacing all lost
Scholars with new participants. Third is to graduate all Scholars who reach
their junior year, and fourth is to ensure that all Scholar graduates are
employed in fields related to their major or matriculate into STEM graduate
programs within one year of graduation. Fifth, and finally, is to generate
knowledge on the effects of cascade mentoring among students in Mathematics with
respect to retention rates, graduation rates, and social and psychosocial
factors such as a sense of belonging in STEM. In this project, first-year
students will benefit from intensive faculty mentoring immediately upon
matriculation, focusing on acclimating to college life, navigating Scholars'
chosen major, and mastering early, foundational courses within their major. In
year two, Scholars who have met all academic expectations will be invited to
participate in formal mentoring training so that they can serve as paid mentors
to newer students in the spring of their second year and continue thereon. While
approaches like this have been used and evaluated in allied healthcare education
environments to a moderate degree, there is little evidence of their application
and efficacy in STEM settings, especially mathematics. This project will explore
the psychological and social effects of cascade mentoring on the students,
particularly the practice's impact on students' sense of belonging in the
sciences, their feelings of self-efficacy in STEM, and their interest in STEM
careers. Project evaluation will examine the impacts on students and progress in
meeting the identified benchmarks related to recruitment, GPA, retention,
graduation, transfer, and career/graduate school choices. Dissemination of
project results will occur through the 25-campus CUNY system and math education
venues. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.