* 2325872
* Travel: Student Travel Grant for 2023 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Kristin Yvonne Rozier, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Formal Methods in Computer Aided Design (FMCAD) 2023 is the twenty-third in a
series of conferences on the theory and applications of formal methods in
hardware and system verification. It provides a leading forum to researchers in
academia and industry for presenting and discussing ground-breaking methods,
technologies, theoretical results, and tools for reasoning formally about
computing systems. This grant will help support conference travel for up to 15
students enrolled in US institutions to attend FMCAD in Ames, Iowa, USA. The
students will get the opportunity to present at the Student Forum, which is a
platform for graduate students at any career stage to introduce their research
to the wider formal methods research community, and solicit feedback.

The field of formal methods is being rapidly deployed in a variety of areas both
in academic research, as well as in industrial systems. Thus the broader
significance and importance include fostering the next generation of researchers
in this research area, as well as providing international experiences to build a
globally-aware workforce. In particular, students will have the opportunity to
present at the Student Forum, learn state-of-the-art methodologies, be exposed
to novel techniques, and interact with senior researchers in their areas of
expertise. The organizers will give priority to students from under-represented
groups and from small universities without a formal methods program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.