* 2325184
* Collaborative Research: Discovery and calibration of stochastic chemical reaction network models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alan Edelman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 375,000.00

Mathematical models are a widely used tool for improving our understanding,
ability to predict, and ability to control the behavior of biological systems.
Such models are often encoded as chemical reaction networks (CRNs), involving
large collections of reactions that describe how constituents of the system,
such as proteins, change their states over time. CRN model components are often
only partially known, and thus methods which mix theoretical physics-based
models for known components, with techniques that estimate unknown components
and their dynamics from experimental data, can improve their predictive
capabilities. This is the domain of Scientific Machine Learning (SciML). This
project will develop new SciML methods for constructing, simulating, and
analyzing CRN models that include randomness in the evolution of protein states,
an important feature to accurately predict the behavior of chemical systems
within individual biological cells. The new methods will be applied to problems
in systems and synthetic biology (the understanding of native, and the
development of novel, cellular systems), but will also be applicable across a
wide range of fields involving CRNs (including epidemiology, physical chemistry,
and pharmacology). Via their incorporation into widely used open source software
libraries of the SciML organization, the methods will be freely available for
use by any researcher studying problems across science and engineering. Training
opportunities will be provided for a postdoctoral scholar and an undergraduate
researcher, who will gain experience working in interdisciplinary teams,
developing SciML methods, integrating these methods into open source software,
and applying the new software to study biological systems.

This project extends the mathematical understanding of discrete stochastic
derivative estimators to facilitate scaling Scientific Machine Learning (SciML)
training techniques to chemical reaction networks (CRNs). One distinct
difficulty in extending SciML to cellular systems is their proneness to noisy
behaviors, as they are modeled as discrete stochastic jump processes via
stochastic simulation algorithms such as the Gillespie method. Such processes
are problematic for many SciML workflows which critically depend on automatic
differentiation (AD) to scale training techniques. This is because there
previously existed no general method for applying AD to them in an unbiased
manner with low variance estimators. This project builds on a recent extension
of AD to discrete stochastic processes which is capable of generating unbiased
low variance derivative estimators. The rigorous connection between the
generated stochastic process for the derivative estimator and the derivative
probability evolution given by the sensitivity equations will be proven, thus
establishing a firm theoretical underpinning for the unbiasedness and variance
of the derivative estimator in the context of CRNs. The feasibility to deploy
discrete stochastic AD (DSAD) on cellular models to perform model calibration
will be demonstrated, and SciML universal differential equation methods for
model discovery will be generalized to the theory-based data-driven discovery of
missing reactions in CRNs. Finally, the applicability of these methods will be
demonstrated on a range of cellular systems (including the B-cell antigen
receptor signaling system, the σV lysozyme stress response system, and a mixed
feedback oscillator).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.