* 2325377
* Workshop on Geomagnetically Induced Currents; College Park, Maryland; Four Days in October 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Geomagnetically induced currents at the Earth's surface during severe space
weather events are hazardous to the technological infrastructure, such as
electric power grids, oil and gas pipelines, undersea communication cables,
telephone and telegraph networks, and railways. Addressing the vulnerability of
these systems to geomagnetic disturbances is an important component in meeting
their critical role in society. The workshop will bring together participants
from research, industry, and government domains to develop a supported and
sustained community centered on the geomagnetically induced currents during
extreme space weather. A key goal is the integration of the modeling and
prediction with their applications to the needs of power system operators and
government agencies in managing potential consequences of the impact on critical
infrastructure. The workshop's main objective is to nucleate an engaged
community supported by government and private funding agencies. The workshop
will contribute to enhancing the resilience of the technological infrastructure
by integrating the understanding and management of risk from geomagnetically
induced currents. The cross-disciplinary meeting will contribute to developing
standards and their approval in the evolving electric power grid by ensuring
information sharing and developing improved modeling and simulation tools. In
education and training, students will participate in the planning and
organization of the workshop with an emphasis on engagement in STEM education
and related activities. The workshop will engage underrepresented groups at all
stages to ensure diversity, equity, and inclusion in meeting the societal need
for resilient technological infrastructure. The workshop will engage
participants from academia, industry, and government in discussions and
exchanges targeting the development of an ecosystem of supported and sustained
communities centered on the geomagnetically induced currents and their hazardous
impacts on technological infrastructure. The workshop's scientific goal is to
integrate the modeling and prediction using first-principle and data-driven
approaches to improve the understanding of geomagnetically induced currents by
harnessing the growing data and improving the predictive capability. The data
from current and forthcoming monitoring platforms will be used to define
approaches to uncertainty quantification, which is an essential step toward
achieving better predictability. The research activities in uncertainty
quantification are inherently multidisciplinary, thus requiring a comprehensive
effort that brings together disciplinary researchers and stakeholders. By
focusing on the overlapping efforts toward addressing the needs of stakeholders,
the workshop will define pathways to the convergence of research, operation, and
regulation. A key goal is the integration of the modeling and prediction with
their applications to the needs of power system operators and government
agencies in managing potential consequences from impact to critical
infrastructure. The emerging approach of Digital Twins will be explored to
address improved decision-making for the electricity system. With the common
objective of building resilient infrastructure, the near- and long-term
objectives will be identified to nucleate an engaged community and its
ecosystem. The workshop will define pathways for coordination to optimize
cooperation and closure between research, operation, and regulation, and toward
establishing multi-agency, long-period funding vehicles to support a sustained
community engaged in all aspects of geomagnetically induced currents to meet the
needs for societal resilience to severe space weather.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.