* 2325060
* Conference: 19th International Congress on Plant-Microbe Interactions Travel Awards
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The 19th International Congress on Plant-Microbe Interactions (IC-MPMI) will
convene in Providence, Rhode Island, from July 16 through July 20, 2023. For the
last 40 years, this meeting has been the premier forum for announcing and
discussing the most innovative scientific discoveries elucidating the molecular
events by which plants and microbes interact. The program will include a mix of
established and young investigators working on pathogenic and symbiotic
associations using diverse biological systems. The plenary and concurrent
sessions will highlight the latest advances in fundamental research (e.g. plant
immune system, pathogen virulence mechanisms, and the evolution/ecology/cell
biology of plant microbiomes and symbioses) as well as translational studies
(e.g. novel approaches for disease control, breakthrough technologies, and
engineering staple food crops) critical for advancements in agricultural
science. Funding from the National Science Foundation will be used to partially
defray the travel costs of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and
early career faculty so that they can afford to attend this conference. Special
attention has been made to promote broader participation of minorities, women,
first-generation students, and the disabled. Importantly, advances through
research and education in plant-microbe interactions facilitated by this
conference are fundamental to ensure sustained production of high-quality crops
and to meet the increasing demands for food and energy worldwide in the 21st
century. An important and unique function of the IC-MPMI is to unite research
specialists who otherwise would not cross paths (e.g., specialists studying and
implementing new technologies, tools and approaches to solve diverse questions
related to plant-microbe interactions). Past meetings have been successful at
fostering the exchange of scientific information, critical discussion, and
establishing strong collaborations across a broad range of research topics and
geographic locations. The meeting has also provided significant training value
for graduate students and post-doctoral scholars. Travel fellowship awardees
will participate in a small meeting workshop designed to inform students about
diverse career paths in MPMI research and promote networking opportunities with
leaders from private, public, and governmental organizations pursuing MPMI-
related research. Networking will also be promoted via a lunch with plenary
speakers and other MPMI research leaders nominated by the awardees. We
anticipate that this student workshop and lunch will foster new connections
required for the success of our next generation of scientists. Several of the
participating scientists have links to companies and institutes developing
agricultural technology. Student exposure to these entities will be key for
those interested in government and industry-related research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.