* 2325839
* BoCP-Design: US-China: Interactions between land-use change and island biogeography as drivers of animal community assembly in the Zhoushan and Caribbean Archipelagos
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Luke Frishkoff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,999.00

Humans modify natural habitats, such as forest and grasslands, to create
agricultural fields and developed areas for people to live. This project aims to
understand why such human-caused habitat modification causes extreme
biodiversity loss in some places, while other places are more resilient. One
idea suggests that small islands are especially at risk, because they can only
evolve a small set of species that can only use a few types of resources or
habitats. In contrast very large islands evolve many species, at least some of
which will have less specialized requirements and may be able to prosper in
human-modified environments. The researchers will test the hypothesis that
biodiversity persists better in human-modified areas on bigger islands, as
predicted by a "lottery model" of tolerance to human land-use. Relatedly, they
will study if species' evolutionary history affects how much biodiversity
remains in human-modified areas. Specifically, they will examine whether species
that arrived on an island from elsewhere are more likely to tolerate human-
modified environments, in comparison to species that evolved on the island in
question. Understanding why some areas are more vulnerable to losing
biodiversity will help prioritize places to conserve. Relatedly, knowledge of
where biodiversity will be most robust to loss will help maximize use of
ecosystem services that benefit people. The research will support undergraduate
and graduate student training and promote scientific collaboration between US
and Chinese biodiversity researchers.

To understand when and where biodiversity declines will be most severe after
habitat modification, the researchers will examine communities of birds,
reptiles, and amphibians in both natural habitats and human-developed areas.
They will do so across islands of different sizes and isolations in both the
Caribbean and Zhoushan Archipelagos (China). Together this combination of
species groups and locations allows the researchers to distinguish good
dispersing species (birds) from poor dispersing ones (reptiles and amphibians)
in island systems where dispersal is easy (in Zhoushan, because between-island
distances are small) versus hard (in the Caribbean, where distances are long).
The researchers will use transects and long-term audio recordings to assess
species occurrence over hundreds of locations across 56 islands in the two
regions. They will quantify how specialized species are by studying diet and
habitat use of the organisms encountered.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.