* 2325338
* SG: The adaptive (and maladaptive) consequences of non-additive genetic variation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Oakley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 198,915.00

Understanding the genetic basis, and potential limitations, of how organisms
adapt to their environment is fundamentally important in many areas of biology.
For example, such knowledge can improve crop breeding and can improve
predictions about responses to climatic variability in both native and agronomic
species. Current knowledge about the genetics of adaptation is mostly limited to
a subset of genetic variation, where the effects of different copies (alleles)
of a gene on survival and reproduction are additive and can simply be summed
together. However, the effects of alleles on the organism can depend on the
presence of other alleles for the same gene or different genes, and on
environmental conditions. One example of this is called hybrid vigor, which
often occurs when mating together plants of different strains, and results in
hybrid offspring that have better survival and better seed production than
either parent strain. The proposed research uses a unique set of genetic
resources to quantify the contribution of these non-additive effects on survival
and seed production. Outreach activities will be conducted with K-12 students on
topics related to adaptation and maladaptation in the face of climate change.

Despite nearly a century of work on the genetics of adaptation, we know little
about the contribution of non-additive genetic variation to adaptation, the
extent to which adaptation exists despite maladaptive loci, and how that balance
may shift with environmental change. This research will determine the genetic
basis of heterosis (hybrid vigor) and heterosis-by-environment interactions for
fitness, quantify the role of epistasis in adaptive differentiation, and
determine the extent to which antagonistic loci contribute to transgressive
segregation in crosses between locally-adapted populations. Foundational work
mapping the genetic basis of long-term fitness of two ecotypes of Arabidopsis
thaliana from Italy and Sweden at the native sites implicated a complex genetic
basis, including epistasis, a mixture of adaptive and maladaptive alleles, and
transgressive segregation for fitness in Sweden. Dominance contributes to
heterosis in a cross between these ecotypes, and limited genetic variation and
high heterosis characterize northern populations. The research will leverage a
panel of Near Isogenic Lines (NILs) to produce homozygous, heterozygous, and
combinatorial introgression segments. To investigate heterosis, epistasis, and
additive complementation for fitness, fitness components of these lines will be
assayed in growth chambers programmed to simulate the native environments,
designed and optimized with over a decade of site level climate and fitness
data. Training will be provided for a graduate and undergraduate student who
will also participate in K-12 outreach activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.