* 2325836
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Integrating Traits, Phylogenies and Distributional Data to Forecast Risks and Resilience of North American Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2026
* USD 799,458.00

Title: Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Integrating Traits,
Phylogenies and Distributional Data to Forecast Risks and Resilience of North
American Plants

Approximately 38,000 species of seed plants in North America are assembled into
an array of communities that reflect diversity in geology and climate, and which
have dynamic evolutionary histories. These species represent approximately 22%
of the worldâ€™s seed plant flora and an enormous range of ecologies and traits.
Despite considerable effort, we lack an understanding of why some lineages and
regions seem to be more resilient than others in response to accelerating
climate and land use changes. With this study, we will conduct a continent-wide
examination of the diversity of seed plants, along with their patterns of
distribution - past, present, and future. The resulting information will be
essential for predicting and modeling the resilience of lineages and communities
in the face of rapid global change. Central to this research will be an
examination of plant traits and their evolutionary histories, which together
will provide new means to assess what has shaped communities and to identify
which lineages are likely to be winners or losers on our changing planet. This
work will also provide resources for the plant biology community and will help
build capacity through a strong focus on training, connecting to conservation
outcomes, and a focused effort to link to traditional ecological knowledge.
Furthermore, a major component of the project is to increase capacity in
biodiversity science, community resource development, translation of fundamental
science to conservation policy across North America, and broadening
participation in science. The project will also include resource development,
training, and engagement for high schoolers, instructors, undergraduates, and
the broader research community.

Plant diversity in North America has been shaped by forces operating over
millennia, and eco-evolutionary dynamics determining the present and future
state of the flora can only be understood in this larger context. Our scientific
goals are threefold, all relating to the development of a framework for
integrating key facets of biodiversity dynamics, and to use those as a means to
predict future response of North American plants to environmental change. First,
we will assemble a detailed view of historical and current trait diversity, as
well as endemism across the continent. These measures will allow us to test
potential mechanisms, operating over longer time scales, that have led to
diverse continent-wide distributional patterns of lineages and traits; they can
be further linked to climatic stability as an interacting driver of diversity
Second, we will examine distributional trends over the last 75 years for a well-
sampled subset of species that comprehensively cover the traits of North
American plants in order to test trait-distribution relationships and to
discover which traits are linked to resilience in the face of stressors such as
changes in climate and land use. Finally, we will link the first two aims
together to forecast changes in plant diversity, and we will use these forecasts
to inform data-driven decisions regarding conservation prioritization of both
lineages and geographic regions. These key insights for the flora of North
America will also aid in understanding the eco-evolutionary processes underlying
the many animal and fungal communities that depend on these plant communities.
The large scope and scale of this project creates the potential to address some
of the most important and pressing questions regarding the flora of North
America.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.