* 2325397
* Extending the EvaluateUR Method to Expand the Community of Users
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Jill Singer, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,024,598.00

Industries and businesses across the country have identified technical and
professional competencies and skills they consider to be essential in today’s
workplace. These skills include communication, problem solving, time management,
and teamwork. Above all, industries and businesses want employees who can
identify and think through problems and figure out how to solve them. If
students are to succeed as employees (or as entrepreneurs) they will need to
master these and related skills, be aware of what they know and don’t know, and
understand how best to overcome any gaps in their knowledge and skills.
Undergraduate research and internships, two high impact practices, have been
shown to help students take ownership of their learning as they develop and
apply problem-solving skills. Many technician education programs at community
colleges also include internship opportunities for students at area businesses
and industries. Indeed, community colleges play a vital role in preparing
students to succeed in the workplace. To measure a broad range of desirable
outcomes that include both content knowledge and skills that are critically
important in the workplace, this project will use an evidence-based method
called EvaluateUR in which students work one-on-one with faculty or research
mentors. The approach also provides students with metacognitive skills that
improve their problem-solving abilities. The EvaluateUR method helps community
college students in technician education and other programs identify the
knowledge and skills they gain from conducting research, to see clearly the
areas where they need to improve, and to use this knowledge to their advantage
as they enter the workforce. The overall goal of this project is to increase the
number of undergraduate students who utilize the EvaluateUR method when they
conduct research or serve in internships.

This project will overcome barriers to implementation of the EvaluateUR method
at all educational institutions, but with a focus on Community and Technical
Colleges. Towards this end the project will pursue four objectives. First is to
develop a student-only scored version of the EvaluateUR method for community
college students conducting research applicable to multiple internship venues
including government, business or industry internships. Second is to create a
version of EvaluateUR (called EvaluateUR-CURE) for shorter duration research
experiences such as those in course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CURE). Third is to develop a no-cost version of the EvaluateUR method for
faculty mentoring three or fewer students in summer or academic year research.
Fourth, and finally, is to host an online forum for the community of EvaluateUR
users to pose questions and share best practices. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education Program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.