* 2325659
* Evaluating an Innovative, Structured Teaching Assistantship Program: Impacts on Student Success and Career Readiness
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dia Sekayi, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,998.00

Nationally, the training and preparation of Graduate Teaching Assistants ranges
from minimal support to well-developed workshops and coaching delivered
primarily at the departmental level. Recently, Morgan State University
implemented a highly structured, institution-wide, continuously evaluated
training and coaching program for TAs (MSTAP). This National Science Foundation
Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to Morgan State University will
seek to an answer to the central question: whether participating in a structured
assistantship— accompanied by course-based instructional training, significant
professional development, and mentoring from well-trained mentors—increases or
decreases the likelihood of the recipient’s student success and career
readiness. The outcomes may suggest an alternative to the dominant “research
apprentice” model of doctoral education that provides a specific definition for
success that devalues teaching (especially Teaching Assistant [TA] roles). This
model also minimizes the training for instruction that proves invaluable upon
degree completion. The study will provide guidance to TA programs nationwide and
underscore the value of teaching as a meaningful component of success and
readiness.

The study involves TAs and non-TAs in a mixed methods approach built on Self-
Determination Theory (SDT). Self-determination will be the measure of success
for TA program participants, as it suggests that autonomy, competence, and
relatedness facilitate overall growth and development. There are three distinct
interventions: 1) the MSTAP instruction; 2) mentor training and mentoring; and
3) enhanced professional development. These three interventions will be
evaluated with observational, survey, interview, and focus group techniques that
lead, with analysis, to five more specific empirical questions: 1) What are the
effects of MSTAP on retention and completion?; 2) What is the impact of MSTAP on
the TAs’ program success and career readiness?; 3) What is the impact on time to
degree?; 4) What are the changes in attitude and perception about the role of
the TA appointment on overall readiness and success?; and 5) How do
undergraduate students experience instruction provided by TAs? These questions,
in turn, provide supporting data for quantitative and qualitative assessment of
the central question. The study involves students from large cohorts of TAs (up
to 180 in any given year) in all Morgan’s doctoral disciplines including
engineering, mathematics, natural sciences, computer science, STEM education,
and psychometrics, with social science and humanities for comparison. A group of
non-TAs (Research Assistants, etc.) will participate in mentoring and
professional development activities, thereby serving as a comparison group in
order to isolate the effects of MSTAP.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.