* 2325544
* A Roadmap to Success in STEM: Support for Mental Well-being, Academic Achievement, and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Mao-Lun Weng, Westfield State College
* Standard Grant
* Nasser Alaraje
* 09/30/2028
* USD 999,977.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Westfield State University (WSU). Over its 5-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 12 unique full-time students, in two cohorts, pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science, environmental
science, and mathematics. Each student can receive up to five years of
scholarship support. The project will help students develop the confidence and
work-life balance skills needed to be successful academically and professionally
through improving and building upon four pillars of institutional support:
financial, academic, social, and professional development. Promoting student
success through mental health literacy is central to this project and will add
to the knowledge base of how mental well-being impacts student retention,
graduation, and career pathways.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
project will increase STEM student success through the following objectives,
focusing on four pillars of student success. Fist is to recruit 12 academically
promising, low-income students majoring in biology, chemistry, computer science,
environmental science, or mathematics into the scholarship program. Second is to
retain and graduate at least 80% of scholars (10 of 12). Third is to place at
least 80% of the scholars in a STEM career or graduate school within one year of
graduation through activities that focus on networking, professional
development, and career readiness. Fourth, and finally, is to build a community
of scholars and faculty who value mental health awareness. Students will be
informed about life-long strategies to improve mental health. Faculty will gain
increased understanding of mental health literacy, translating that knowledge
into pedagogical practices to support student mental health. With a primary
focus on creating a culture that values mental well-being as a support strategy
that helps to ensure the academic and career success of the scholars, the
proposed project seeks to promote mental health literacy among students and
faculty within the STEM fields. With the hypothesis that increases in mental
health literacy and the application of skills and practices that lead to a sense
of mental well-being will allow for a greater likelihood of realizing improved
STEM learning, identity, and future career success, the evaluation will include
reviewing project strategies provided by the Counseling Center, the Wellness
Course that includes the Koru Mindfulness Workshops, the incorporation of
mindfulness exercises in the STEM courses, and other wellness-focused events and
opportunities. Project results will be disseminated widely to WSU internal
stakeholders, community members, and the broader scholarly community through
publications and venues focusing on STEM education. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.