* 2325434
* I-Corps: Tissue paint and contrast agent for photoacoustic imaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Remi Veneziano, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to bring a
novel and safe contrast agent platform for photoacoustic imaging that will be of
benefit for multiple biomedical imaging applications. This technology would
significantly increase the depth of imaging currently accessible with
traditional contrast agent, limit the safety risk, enhance the quality and
contrast of photoacoustic imaging and increase the targeting specificity to
stain tissues and organs with higher precision. The applications impacted by
this novel technology include but are not limited to preclinical imaging for
better assessment of biological mechanisms happening in deep tissues, clinical
imaging for more accurate and faster cancer diagnosis, lymph node staining, and
tumor margin staining to help surgeons remove tumors more efficiently. In
addition, the scalability and versatility of this novel contrast agent platform
would reduce the cost associated with biomedical imaging and would facilitate
access to clinical diagnostic imaging for many patients with limited resources.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a novel, easy to synthesize,
size-tunable and targeted contrast agent platform for photoacoustic imaging that
can potentially solve unmet imaging needs in preclinical and clinical markets.
This platform is composed of a highly organized molecular arrangement of
biocompatible dyes offering a high optical absorption in the near-infrared range
aiding in deep-tissue imaging. This platform does not require any nanocarriers
to be assembled, which increases its safety profile, reduces the number of
components to facilitate clinical translation. The size of the contrast agent
can be controlled without changing the composition or the optical properties
using scalable and reproducible synthesis methods which broadens its use in
biomedical imaging. It also offers significant advantages in comparison with
traditional clinically used contrast agents that are usually not targeted and
thus offer limited specificity. The platform offers long-term storage capability
using conventional storage methods without any change in its optical and
physical properties, which will eventually aid its manufacturability and
distribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.