* 2325619
* GP-GO: Fostering a learning ecosystem for interdisciplinary Earth scientists through service learning and conservation in Jamaica
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ashley Matheny, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2026
* USD 529,977.00

Most undergraduate students are not introduced to the diverse scientific fields
rooted in Earth science and thus rarely choose the geosciences as a field of
study or career goal. This GEOPaths:GO project aims to recruit and retain new
students with diverse backgrounds to the Earth sciences and prepare them to work
in a global context. The research goal is to establish a community-focused
multi-year conservation network in Jamaica. The research team lead ongoing
studies of different aspects of Earth science (e.g., ecology, hydrology,
biogeochemistry, paleontology, and geoscience education) and have established
multiple, connected conservation research projects in Jamaica, in collaboration
with local experts at the University of the West Indies and Jamaican non-
governmental organizations. Jamaica is an ideal location for this collaboration
between US and Caribbean scientists and students as it is home to many vital and
complex ecosystems such as rainforests, mangroves, coral reefs, and seagrass
beds. Historically, the stability and dynamics of these ecosystems have not been
actively monitored, or scientists conducted their research without involving
local communities or experts. In this project, undergraduate and graduate
students will select and lead research projects that are meaningful to them, as
well as the local communities in Jamaica (i.e., culturally relevant, service-
learning experiences). This foundational research will support conservation of
island landscapes, biodiversity, and culture through collaborations amongst
multiple Earth science disciplines. This project will foster the establishment
of promising practices for effective, equitable international collaborations.

There is a profound need to recruit and retain students in the Earth sciences.
This project will create a conservation-based program focused on Earth science
discovery that fosters a broad community of learners. The project aims to
recruit students to the geosciences through engagement in service learning that
touches on aspects of paleontology, ecology, chemistry, hydrology, cultural
history, and community engagement across the land, coastline, and ocean.
University of Texas at Austin is a research intensive public, Hispanic-serving
university and will partner with other minority-serving institutions to recruit
non-geoscience students. Over the summer, the project team will showcase
researchers and their projects to introduce students to (a) the different,
connected elements of Earth sciences; (b) the communities and people that
collaborate to promote conservation; and (c) the diverse community of scholars
uniting to preserve the natural world and at-risk communities. Students will
build a story map or virtual field trip to share their experiences and research
in Jamaica. The projects will be the foundation of a conservation network that
integrates different Earth science disciplines to understand long-term and
short-term changes to the land and ocean. The focus on service-learning will
help students engage with the material and improve their motivation to become
(geo)scientists. To evaluate whether the project has met the recruitment and
retention goals, the assessment will take a holistic, case study approach to
understand participantsâ€™ experiences throughout the project (e.g., assessing
personal achievements, perception of the geosciences, interest in pursuing the
geosciences).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.