* 2325921
* Coaching and Retention for Engineering Students: Improving Low-Income Student Success in Engineering with Innovative Mentoring and Early Internship Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* Xiangxiong Kong, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2029
* USD 965,105.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Coastal Carolina University, a public comprehensive liberal arts
institution located in Conway, South Carolina. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 11 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Engineering Science. First-year students will receive up
to four years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase student
persistence and degree attainment in engineering by linking scholarships with
effective supporting activities, including summer bridge courses, mentoring, and
early professional engineering experiences. With the help of a tailored first-
year curriculum and mentor coaching, the scholars will obtain employment in
industry as engineering interns during their summer term as rising sophomores.
Scholars will receive job-site mentoring from practicing engineers at the
project’s industry partners who will provide and supervise internship
experiences. The project will investigate improved practices in mentoring,
assessment and evaluation of curriculum improvements, and effective mechanisms
for industry feedback into higher education curricula. Because the Engineering
Science program at Coastal Carolina University has a high population of
underrepresented students, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in engineering and to learn how mentoring and early internship
experiences support retention and graduation of this student population.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Towards
this end the project team will pursue three specific aims. First is to
accommodate developmental math-ready engineering students using a two-course
summer bridge program, integrating a math boot camp and an engineering graphics
course, linked by a fun, skills-focused, exploratory rapid-prototyping design
project. Second is to enhance student academic success through a program of
mentoring focused on self-regulated learning strategies. Third, and finally, is
to confer self-efficacy and motivational benefits accruing to degree completion,
through a culminating, early engineering internship experience. This project
will investigate the effects of summer bridge courses, mentoring, and early
internship experiences on students’ self-efficacy and outcomes expectations,
interest, and satisfaction in engineering, in the framework of Social Cognitive
Career Theory. This project will investigate the factors in these project
interventions that result in high satisfaction and persistence to degree
completion for low-income students in engineering. Evaluation of the project
will be conducted in light of Social Cognitive Career Theory. Mentoring reports,
internship cover letters, workplace competency assessments, student interviews,
and Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaires will be analyzed for
benefits to students' motivational profiles and views of engineering and
institutional data will be examined for impacts on Engineering program
progression and completion. Results will be made available by a project page
with the Open Science Framework, where all relevant project materials will be
stored and publicly available. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.