* 2325470
* I-Corps: A Wearable Platform for Assessing Respiratory Health
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Mativetsky, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wearable platform that will increase access to respiratory
health data, in both clinical settings and outside such settings. Although
breathing is directly impacted by respiratory disease, conventional respiratory
monitoring technologies offer only a brief snapshot of respiratory health in a
clinical setting, with a strong reliance on the expertise of healthcare
professionals. To improve health outcomes, there is a need for non-invasive
tools that facilitate access to respiratory health data, increase the likelihood
of early disease detection, improve patient monitoring, and enhance the
effectiveness of telemedicine. The proposed technology is expected to benefit
healthcare outcomes and ease the economic burdens associated with respiratory
disease. Such benefits will likely be felt most strongly in underserved rural,
low-income, and minority communities with limited access to specialist care and
facilities. If brought to market, this technology also may help support the
emerging flexible hybrid electronics manufacturing sector in the US and
potentially disrupt the protective facemask industry. This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a wearable platform for respiratory health
monitoring. The proposed technology integrates a flexible electronic respiratory
health sensor into a lightweight facemask. A reusable electronics module
includes wireless data transmission to a smartphone. Artificial intelligence
analysis enables context-sensitive assessment of breathing patterns and user
activity. The smart mask enables the non-invasive acquisition of respiratory
data under daily life conditions, providing rich data sets for AI training,
testing, and robust pattern identification. The AI capabilities, in turn,
elevate the utility of the sensors beyond signal monitoring, to enable
autonomous diagnostics for detecting anomalous breathing associated with disease
or user distress. In addition, the proposed platform technology may improve
early diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and sleep apnea,
protection and monitoring of vulnerable populations that are sensitive to air
pollution caused by forest fires or smog, protection and monitoring of workers
in hazardous manufacturing environments, protection and monitoring of
populations during viral outbreaks of COVID or flu, remote patient monitoring
for telemedicine, and breath training for rehabilitation and stress relief.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.