* 2325563
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Secure and Privacy-Preserving Dynamic Spectrum Access
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) is a crucial solution to the ever-increasing
wireless spectrum shortage. DSS systems typically use an automated frequency
coordinator called a Spectrum Access System (SAS), which uses both dedicated and
crowdsourced spectrum sensors to enable on-demand, cost-effective spectrum
sensing with extraordinary geographic coverage and granularity. Crowdsourcing-
assisted DSS systems have long faced security and privacy concerns. The
project’s novelties are the development, concept prototying, and evaluation of
TrustSAS, an innovative AI/ML-powered trustworthy SAS that utilizes both
dedicated and crowdsourced spectrum sensors to ensure comprehensive and
efficient spectrum utilization while maintaining strong security and privacy.
The project's broader significance and importance are the exploration of the
latest advances in AI/ML technologies to enable trustworthy DSS and the
contribution to the advancement of scientific research in AI/ML-driven wireless
and mobile security systems.

The proposed research includes three integrated thrusts. Thrust 1 develops
VeriSS, a pioneer framework for verifiable spectrum sensing that employs
graphical neural networks to analyze spectrum-sensing data and evaluate their
trustworthiness even in the presence of potentially compromised spectrum
sensors. Thrust 2 investigates TrustSML, a novel framework that builds upon
VeriSS to achieve fast, accurate, and trustworthy localization of multiple
simultaneous spectrum misusers. Thrust 3 studies PriCCS, a novel spatial
crowdsourcing framework that enables the TrustSAS system operator to perform
cost-effective and accurate spectrum-sensing task assignment while providing
strong location privacy guarantees to participating crowd workers. The project's
deliverables, including tutorials, talks, publications, and open-source
toolkits, will be made publicly available online. The proposed research will be
integrated into curriculum development, enhancing undergraduate research
experiences and fostering broad participation in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.