* 2325764
* I-Corps:  Photonic Fiber Barcodes for Integrated Textile Traceability and Sorting
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Max Shtein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an indelible labelling system for textiles, footwear, and other
products. The goal of the proposed technology is to enable authentication,
manufacturing life cycle tracing, and enhance sorting efficiency for reuse,
repair, or recycling at the end-of-life. Over 85% of textiles currently end up
in landfills, despite a recent study indicating 74% of low-value, post-consumer
textiles are readily available for fiber-to-fiber recycling and the expected
market for recycled textiles to be $10 billion by 2028. A key challenge in
implementing fiber-to-fiber recycling is feedstock ambiguity. Over 29% of post-
consumer clothing lacks a legible care label, while 41% have inaccurate labels.
To realize a functional circular economy for textiles domestically and
worldwide, and the associated positive social impacts, a functional, robust
labeling and tracing system is required. In addition to the issue of textile
waste created by lack of end-of-life management, there also is the challenge of
illegal import of counterfeit goods, which is estimated to cost $33.6 billion in
wages and benefits to employees in the US, and $7.2 billion in lost tax revenue
every year.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an all-organic, recyclable
fiber directly integrated into a fabric or garment during manufacture that has
an engineered photonic signature to provide an indelible label. The proposed
technology is readable using both hand-held and high-throughput optical sorting
systems at point-of-sale and recycling facilities. In the apparel industry,
product life cycle management is hampered, in part, by inaccurate, poorly
readable, and detachable standard care labels. Instead, this project seeks to
enable a labeling system capable of being integrated into the fabric itself,
that is intrinsically recyclable, low-cost, encodes information, and allows
rapid readout after years of normal use. In this work, all-polymer photonic
crystals are designed and then fabricated by thermal drawing with >100 layers
having sub-micrometer individual thickness and low refractive index contrast,
enabling the creation of unique optical signatures at visible and infrared
wavelengths. The fibers’ optical design also enables the use of overtone peaks
to avoid overlap with parasitic molecular absorption, substantially improving
the signal-to-noise ratio (and, therefore, ease and speed) of readout. The
ability to produce kilometers of fiber that are compatible with existing textile
manufacturing processes, coupled with low input material cost, make the proposed
technology a potential market-viable improvement over the standard care label.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.