* 2325780
* PFI (MCA): Hydrogen and Solid Carbon Production with Electrified Methane Pyrolysis in Zeolite-Protected, Metal Membrane Reactor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Dongxia Liu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,312.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-Mid-
Career Advancement (PFI (MCA)) project lies in the direct methane pyrolysis
system that integrates hydrogen production, separation, and purification into a
compact modular membrane reactor. This membrane reactor seeks to provide a low-
cost, high energy-efficiency and zero-emission approach to producing hydrogen
and solid carbon, enabling a hydrogen economy. Both emission-free hydrogen and
carbon nanotube products from the proposed technology may offer economic value.
The project provides a platform that enables the education of the next
generation of scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs, especially from the
underrepresented student groups including women, minorities, and people with
disabilities. The principal investigator will receive training and guidance from
the senior mentor to develop skills to address the pain points of potential
industrial customers.

This project seeks to enable highly-efficient and durable membrane reactors for
direct methane pyrolysis at moderate temperatures for production of decarbonized
hydrogen and carbon nanotubes. These reactors address the underlying challenges
in commercializing membrane reactors for hydrogen production from methane
pyrolysis due to the scarcity of active and stable membrane and catalyst
materials. The proposed research seek to advance the membrane reactor technology
and foundational knowledge of surface crystallization of zeolites and methods to
improve resistance of palladium-based membranes to gas impurities and the
effects of hierarchical zeolite-supported catalysts on methane activation. The
team will also examine the effects of spatial and temporal temperature control
on methane pyrolysis in the reactor, as well as the predictive correlations of
materials synthesis for the membrane reactors. The fundamental concepts and
technologies obtained from this proposal may enable new avenues of material
discovery and technique development that can impact the future hydrogen economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.