* 2325413
* Workshop: Data Driven and Computational Modeling of Materials Across Scales; Los Angeles, California; 10-12 May 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Amartya Banerjee, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2024
* USD 34,406.00

This award provides registration and travel support for 20 early career U.S.
researchers to attend the Workshop on Data Driven and Computational Modeling of
Materials Across Scales, which will be held 10-12 May 2023 in Los Angeles,
California. The objective of this workshop is to bring together experts from a
wide variety of technical backgrounds to present and deliberate on the topics of
multiscale modeling of materials, computational mechanics, and data
science/machine learning methods. The workshop will feature invited talks,
poster presentations, lightning talks, panel discussions, and networking
opportunities for researchers. The award will broaden the participation from
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty participants,
particularly women and underrepresented minority researchers. In the selection
process, consideration will be given to the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions that the participants
represent, and the diversity of disciplines. A detailed workshop report,
abstracts of all presentations, and video recordings of invited talks will be
widely disseminated beyond the workshop.

This workshop will engage researchers in the exchange of scientific ideas on
current and future research directions in multiscale modeling of materials,
computational mechanics, and data science/machine learning methods. The success
of computational approaches to materials modeling hinges on having access to
accurate, reliable and efficient simulation techniques across length and time
scales. Most materials phenomena are multiscale in nature and properties of
common engineering materials are often dictated by the properties of defects
that interact at length scales much smaller than everyday macroscopic objects.
As such, predictive computational tools suited to the length and time scales
relevant to the problem physics, and techniques which span across scales are
required. Data analytics and machine learning tools have provided many new and
exciting avenues in computational materials research and computational
mechanics. The best strategies for using these powerful new tools in multiscale
materials modeling constitute an important and active area of ongoing research.
The invited talks, poster presentations and panel discussions will inform the
participants of the latest technical developments in the field and also provide
the opportunity for experts to deliberate openly on challenges related to the
aforementioned topics. These discussions are expected to eventually lead to new
computational and data driven techniques for materials modeling, and to also
drive the development of novel materials via bottom-up design strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.