* 2325364
* SBIR Phase I:  Path Planning for Multi-target Search and Localization in Co-Robotic Architectures
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Paul Flikkema, BIOTRONIC INNOVATIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is a high-performance, drone-based, wildlife telemetry
technology that is economical and easy to use. Its improved performance and
significantly lower cost than existing competitive technologies will empower
users with greater capability and lower the barrier to entry for field data
collection. This technology will enable researchers to better understand the
complex effects of geography, climate, interspecies competition, invasive
species, and land use policy on animals and their habitats.

This project will enable a co-robotic system that employs an unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) as an assistant wildlife tracker. By fusing data from the UAV and
the knowledge and insights of the human tracker, the team will greatly increase
the capability of these systems to track a larger number of animals, to increase
the frequency of tracking campaigns, and to improve the ease of use. This
research will develop and refine a new class of machine learning algorithms for
wildlife localization. As the UAV platform executes its mission, the human
tracker can monitor its progress and plans, and intervene at any time with
commands to re-direct the UAV. The research plan tackles the key challenges in
this problem domain, including safety of UAV operation and the possible effects
of noise emissions. Based on the identification of key risks and mitigation
strategies, the research plan executes multiple rapid iterations of a develop-
simulate-deploy-test design process within a set of tasks that tackle
increasingly complex localization scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.