* 2325232
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2023 International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA'23).
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2025
* USD 21,841.00

This is funding to support participation in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of
six graduate student authors from U.S. institutions of higher learning, along
with distinguished research faculty as mentors (who will not be funded by this
proposal), to be held in conjunction with the 2023 International Conference on
Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA'23), which will
take place July 5-7, 2023 in Corfu, Greece. The PETRA mission is to promote
interdisciplinary research on ways to use pervasive ambient intelligent
environments to improve the quality of life and enhance human performance with
greater capabilities. It is the only annual conference that brings together
theoreticians and practitioners from a wide variety of disciplines to focus on
the application of pervasive technologies to assistive environments. Conference
outcomes have a broad impact in diverse application areas such as manufacturing,
transportation, energy systems, security and safety, robotics, healthcare,
biomedicine, environment and conservation. PETRA brings together very different
types of technologies to also address important social and healthcare issues for
sensitive populations, such as the elderly, or persons suffering from chronic
conditions such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Cerebral Palsy and other
disabilities or traumas. The PETRA proceedings are published in the ACM Digital
Library, and the authors of the best papers are invited to submit to special
journal issues after the end of the conference. The conference organizers will
make a concerted effort to attract participants who are women, members of under-
represented minorities, persons with disabilities, and those whose work focuses
on challenges related to diversity. More information about the conference may be
found online at http://www.petrae.org.

The PETRA 2023 Doctoral Consortium will afford student authors of papers
accepted for presentation at the conference a unique opportunity to gain
additional exposure for their innovative ideas while also receiving
reinforcement for the importance and value of conducting research with societal
impact. The workshop will allow the junior participants to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior colleagues. The Doctoral
Consortium will consist of special sessions at the beginning, during, and at the
end of the conference, to foster the research efforts of this next generation of
researchers by providing substantive feedback and guidance in a supportive and
interactive environment from a group of senior researchers. The special program
organized for the students includes sessions between the doctoral students and
the faculty mentors, in which the students will discuss their work and ask
questions; the faculty mentors will provide constructive comments on the
students' work and address their questions. Each student will be asked to submit
a report that provides feedback about the conference, regarding the benefits
they received, which presentations they liked and why, and how certain papers
and topics relate to their work. After they finish these reports, students will
participate in small group breakout sessions to discuss them, and the faculty
mentors will provide guidance on how to proceed for further journal publication.
Students will also have the option to submit a poster paper and to attend
conference workshops on special topics. Short papers on the participants' work
will be published in the conference proceedings, and a summary report on the
event will be posted on the conference website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.