* 2325494
* Collaborative Research: GEOPaths: IN: DIG IT (Data in Geosciences in Teaching)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 117,217.00

Atmospheric, climate, ocean, earth and environmental sciences (geosciences) are
among the least diverse fields in science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM). A lack of diversity in STEM fields means decreased ability to identify
and solve critical issues facing society such as climate change, which
disproportionately affects the populations that are least represented in STEM.
The Data in Geosciences in Teaching project aims to increase diversity in the
geosciences by supporting high school teachers in school districts with diverse
student populations to sustainably build their science programs to include the
types of geoscience student learning experiences that increase the likelihood
that these students will pursue STEM careers. Classroom and field-based
geosciences lessons will be co-created by teachers and community geosciences
partners (industry, government, and academic). This project aims to make real
change in the district science programming by providing a long-term commitment
of resources, supporting teachers using local geoscience experiences and
expertise, and building sustainable partnerships.

This project seeks to create a systematic approach to ensuring equitable access
to geoscience learning experiences for local high school educators and
professionals through creation of a geosciences learning ecosystem that will
incorporate the assets and expertise of Community Geosciences Partners,
professional learning experiences, their existing science curriculum, newly
created geosciences learning experiences, and evidence of student impacts to
support iterative design of the student learning experiences. The goals of this
project are to: (1) design and implement a series of experiences for high school
science teachers to engage with local Geoscience Community Partners and their
data to foster learning and collaborations (Teacher Learning); (2) facilitate
the co-creation of student learning experiences that increase the number of
authentic, data-rich, and locally-and/or personally-relevant geoscience lessons
taught in local high school science courses (Student Learning); and (3) create
and implement a sustainability plan with the local high school science
programming that includes continued collaborations between high school science
teachers and local Community Geosciences Partners (System Level Change).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.