* 2325276
* eMB: Mouth to Mind: Leveraging network dynamical systems and software to understand diet, diabetes, dementia and modifiable risk factors delaying Alzheimer's disease
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Travis Thompson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2026
* USD 519,526.00

Americans are losing the battle for minds. Obesity and type 2 diabetes
accelerate the progression of deadly, age-related neurodegeneration like
Alzheimer's disease (AD). In fact, by 2050, AD will impact every American
family; 1 in 7 Americans over 65 will have AD, and there is no clear, effective
pharmaceutical treatment regime in sight. In the absence of practical
pharmaceutical treatment strategies for AD, understanding how AD can be delayed
through modifiable risk factors, such as diet and exercise, is of paramount
importance. NSF-funded mathematicians and nutritional scientists from Texas Tech
University are coming together to develop new methods for studying how the
modifiable risk factors in obesity and diabetes, like the types of food one
chooses to eat or how much exercise and sleep one can get, affect AD. To do
this, the investigators are developing new mathematical models to relate factors
like brain inflammation and metabolic stress to AD progression and producing the
necessary computer software to solve these types of problems on large, complex
human brain graphs generated from medical data. The research aims to identify
what modifiable factors matter the most for delaying AD, and the team of
investigators is partnering with rural community leaders to bring their results
straight into the lives, and onto the dinner tables, of American families. This
project will provide training for graduate mathematics students and one part-
time summer undergraduate. Additionally, this project will allow the
investigators to partner with Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service to bring the
results of this research directly to under-served populations in Lubbock and
surrounding counties through Better Living for Texans.

Oxidative stress, brain insulin sensitivity and neuroinflammation are salient
mechanisms of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology and known associates of
modifiable AD risk factors. What mediation of modifiable factors delay the
pathogenesis and progression of AD? Detailed studies that investigate modifiable
risk factors for AD in human subjects face significant ethical, technical or
financial barriers. To avoid these challenges, the research team will employ an
agile approach based on mathematical models that describe the evolution of AD-
associated amyloid-beta and tau protein pathology on complex human brain
networks generated from medical data. The goals of the interdisciplinary project
are threefold. First, to devise novel, high-dimensional network dynamical
systems (NDS) that express the evolution of AD protein pathology in the presence
of perturbed insulin homeostasis, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation.
Second, to construct effective computational software, based on high-performance
libraries such as PETSc and SUNDIALS, that instantiates and solves large NDS
models via an accessible, high-level programming interface. Third, to analyze
the NDS models using techniques from the theory of differential equations,
networks and data science in addition to performing large computational
simulations of AD pathology on brain graphs derived from patient neuroimaging
data. Combining these research outcomes will develop an understanding of the
efficacy of altering modifiable AD risk factors and enable high-level
recommendations for the public to mitigate the risk of developing AD in their
lifetime.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.