* 2325466
* CAREER: Identifying the Role of Tandem Repeats in Great Ape Adaptation through Undergraduate Team Research Using a Novel Statistical Framework
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Rorianne Rohlfs, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2027
* USD 483,199.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

This project will substantially expand our ability to study rapid trait
evolution. Rapid trait evolution results in dramatic differences between closely
related species, such as chimpanzees and humans. The way genes are used (gene
expression) has been implicated in such differences, but the genetic basis for
altered gene expression is poorly understood. Until recently, because of limits
in DNA sequencing techniques, a major source of genetic variation (tandem
repeats) has been difficult to study. While sequencing technology has advanced
so that we can produce these data, we still lack a way to analyze it. This
project will create a new analysis tool and will demonstrate its use by studying
great ape evolution, addressing longstanding biological problems such brain
evolution. Further, this project will support the professional development of
undergraduate and masters student scientists, mostly persons excluded due to
ethnicity, race, and gender, improving the diversity, rigor, and relevance of
science in the long term.

Specifically, this project will complete the following objectives: (1) create
TREVA, a statistical tool that uses tandem repeat (TR) variation data between
and within species to test evolutionary hypotheses, in particular to identify
TRs under balancing or directional selection; (2) apply TREVA to empirical data
to determine how TR variation underlies adaptation in great apes; (3) identify
genes impacted by TRs under selection and determine the downstream biological
processes and traits under selection. This project will integrate education into
research using three mechanisms. (1) The research will primarily be carried out
by San Francisco State University (SFSU) undergraduates and master’s students.
(2) The project will create the Computational Research Introductory Summer
Program where SFSU masters students will be supported to mentor teams of novice
SFSU undergraduates to learn computer science skills and apply them to original
research projects. (3) Students performing the research will create video
abstracts describing their work, which will be used in science classes
nationally to engage students with diverse scientists.

This project is co-funded by the Biological Anthropology program in the Division
of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.