* 2325871
* Conference: A Learning Progression for K-12 Data Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Chad Dorsey, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,896.00

In today's increasingly data-rich world, data science education is vital not
only for work in STEM fields but also for all citizens. Although it is
increasingly clear that data science education at the K-12 level is vital, much
debate still exists about the form and focus it should assume in the classroom.
The proposed workshop will gather a diverse group of leading researchers in the
field of data science education to develop a cohesive research framework to
define and guide this quickly growing field. This framework will focus on what
learners need to know and be able to do with data starting with the earliest
learners and going through high school. Workshop participants will also identify
the key grand challenges for data science education and suggest the most
valuable areas for future research. In doing so, the outcome of the workshop
will support researchers, educators, developers, and policymakers, bolstering
the coherence of future efforts towards supporting comprehensive data science
education in grades K-12.

Establishing and characterizing current research in data science education is
critical to guiding all aspects of this quickly emerging field. To address this
need, this project brings together stakeholders from across the field of K-12
data science education, first in a smaller steering committee and focused pre-
work groups and then for a multiple-day in-person knowledge building session, to
grapple with a series of connected queries positioned at the center of the
field's current needs. Via organized guided discussions the workshop will
propose a summary of the progress made so far in DSE research, identify places
where the largest gaps remain, and highlight the areas that provide the most
promising ground for interconnection. The workshop will then employ the summary
of existing research to suggest a learning progressions framework for K-12 data
science education aimed to benefit a broad range of stakeholders and
applications. The workshop will adopt an approach that bounds the components
involved in data science education, providing a framework elucidating strands of
learning that comprise the domain with each identified strand deliberately
providing entry points spanning grades K-12. This framework will be solid enough
to inform work across both research and development, yet flexible enough to
evolve and incorporate the many new findings certain to arise during the
workshop activities. The resulting framework will serve as guidance for
identifying future research priorities and suggestions to supporters, funders,
and implementing stakeholders, including policy- and decision-makers at local
and regional levels.

This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.