* 2325694
* Improving Access and Outcomes for Students in Semiconductors and Solar Energy
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Shirley-Ann Behravesh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Arizona State University aims to revolutionize graduate education in the
field of semiconductor manufacturing. This project seeks to address the
complexity and interconnectedness of concepts in graduate education associated
with semiconductor manufacturing, which requires students to integrate and apply
information across many disciplines. This IGE award is timely with the passage
of the Chips and Science Act, which provides over $52 billion in direct support
to the semiconductor industry to revitalize onshore manufacturing in the US. The
expansion of semiconductor manufacturing will require an almost doubling of the
existing semiconductor workforce. However, various challenges pose significant
barriers to achieving this goal, including the limited enrollment of students in
semiconductor-related graduate programs compared to other fields. Moreover, the
poor visibility of the field in terms of career paths, the high capital
equipment costs of hands-on teaching facilities, and the lack of diversity in
the semiconductor workforce further compound the challenge of doubling the
semiconductor workforce. In response to these challenges, ASUâ€™s IGE project will
forge new frontiers in graduate education, combining innovative virtual learning
approaches with practical hands-on experiences. Through a virtual semiconductor
manufacturing line, developed in partnership with industry and government
partners, students will gain a comprehensive understanding of the manufacturing
process and its multidisciplinary nature. Additionally, a one-week hands-on
experience in an actual manufacturing environment will equip students with
valuable knowledge, offering insights into diverse career pathways within the
semiconductor field. Integral to the project's success is its commitment to
fostering inclusion and promoting diversity. The project will facilitate
connections between students and industry through a dedicated
Stakeholder/Student Day, providing a platform for meaningful interactions
between students and industry professionals. By empowering students and
enhancing their agency, the program aims to cultivate a diverse and inclusive
community.

The ASU IGE will develop a certificate program for graduate students in
semiconductor-related fields based on the virtual pilot line that focuses on the
interaction among complex steps in a semiconductor manufacturing line and how
the influence of factors such as cost, reliability, yield, changes in supply,
sustainability, externalities, and changes in input parameters changes the
interactions and outcomes of a manufacturing sequence. The educational program
structure and components integrate sustainability concepts, via course projects,
formal training components, and the inclusion of a program structure that
includes and encourages additional viewpoints. The program will integrate
multiple stakeholder viewpoints and goals in semiconductors in various industry
segments, including close collaboration with industry, government agencies, and
other affected communities, including those impacted by its life-cycle impacts.
Finally, the IGE program will increase the pipeline and retention of
historically underrepresented groups in semiconductor-based fields by increasing
access to necessary skills and education; by integrating and emphasizing diverse
viewpoints in program participants, including industry participants and IGE
leadership; and by program components to create a culture of inclusion.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.