* 2325198
* Nonenzymatic RNA Replication
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jack Szostak, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 899,998.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jack W. Szostak from the Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard University will study prebiotic chemistry relevant for the origin of
life on the early Earth. The proposed work will focus on how primordial RNA
molecules could have replicated without enzymes. This research focuses on how
life is a natural phenomenon that can emerge according to the laws of chemistry
and physics. Carrying out the proposed research will contribute to training the
next generation of 21st century scientists in the fields of chemistry and
chemical biology. The proposed experimental procedures will allow graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to acquire specialized training in a broad
range of chemical methods including organic synthesis, reaction kinetics,
structure determination by crystallography, mass spectrometry and NMR. The
laboratoryâ€™s findings will be communicated to the broadest possible audience in
response to the enormous public interest in the origin of life and the
possibility that life may exist elsewhere in the Universe. This outreach will
both engage and educate non-scientists in the value and power of evidence-based
thinking. A broader appreciation of and respect for science would be an enormous
societal benefit.

The proposed research will advance knowledge of prebiotic chemistry and the
chemistry of RNA. The objectives are to understand how chemical energy could be
harvested and used to drive replication, and the emergent behaviors of complex
RNA systems that will lead to non-enzymatic replication. The experiments related
to activation chemistry will explore how high-energy compounds resulting from
exposure to UV light can drive the chemical activation of nucleotides and thus
the non-enzymatic replication of RNA. The exploration of a new model for RNA
replication will examine the possibility that life emerged from a very complex
mixture of small RNA fragments, prior to the evolution of enzyme-catalyzed
replication of long sequences such as viral RNA genomes or cellular DNA genomes.
The use of modern sequencing technology will provide insight into how RNA
copying and replication can be achieved continuously and accurately.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.