* 2325700
* 2023 Waterman Award
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* William Anderegg, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2028
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr. William Anderegg as one of
the three 2023 recipients of its Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's
highest honor and recognizes an outstanding researcher who is 40 years or
younger or not more than 10 years beyond receipt of the Ph.D. degree, by
December 31 of the year of the nomination. In addition to a medal, the awardee
receives a $1 million grant over five years to support scientific research or
advanced study at the institution of the recipient's choice.

Dr. William “Bill” Anderegg, Director of the Wilkes Center for Climate Science
and Policy and Associate Professor, School of Biological Sciences at the
University of Utah is recognized for his outstanding contributions to ecological
and climate change research. His novel research uses a multi-disciplinary focus
to address the greatest environmental challenges facing the U.S. and the world
today. Dr. Anderegg’s landmark papers on aspen forests linked the risk of
drought mortality with fundamental tree physiology, the threshold loss of
vascular function. He showed how physiological and ecological components of
forests, such as diversity of water-transport strategies, determine forest
resilience to climate stresses. He led a multi-disciplinary team of
distinguished researchers to provide a new framework for forest climate
mitigation in 2020 and followed up with an unprecedented and comprehensive risk
analysis for the Earth’s forests over the 21st century in 2022. His work
advances the basic understanding of mechanisms driving plant sensitivity to
drought, with clear links to widespread tree-mortality events of the last two
decades across the Western U.S. (i.e., the “megadrought”). His work elucidates
the importance of biodiversity to the sustainable functioning of forest
ecosystems under water-limited conditions regionally and globally and is
critical to advancing the understanding of climate change and developing
sustainability practices for forest ecosystems.

Throughout his scientific career, Dr. Anderegg has received numerous NSF awards,
including an NSF CAREER grant in 2021. He was also a recipient of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate and Global Change Postdoctoral
Fellowship, the American Geophysical Union’s Global Environmental Change Early
Career Award, and the New Phytologist Tansley Medal. Dr. Anderegg intimately
integrates his research with undergraduate and graduate education, research
mentorship and professional development. He has demonstrated a strong commitment
to increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM through his active
recruitment, teaching, and training of members of historically excluded groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.