* 2325518
* My PhD: Incorporating Student-Centered Assessments into the core of PhD Training
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Patrick Brandt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,418.00

PhD training in STEM (Science, Technology Engineering, and Mathematics) programs
generally includes course work, qualifying exams, and dissertation research.
Each component focuses primarily on discipline-specific concepts and skills with
research frequently related to an advisor’s grant. This may be ideal for
students seeking tenure track faculty or independent research positions.
However, the opportunities and interests of PhD graduates are increasingly
broad. Recognizing the growing diversity of career outcomes warrants the need to
incorporate career exploration and professional development into PhD training.
Towards this goal, this National Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate
Education (IGE) award to the University of North Carolina will develop a model
to maximize student-centered PhD training with individualized competencies,
entitled “MyPhD”, which can be adopted by any STEM graduate program. MyPhD is
expected to seamlessly integrate individualized, translatable skill development
(e.g., leadership, communication, management) with traditionally required
discipline specific competencies (e.g., scientific knowledge, technical skills,
data interpretation).

Although some PhD programs provide opportunities for students to develop
professional skills, they tend to be voluntary and extra-curricular leading to
potential inequity due to the hidden curriculum of unspoken academic rules,
culture, and expectations, particularly for first generation students or those
from historically excluded groups. Moreover, professional skills are not
formally assessed in the primary mechanisms for monitoring progress in PhD
training programs such as qualifying exams, committee meetings, and the
thesis/dissertation defense. As such, the traditional designs of these academic
doctoral milestones seem antiquated, lack flexibility to address student career
goals, and lack evidence-based support. To transform PhD training, MyPhD will
develop evidence-based guidelines that facilitate the development of
individualized student-centered competencies and assessments throughout a
student’s doctoral training that can be customized to better match career
interests. This approach is anticipated to increase retention in PhD programs,
accelerate student advancement in careers post-graduation, decrease inequity in
training, enhance program environments, and increase student wellbeing. The
following objectives, with an initial focus on biomedical PhD programs, will
help the project to achieve its goals: 1) evaluate current assessment methods
for determining student progression with a focus on qualifying exams and
thesis/dissertation committee practices and their relationship to program-
defined competencies; 2) develop and implement student-centered and competency-
based approaches to qualifying exams and directly compare the approach to
current practices within multiple programs; 3) develop and implement student-
centered and competency-based approaches to student evaluation by dissertation
committees and directly compare the approach to current practices within
multiple programs; 4) evaluate the proposed transformation by directly comparing
student outcomes and student and faculty perceptions of training using current
practices to the proposed MyPhD approach.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.