* 2325500
* Journal of Advanced Technological Education (J ATE)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Karen Leung, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 615,281.00

Community colleges are integral to the higher education landscape in the United
States, enrolling a large percentage of all undergraduate students, including
half of all freshman and sophomores. Community and technical colleges teach a
higher proportion of low-income students, students of color, and first-
generation college students than their counterparts at four-year institutions.
Because of differences in the history, mission, organizational structures, and
student populations, community college faculty spend more time teaching and
fewer hours engaged in research and scholarship than four-year college faculty.
Yet within higher education as a whole, publication in peer-reviewed journals
remains a primary way of evaluating the productivity and workload of college
faculty. In a world where faculty competence is often measured in terms of
publications rather than teaching experience, the lower number of articles
submitted for publication by faculty at community and technical colleges
contributes to perceptions of lower prestige, and misperceptions of the quality
of education provided by community and technical colleges. With the emergence of
the Journal of Advanced Technological Education (J ATE), these highly-valuable,
little-known sources of innovative ideas can be brought to a larger audience. J
ATE represents an opportunity not only for community colleges, but for educators
at all levels to learn about research and best practices in technician education
and undergraduate research that are being developed for the most diverse
population of undergraduates in the country. This project will support the J ATE
in developing a sustainability plan for the journal while also supporting both
faculty and students in honing their skills on crafting articles for submission
to peer-reviewed journals.

The goal of J ATE is to promote and advance technician education nationwide by
building a community of peer-reviewed published authors from community and
technical colleges. By publishing innovations in technician education, this
project will promote best practices for teaching Americaâ€™s increasingly diverse
undergraduate student population and increase the reach and recognition of
community college faculty and students. The goal will be achieved through
professional development of project team members, community college faculty and
students; broad dissemination of resources and information for ATE PIs, Co-PIs,
Evaluators, and community college faculty; and a business plan for sustaining
the only peer-reviewed journal dedicated to technician training. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.