* 2325341
* From a jack-of-all-trades arise masters of few: uncovering the evolutionary patterns and processes driving multigene family functional diversification
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Todd Barkman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2026
* USD 501,392.00

Specialized metabolites are not only the spice of life, they mediate nearly all
organismal interactions with the environment. Due to their importance, this
proposed work aims to understand how the >200,000 chemicals produced by plants
and microorganisms evolved. Knowledge of the historical genetic mechanisms
allowing for existing metabolites to be produced should allow for the generation
of novel metabolites by protein engineering for applications in agriculture,
medicine, bioengineering and pharmaceuticals. In order to achieve these research
goals, the next generation of diverse scientists at different stages of
development will be trained and collect data. At least 100 undergraduate
students will be engaged in authentic research experiences that generate novel
data so that their findings related to protein evolution and specialized
metabolite biosynthesis can be published in peer-reviewed journals. This
experience is expected to increase the probability of student recruitment into
scientific research careers.

The origins of genomic complexity are unclear but at least partly depend on gene
duplication to generate multigene families. This project will investigate the
factors that promote multigene family functional diversification after gene
duplication, a topic of broad applicability to the thousands of enzymes involved
in reactions required for life. To do this, the SABATH enzyme family of
methyltransferases, which produce critical molecules for plant development and
defense, will be studied. Ancestral Sequence Resurrection will be employed to
directly study the ancestral enzymes that gave rise to modern-day enzymes.
First, >10,000 enzyme assays will be performed to determine whether protein
functional divergence is asymmetrical throughout enzyme family diversification
by resurrecting ancient pre- and post-duplication enzymes. Second, the
hypothesis that two descendant genes are better than one ancestral gene in terms
of biochemical function will also be tested. To do this, the amount of
biochemical products produced by pre- and post-duplication enzymes will be
measured. Third, ancestral protein crystal structures will be generated for
multiple ancestral and descendant enzymes in this family and analyzed in a
comparative context to gain insight into active site configurations concomitant
with evolutionary changes in enzyme substrate preferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.