* 2325922
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Design: Climate change alteration of soils functional biodiversity of the Paramos, Colombia
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Siela Maximova, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 09/30/2026
* USD 433,800.00

Páramos are high-altitude tundra ecosystems nested at the heart of the Andes
mountains. These cold and humid environments are home to a multitude of plants,
animals, and insects. Páramos are a critical water source for downstream urban
centers, including Colombia's capital city, Bogota. Additionally, the Páramos
soils contain substantial organic carbon reserves due to slow rates of organic
matter decomposition. Beyond being a pool of carbon sequestered away from the
atmosphere, this large reservoir of organic matter controls the soils’ hydraulic
and fertility properties. The Páramos’ unique geographic location, at an
elevation above 2,800 m above sea level, makes them highly vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change. In fact, these ecosystems’ surface areas are
projected to shrink by half within the next 50 years possibly causing loss of
the essential services they provide. This project aims to characterize the
microbial diversity in the Páramos soils in Colombia and investigate how climate
change will affect microbes’ functions. The research is of high importance,
considering that immediate and long-term changes in microbial metabolism could
impact the ability of Páramos soils to store organic carbon and regulate
downstream water flow. To study the cascading effect of climate change on
Páramos ecosystems, this project will jumpstart collaborations among
transdisciplinary experts that will integrate the research of below-ground
microbial communities with above-ground vegetation functions. The project will
also engage high school and undergraduate students that will work together to
develop and deploy low-cost long-term soil monitoring data loggers in Chingaza
National Natural Park, near the city of Bogota.

This project will address the critical need to disentangle the effect of
moisture and temperature on the fate of organic carbon in Páramos soils while
building a transdisciplinary team capable of expanding the scope of the research
to an ecosystem level. The project includes establishing controlled soil
mesocosms that will allow to independently vary moisture and temperature levels.
Additionally, functions of the soil microbiome will be investigated using
metagenomics and amplicon sequencing, and probes will be deployed to initiate
long-term monitoring of the soil response to climate change in situ. This
project will culminate in the organization of an international Páramos symposium
that will set up priorities for future systems research. The symposium will
bring together scientists from diverse fields to discuss the linkages between
above-ground and below-ground ecosystem functions and plan future collaborations
in predicting Páramos-wide effects of climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.