* 2325227
* Phospholipase D Regulation of Exosome Secretion
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Dinah Loerke, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 639,461.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Michelle Knowles of the University of Denver is studying how cells
control their communication with one another. One way that cells communicate is
through the secretion of nanoscopic packets called “exosomes.” Exosomes are
lipid-coated containers that carry molecules and travel through the body, where
they are taken up by other cells. Exosomes can alter the function of other
cells, for better or worse. The factors that control how cells make exosomes and
their release are not fully understood. The research supported by this award
will focus on the lipid-modifying protein, phospholipase D (PLD), an enzyme, and
on phosphatidic acid (PA), which is a lipid whose production is catalyzed by
PLD. PA can alter the shapes of membranes and acts as a signaling molecule. The
role of PLD and PA in the formation of exosomes and their release will be
investigated. Beyond generating new knowledge about exosomes, the project will
create opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to learn how to use
state of the art technology to address problems at the forefront of cell
communication. Drs. Knowles and Dinah Loerke (University of Denver) will develop
a peer mentoring program for graduate students. The results of scientific and
broader impact activities will be presented at conferences and published to
allow others to build upon the foundational knowledge obtained about cellular
regulation and student mentorship.

Phospholipase D and phospholipase A (PLD and PA) could be involved in the
formation of exosomes and/or in the release process itself. Both steps require
highly curved membranes. In this research project, the presence of PLD and the
formation of PA will be mapped in space and time during exosome secretion.
Quantitative fluorescence microscopy approaches will be used in conjunction with
standard biochemical methods to assess the number of exosomes and the frequency
with which they are released from cells. The formation, trafficking and fusion
stages of the exosome lifecycle will be assessed in live cells. The activity and
presence of PLD will be altered to determine when and where PLD and phosphatidic
acid are required. This project has the potential for far-reaching scientific
impact; specifically, by demonstrating the use of biophysical tools/chemical
biology to help to elucidate important mechanisms of cellular communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.