* 2325045
* SBIR Phase II:  Accelerating R&amp;D through Streamlined Machine Learning Algorithms for Small Data Applications in Advanced Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Daniela Blanco, SUNTHETICS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will improve and accelerate the development of new chemicals,
processes, and formulations in the pharmaceutical industry. By harnessing the
power of machine learning (ML), this project aims to save time and resources by
up to 95%, while reducing waste generation, thereby enhancing the commercial and
societal impact of drug development. Traditional process optimization in drug
development is a time-consuming and expensive endeavor, often relying on trial-
and-error approaches. Lead optimization and route scouting in pre-clinical drug
development can take months and involve thousands of experiments, costing
millions of dollars in personnel expenses alone. This project seeks to address
these challenges by employing ML to guide experimental design with small
datasets. Through a combination of ML and chemistry knowledge, this project aims
to streamline the optimization process by suggesting only the most promising
experiments and minimizing the number of failed attempts. This solution not only
grants patients quicker access to medicines but also enables companies to
generate earlier revenue and maintain longer market exclusivity.

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses one of the
most significant challenges faced by research and development (R&D) chemists:
the optimization of categorical variables in synthetic processes, specifically
solvent selection. Solvents play a vital role in the chemical industry,
including reaction, separation, purification, and formulation. The proper
solvent can improve efficiency, reduce costs, and result in a more
environmentally friendly process. Despite successful advances in ML-guided
optimization and green solvent selection methodologies, available tools do not
effectively combine environmental and performance parameters for simultaneous
solvent selection and process optimization. This project will provide a solution
for scientists across the chemical industry to leverage small data and
innovative ML technologies to advance manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.