* 2325722
* NSF/FDA SiR: A Nonclinical Testing Tool for Wearable Photoplethysmography-Based Blood Pressure Monitoring Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Jin-Oh Hahn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 10/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project intends to develop and implement a testing platform that can
evaluate the accuracy of wearable blood pressure measurement devices. There is a
recent surge in the development of wearable-based blood pressure monitoring
technologies, and some are commercially available in the market. However,
challenges remain in validating these devices to ensure the accuracy in BP
measurement due to the limitations in acceptable testing procedures. Current
evaluation is mostly based on resource-intensive clinical testing. Hence,
successful completion of this project will enable low-cost and meaningful
evaluation of wearable blood pressure monitoring devices by advancing our
knowledge related to (i) the bio-signal measured by the wearable devices versus
human physiology and tissue bio-mechanics; (ii) time-/cost-efficient bench
testing of wearable blood pressure monitoring devices; (iii) the design and
implementation of a platform that can imitate pulsatile blood flow in the human
body under a wide range of physiological conditions. In addition, this project
will foster the development of new blood pressure monitoring devices, stimulate
medical device market with new technologies, improve the quality of life of
humans with more accurate blood pressure measurement, and (iv) creating the
next-generation of scientists with the knowledge of how to develop and evaluate
novel medical and healthcare devices.

Despite the recent surge in the development and deployment of
photoplethysmography (PPG)-based wearable blood pressure monitoring devices,
there is no bench test method that can objectively evaluate these high-impact
healthcare devices. To bridge the gap, this project will develop a novel flow
phantom circuit technology as a non-clinical testing platform capable of
performing bench testing of PPG-based BP monitoring devices. The flow phantom
technology provides a low-cost, low-risk, and highly effective evaluation
environment by simulating a mock circulation flow loop and a tissue-mimicking
pulsatile phantom. When a PPG-based blood pressure monitoring device is
physically placed into the circuit, it operates in a dynamically changing
environment with the flow phantom circuit. Hence, the platform can identify the
impact of alterations in the sensor and algorithm elements in the device on
blood pressure measurements. The platform can also evaluate the sensitivity of
PPG-based blood pressure measurement algorithms to various flow and motion
conditions. Last but not least, a mature version of this platform has the
potential to transform the design and testing processes of a wide variety of
PPG-based hemodynamic monitoring devices beyond blood pressure monitors. To
achieve the project goal, the following tasks will be accomplished: (i) a bench
flow phantom with physiologically relevant and controllable blood pressure,
blood flow, anatomical, and optical characteristics will be constructed; and
(ii) test methods using the flow phantom to evaluate the sensitivity of PPG-
based blood pressure measurement algorithms to various flow and motion
conditions will be developed. The result of this project will eventually lead us
to a Regulatory Science Tool that will augment clinical studies and potentially
reduce the burdensome approach of repeating full clinical validation protocols
for alternative sensor-algorithm combinations, enabling more targeted clinical
testing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.