* 2325080
* Software-Tailored Architecture for Quantum Co-Design (STAQ)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Christopher Monroe, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2028
* USD 3,400,000.00

Quantum computers hold great promise to catalyze a new era of computational
power that will benefit all of society. However, quantum computer processing is
based on radical laws of physics that have no analog in everyday life, making it
a challenge to attract the needed technical workforce and user base. The NSF-
STAQ program is a unique national quantum computer research activity that
designs, runs, and optimizes quantum algorithms on programmable quantum computer
systems in a university setting. STAQ quantum computers are designed and built
in-house at Duke University, based on the mature and scalable platform of
trapped atomic ions – individual atoms suspended above a chip with
electromagnetic fields and controlled with laser beams. The Duke Quantum Center
features several programmable quantum computer systems capable of running
generic quantum circuits and applications. The STAQ team of 17 investigators
from 8 institutions, including a core at Duke University, exercises complete
control of all hardware and software layers. STAQ will bring together
scientists, engineers, computer scientists, and application experts to hasten
quantum computer advantage over conventional computers, while educating the
public and bringing quantum computers to users who may not be familiar with
quantum mechanics or its growing importance to society.

Securing quantum advantage in computation will require a vertical “full stack”
approach, integrating application and algorithmic development with software
optimization and control down to the hardware level composed of controllable
quantum systems typically expressed in terms of quantum bits (qubits). STAQ
hardware is based on trapped atomic ions, owing to their high level of
performance, reconfigurability, and software controllability, all designed and
fabricated in STAQ facilities. However, the general approach to quantum
computing in the STAQ program is expected to confer to other physical platforms.
The STAQ program will co-design quantum algorithms to STAQ machines having more
than 50 qubits and gate fidelities well above 99% (including initialization and
measurement errors), thus reaching a regime where quantum computations will
challenge high-performance classical computers. STAQ will pursue several
families of quantum algorithms, including approximate optimization and
variational algorithms, quantum simulations of physical models in condensed
matter, broad classes of lattice gauge theory problems applicable to nuclear
physics, and quantum computer certification standards. STAQ will engage and
educate a broad base of users, students, and other researchers interested in
quantum computer science and engineering, with a vibrant visitors program to
stimulate collaborations and new areas of application exploration.

This project advances the objectives of Quantum Information Science and
Engineering at NSF in response to the National Quantum Initiative Act for the
continued leadership of the United States in QIS and its technology
applications.

This award by the Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of
Physics within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences is jointly
supported by the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.