* 2325521
* TRIAGE: Techniques for Resolving Intragroup Conflict to Advance Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tia Dumas, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,956.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Clemson University will test the effectiveness of novel approaches to educate
a new generation of conflict-embracing science, technology, engineering, and
math (STEM) graduate students. As the challenges tackled by STEM professionals
are increasingly complex and require wide ranging expertise, organizations often
look to teams to generate creative, innovative solutions. Accordingly, graduate
students entering today’s STEM workforce are expected to work on
interdisciplinary, cross-functional, and demographically diverse teams. Although
such teams have tremendous potential for innovation and creativity, diverse
teams are at an increased risk of team conflict. Existing tools for building
teamwork skills do not adequately address conflict management skills and rarely
focus on the graduate student population. This award is focused on developing
and testing new approaches to prepare graduate students as effective teammates
by building conflict management skills to facilitate effective teamwork when
they enter the workforce.

Drawing from proven science on conflict management, this project focuses on
developing a set of tools aimed at helping graduate students develop conflict
management skills, assess conflict in their teams, and identify interventions to
help their teams navigate conflict. Following their development, these tools
will be piloted and evaluated amongst Clemson University STEM graduate students
using an experimental approach. Once validated in the graduate population, the
tools will be expanded to Clemson University undergraduate and graduate students
across fields as well as students at Greenville Technical College. Students will
begin with a day-long training program focused on constructive controversy, an
approach aimed at improving teams’ ability to generate constructive, task-
focused conflict. Following the training program, graduate students will
participate in a novel dashboard-based approach to managing conflict in their
research teams. Using data generated from surveys of graduate students’ research
teams, dashboards will provide students with information about their team’s
conflict and other teamwork processes alongside targeted interventions to
implement within their teams. Once validated amongst STEM graduate students and
expanded to undergraduate students at Clemson and technical college students at
Greenville Technical College, the project will conclude with the creation of a
set of transportable team conflict tools, including training materials and the
dashboard’s interventions, which will be made accessible to the public online.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.