* 2325126
* SBIR Phase I:  Retrofit Dehumidifiers to Enable Greater than 50% Air Conditioner Energy Savings Via Elimination of Latent Loads
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Rawand Rasheed, HELIX EARTH TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Mara E. Schindelholz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,921.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the development of retrofit
dehumidification systems for air conditioners (AC) to reduce latent loads and
save more than 50% of the energy consumed by AC systems. Air conditioners
consume more than $230 billion in energy annually worldwide, accounting for more
than 4% of total global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. The goal of this SBIR
Phase I project is to develop a drop-in solution for existing AC infrastructure
to enable substantial reductions in energy use and operating costs for AC
systems. These drop-in dehumidification systems have the potential to save the
industry > $100 billion in energy costs and up to 1 gigaton of CO2 emissions
annually. The innovation developed in this project will help mitigate the
effects of global climate change, while simultaneously ensuring access to
affordable cooling systems globally by helping substantially reduce operating
costs for AC systems.

The intellectual merit of this project is in its utilization of a droplet
filtration method, initially pioneered for space applications. This filtration
method enables retrofit dehumidifiers that are powered by a liquid desiccant
spray reactor that enables high-rate, high-efficiency dehumidification. The
dehumidification approach in this project is differentiated from other state-of-
the-art methods on the market today due to the method of liquid desiccant
deployment, which enables high surface area contact between liquids and gasses.
The filtration method enables high-efficiency dehumidification by capturing
nearly 100% of fine droplets (<30 micrometers) at very low pressure drop (<100
Pascals) using three distinct filter length-scales. The meter-scale filters are
additively manufactured with millimeter-scale helical pores that enable low-
pressure-drop inertial capture of fine droplets, which are absorbed in the
micrometer-scale porous medium of the filters via capillary forces. These
filters enable dehumidifiers that operate 6-8x more efficiently than other
methods on the market today and have very high process rates, resulting in a
20-fold reduction in system volume compared to other technologies. This Phase I
project will mature the dehumidifiers from a lab-scale proof of concept to a
system prototype for a window-scale AC unit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.