* 2325475
* Interdisciplinary Scientific Immersion Program for entering PhD students
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Heather True, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 492,871.00

Graduate education in STEM typically focuses on diving deep into the details in
one particular field of study. Most graduate programs’ curricula do not include
opportunities to introduce trainees to other STEM fields because it would
increase their time in training. However, research that combines disciplines
drives much exciting discovery and innovation that often leads to new
technologies and products. It is important for scientists in different fields to
be able to communicate and work together to continue to drive the innovation and
development that impacts our society. The fact that most institutions offer a
wide array of STEM programs can be leveraged to bring trainees together with
their peers in other disciplines and create a path to new collaborations and
more breadth in scientific thinking with our next generation of researchers.
This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to Washington University will determine whether a short, immersive experience
that involves students from different STEM disciplines will enhance the cross-
discipline communication, critical thinking, and networking among young
scientists. The trainees will also develop skills in teamwork that are crucial
to success as a researcher in both academic and non-academic work settings. The
results will determine whether short, immersive experiences with trainees in a
variety of disciplines working in teams can have added value in preparing them
for interdisciplinary research and the workforce.

This project will immerse new graduate trainees in an interdisciplinary learning
experience which models the collaborative nature of research and can be broadly
utilized in STEM programs. Washington University has a breadth of bioscience
programs that will be combined to create an opportunity for new graduate
students to simultaneously develop their sense of community and belonging while
working towards key core competencies (critical thinking, teamwork, scientific
communication, career readiness) and establishing a wide network of peers in the
Interdisciplinary Scientific Immersion Program (ISIP). The overarching goal of
ISIP is to provide the framework to promote interdisciplinary knowledge and
research at institutions that offer discipline-focused PhD training. The
pedagogical method for ISIP is cooperative team-based learning, a methodology
that has demonstrated significant advantages for learning for all students with
the highest gains for those students from underrepresented backgrounds. The
program will involve a wide range of faculty as team co-facilitators, and
interdisciplinary student groups will work towards a common goal that will allow
for varied learning experiences and cross-discipline peer networking. The
developed program will be transferable to many types of STEM programs and
institutions. The assessment tools that will be utilized include pre- and post-
survey questions addressing self-assessment of confidence in: interdisciplinary
communication skills, literature-based research, articulation of hypothesis,
writing specific aims, and managing self and others. The added value of this
program to traditional STEM PhD programs will be in actively promoting
interdisciplinary thought and communication for new graduate students that will
be transformative for many in both their thesis work and career readiness.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.