* 2325222
* I-Corps: A Minimally Invasive Palpation Device for Intraoperative Tumor Detection
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Jinho Kim, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of intraoperative robotic palpation device that can significantly
improve the outcome of cancer treatment. A major problem that our device intends
to solve is that tumors with sub-centimeter in their size are difficult to
identify via preoperative imaging and during minimally invasive intraoperative
procedures. Our robotic palpation device can be deployed into the patient’s body
and quickly generate a tissue stiffness map at the pathologic region with a high
spatial resolution. By enabling precise and prompt detection of tumors,
regardless of their size, this technology can significantly enhance the outcomes
of tumor resection surgery. This technology has a wide range of potential
applications beyond intraoperative tumor detection. It has the capability to
identify diseased tissues, including fibrotic tissues, whose physical
characteristics have undergone alterations. Altogether, this cutting-edge
technology has the unparalleled ability to identify diseased tissues, providing
invaluable quantitative information to empower clinicians to confidently make
data-driven decisions about the most effective treatment strategies.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a robotic palpation device
that can help surgeons to detect tumors during minimally invasive robot-assisted
cancer treatment surgery. In open chest surgery, surgeons frequently rely on
manual palpation to detect tumors that may not be visible on imaging techniques,
such as X-ray, CT, or MRI, especially those small than 1 cm. However, a
persistent technical challenge involving the robot-assisted surgery is the
surgeon’s inability to touch and feel the tissues during the surgery. As a
result of the surgeon’s loss of tactile sensation, small tumors can remain
undetected, leading to incomplete tumor removal that can cause cancer
progression, recurrence, and metastasis. This innovation is a “robotic finger”
that can be deployed into the patient’s body during surgery and survey the
pathologic tissue areas to generate a tissue stiffness map that is correlated to
the presence of tumorous tissues that must be removed surgically. This
innovation will offer surgeons the ability to pinpoint all tumors with
substantially improved accuracy and resolution, ultimately leading to improved
patient outcomes and a reduction in cancer recurrence and metastasis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.