* 2325719
* RAPID: Monitoring microbial attenuation of toxins released following the East Palestine train derailment in Ohio
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Frank Loeffler, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

On February 3rd, 2023, a freight train derailment occurred in East Palestine in
the State of Ohio. Following the train derailment, various hazardous chemicals,
including butyl acrylate (BA), vinyl chloride (VC), and combustion by-products
(e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) from a ‘controlled burn’ of the
remaining VC and BA in the train cars, were released into nearby soils,
sediments, groundwater aquifer, and waterways including the Ohio River which
serves a source of drinking water for more than 5 million people. As of May 29,
2023, EPA and Norfolk Southern continue to 1) conduct air monitoring onsite and
in the surrounding communities and 2) clean up the derailment site by
excavating/disposing of contaminated soils and collecting/removing contaminated
wastewater. This RAPID project will test the hypothesis that in contaminant-
impacted areas, microbial communities will show measurable responses to the
release of toxins, and that these responses could inform about contaminant
degradation/detoxification processes and natural attenuation potential. To test
this hypothesis, the Principal Investigator (PI) and co-investigators from the
University of Tennessee (UT) Knoxville and the environmental consulting company
Microbial Insights in Knoxville (TN) will collect and test soil, sediment, and
groundwater samples from impacted areas and those not impacted by pollutants
released during the East Palestine accident. Specifically, the project team
proposes to combine measurements of biomarkers with complementary cultivation-
based efforts of microorganisms that are known to degrade the classes/types of
chemical pollutants that were released following the East Palestine train
derailment. The successful completion of this project has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of fundamental knowledge to guide
and inform the design and implementation of effective pollutant remediation
solutions at the East Palestine derailment site and in nearby communities.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of one graduate student and three undergraduate
students at UT Knoxville.

Following the East Palestine train derailment, various hazardous chemicals,
including vinyl chloride, butyl acrylate, other volatile and semi-volatile
organic compounds (VOCs and SVOCs), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),
etc. were released into nearby soils, sediments, groundwater aquifer, and
waterways including the Ohio River. However, to date, there has been limited
fundamental investigations of the fate and transformations of the hazardous
chemicals that were released into the environment three months after the East
Palestine accident. The overarching goal of this RAPID project is to establish
that microbial communities in impacted areas will show measurable responses, and
that these responses could inform about contaminant degradation/detoxification
processes and natural attenuation potential at the East Palestine accident site
and in nearby soils, sediments, groundwater aquifer, and waterways. The specific
objectives of the research are to 1) carry out time-series sampling of soils,
sediments, and groundwater in impacted and non-impacted (background) areas, 2)
conduct quantitative tracking of contaminant-degrading microorganisms, their
dynamics, and their activities in response to the contamination, 3) design and
conduct a targeted microcosm treatability study that demonstrates degradation of
contaminants by indigenous microorganisms, and 4) synthesize the collected
information and research findings to guide and inform the design of a site-
specific monitoring program. The successful completion of the proposed research
has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of new data
and fundamental knowledge to guide the design and implementation of site-
tailored monitoring protocols that could comprehensively assess the natural
attenuation and contaminant degradation/detoxification potentials of indigenous
microbiomes at the East Palestine site and in nearby communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.