* 2325593
* Social justice training in graduate engineering education through critical civic engagement
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sri Sritharan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,169.00

Engineers make decisions that inadvertently have impacts on society particularly
in the way they shape structural inequities, but these social justice outcomes
are often invisible in engineering education. The neglect of social justice is
especially troubling because history is replete with engineering projects that
have exacerbated inequalities. Previous approaches to enhance social justice
attitudes and beliefs are nascent in engineering and have primarily focused on
in-class curricula targeted at increasing awareness of inequities. Prior
research of the project team has shown that these approaches are important but
present limitations in their capacity to enhance social justice action. It is
hypothesized that learning about social justice in the classroom, in isolation
from communities and the injustices they face, is limiting. This National
Science Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to Iowa State
University (ISU) will test if engaging social justice curriculum in
collaboration with marginalized communities and civic partners changes students’
social justice attitudes and desire to act upon those injustices. This project
will encourage engineering students to think critically about some of the most
challenging social issues, i.e., racism, sexism, and other forms of social
inequities. This project proposes a model for social justice action. It
addresses the limitations of current educational interventions which overfocus
on changing social justice attitudes but not action. The project will directly
impact approximately 250 graduate engineering students.

This project closes the gap between social justice curriculum and the places
where social injustices take place through a new model called critical civic
engagement (CCE). CCE emphasizes community-driven collaboration wherein students
learn from both in and with marginalized communities and civic partners. The CCE
model will consist of ten modules implemented across four graduate engineering
courses at ISU during two consecutive semesters. The CCE curriculum will be
implemented in close partnership with marginalized communities and civic
partners. The CCE model posits that co-production and civic engagement are
foundational to social justice. If proven correct, this model will outline
specific steps to help graduate instructors create sites of social justice. The
pedagogical tools in this project will help bridge the power gap between
graduate education and the places where injustices happen. The CCE model’s rigor
will be reflected through improvements in the following student outcomes: (1)
critical consciousness in engineering, (2) moral development, (3) intersectional
consciousness, (4) personal beliefs about diversity, (5) self-assessment of
critical consciousness and curriculum, and (6) qualitative assessment of the
course.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.