* 2325378
* Travel: Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Qi Zhao, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides partial support to students from US institutions to
participate in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) in Vancouver, Canada, from June 18 to 22,
2023. The CVPR is the premier annual conference that attracts over 10,000
participants from all over the world and is widely considered the leading
conference in computer vision. The Doctoral Consortium is designed specifically
for Ph.D. students who are nearing graduation or who have recently graduated,
offering them an opportunity to present their research and receive valuable
feedback from experienced faculty and senior researchers. It is an ideal
platform for discussions on research and professional development, networking,
and career advancement. It aims to promote the development of students in STEM
and increase the number of researchers and educators in the field. Furthermore,
it plays a significant role in advancing the field of computer vision and
addressing critical problems that have the potential to benefit society as a
whole.

This project will provide group travel grants to support a diverse group of
approximately 25 students from US-based institutions, including those from
underrepresented groups and institutions and those who may not otherwise have
the means to attend the conference. The selection of participants and travel
support recipients will be determined by the 2023 CVPR Doctoral Consortium
chairs. The travel award will cover partial conference-related expenses such as
airfare, lodging, and transportation. The Doctoral Consortium will include a
poster session, interaction discussions, and small group mentoring. It will be
held in a hybrid mode to enable students and mentors with varying needs to
participate. The event will be diverse in terms of gender, ethnic background,
academic institution, and geographic location.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.