* 2325301
* Conference: NSF-NIH Joint Workshop on Foundational AI in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Carleton Kingsford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 04/30/2024
* USD 49,739.00

Methods and new techniques in artificial intelligence (AI) are rapidly being
developed, extended, and applied to challenging problems in biology. At the same
time, as new experimental methods, new data collection efforts, and greater
understanding are developed in biology, the class and scope of problems that are
amendable to AI approaches is growing. Extreme interest and rapid progress in AI
has also made the AI research landscape diverse and complex, with a number of
related, competing, and overlapping technologies and approaches being advanced.
This rich ecosystem is a boon to research and innovation, but it also makes
identifying threads and pressing problems more challenging. Thus, there is a
need to survey the current frontier of the interface between AI methodology and
biology and to chart future directions and challenges. We propose a 2-day,
online workshop to address that need. This workshop will host invited talks by
researchers working on foundational AI methods in biology. New directions and
connections between emerging AI methodologies and problems in biology and health
will be identified, synthesized, highlighted, and formalized. The workshop will
catalyze discussion and help set the agenda for future research in this area,
helping to launch new directions and solidify promising ones.

The workshop will consist of approximately 13 talks and 4 discussion sessions
over two days. Speakers will be selected based on their prior work and
experience with developing new foundational AI methodology that answers
biological questions. Speakers will be asked to focus on one or more of the
following foundational AI themes as related to biology and human health: (1)
Fairness and Social Effects of AI; (2) Federated Learning; (3) Generative Deep
Learning Models; (4) Scalability of AI; (5) Privacy and Security in AI; (6)
Method Optimization and Automated Algorithm Design; (7) Explainable AI and
Causality; (8) Active Learning and Automated Science; (9) Transfer Learning; and
(10) Incorporation of Prior Knowledge in AI. Though the workshop cannot hope to
deeply cover all these foundational aspects, we aim to cover as many as
possible. Speakers will connect these foundational computational techniques to
problems in biology in areas such as genomics, structural biology, drug
development, systems biology, biomedical imaging, neuroscience, and disease
forecasting. With permission of the speaker, the talks will be recorded and
distributed over the internet, and participants will be invited to contribute to
a publication that surveys the identified themes, directions, and challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.