* 2325599
* A Personalized Learning Model for STEM Graduate Education
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Goetz Veser, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Most U.S. graduate engineering programs traditionally follow a “one-size-fits-
all” approach that focuses narrowly on research skills, is slow to incorporate
industry trends, and defaults to training students for careers as university
professors. Further, students are often assumed to start at the same knowledge
level, thereby disregarding differences not only in academic preparation, but in
students’ background, including socioeconomic, sociocultural, prior work
experience, and professional development. Not accounting for these factors
negatively affects inclusivity. This National Science Foundation Innovations of
Graduate Education (IGE) award to the University of Pittsburgh will (1) break
the traditional one-size-fits-all approach to graduate STEM education by
creating and validating an approach focused on personalized learning, and (2)
generate the knowledge required to broadly deploy this innovation within and
outside the University of Pittsburgh. The approach will be piloted in Chemical
Engineering, where the impact on both students and faculty will be rigorously
assessed. The personalized approach directly addresses issues of inclusivity by
removing barriers to participation by underrepresented minorities. The
innovation of this project lies in the integration of its components into a
department-wide model that can be translated to any STEM field, directly
addressing a well-known challenge in the STEM community: diffusion of
educational innovations. That is, it does not rely on the personalization of a
single course or a particular focus on professional development. This project
will advance scientific knowledge on the connection between personalized
learning and student outcomes.

This project will create and validate a personalized learning model (PLM) for
graduate STEM education. It is guided by an overarching theory of change to
quantify the impact on both students and faculty. Key components of the model
include (1) establishing Instructional Goals for each student through learner
profiles, strength finders, and individual development plans, (2) defining the
Task Environment through one-credit, modular classes that provide flexibility
and content customization, along with a set of co-curricular activities
organized around industry, academia, and entrepreneurship, and (3) Scaffolding
the Instruction to provide pedagogy that leads to independence and mastery in
the students’ area of focus. Strategy (4), Assessment of Performance and
Learning, enables tracking of the students’ progression towards their
instructional goals, followed by guided (5) Reflection and Evaluation.
Qualitative and quantitative methods, both formative and summative, will be
employed, guided by internal experts in evaluation and assessment, by an
Education Innovation Advisory board, and by an external evaluator. The first
goal of the innovation is to create and deploy the PLM, and the second goal is
to provide the knowledge base to deploy this innovation beyond chemical
engineering to other STEM fields within and beyond the University of Pittsburgh.
Roger’s Diffusion of Innovation will be used to create and implement “how to”
workshops to disseminate findings within Pitt and beyond. Thus, a significant
broader impact is the development of a new approach to graduate training that,
once proven impactful, can be disseminated nationally across multiple STEM
disciplines.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.