* 2325631
* Design and Development of a Near Real-Time Community Crowdsourced Resilience Information System for Enhancing Community Resilience in the Face of Flooding and other Extreme Events
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* SUBHRAJIT GUHATHAKURTA, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,488,568.00

Communities along the coast are increasingly vulnerable to coastal hazards such
as flooding due to extreme weather events and sea level rise. In the US alone,
40% of the population lives in coastal cities and subjected to elevated risks of
such hazards. The probability of a flooding event in these communities is also
increasing with global warming. The proposed project will design a neighborhood-
scale Community Resilience Information System (CRIS-HAZARD) by leveraging
citizen science and community participation for enabling real-time data-driven
decision-making to make communities more resilient to flooding. CRIS-HAZARD will
support frequent bi-directional flow of information among communities, research
scientists, and decision-makers. The objective is to develop a platform that
facilitates the smart and connected city framework by engaging diverse
communities to improve the lives of all citizens, especially those who are
marginalized. The project is piloted in Pinellas County, Florida, in the Tampa
Bay region on the Gulf Coast of west-central Florida. This region’s geography
and low elevation make it especially vulnerable to climate change-induced
extreme weather events like flooding.

Unlike previous attempts at integrating data and models to predict flooding
events, the approach of CRIS-HAZARD is distinctive as this research pioneers the
integration of user-supplied data (crowd-sourced and social media) with real-
time flood prediction models and uncertainty analysis techniques, which is
expected to advance our understanding of risk and resilience in coastal
communities facing persistent flooding events. The initiative integrates the
expertise of research institutions, government agencies (Office of Emergency
Management or OEM), local stakeholders, and community engagement networks to
enhance community-based planning and policy decisions, promoting community
resilience. Furthermore, the project fosters customized resiliency planning at
the neighborhood level engaging citizen scientists as partners. It aligns with
the National Science Foundation's mission to provide transparent and accessible
information on risks and vulnerability, contributing to the development of smart
and resilient communities nationwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.