* 2325840
* Viral afterlife: Pandemic viruses as rich reservoirs of immunomimetic peptide fragments capable of re-assembly into pro-inflammatory supramolecular complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Gerard Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 09/30/2026
* USD 402,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: The knowledge of what makes a coronavirus a pandemic
coronavirus capable of causing a profoundly dangerous immune response is
inadequate. This knowledge gap remains a threat to multiple national interests,
such as health and economic prosperity. The central hypothesis in this work is
that a pandemic coronavirus is one that harbors peptide fragments that strongly
amplify immune responses, fragments that can be liberated even after the virus
is destroyed by the immune system. In preliminary data, artificial intelligence
methods are used to find fragments in 3 proteins in the SARS-CoV-2 virus (the
COVID-19 virus) that can mimic peptides from the host that amplify immune
activation. These preliminary studies found that these biomimetic viral peptides
capable of amplifying immune responses are strongly enriched in SARS-CoV-2
relative to ‘common cold’ coronaviruses. Moreover, these peptides from SARS-
CoV-2 but not corresponding analogs from ‘common cold’ coronaviruses can
organize into crystalline complexes capable of such amplified immune activation.
Such complexes amplify immune responses in diverse human cell types. The induced
gene expression pattern from an examination of ~30,000 genes matches well with
the COVID-19 gene expression pattern from the curated database in Kyoto. The
goals of this present proposal are: 1) to analyze all proteins of the
coronavirus using x-ray and immune activation experiments, and 2) to examine why
the Omicron variant is less toxic to hosts, based on first principles. The
research topics here are conducive to training for academic and industrial
employment. Research internships will be provided through underrepresented
undergraduate and veteran outreach programs. Results from this will be
incorporated into the PI’s advanced undergraduate/graduate classes.

Technical Abstract: The knowledge of what makes a coronavirus a pandemic
coronavirus capable of causing a profoundly dangerous immune response is at
present inadequate. This knowledge gap remains a threat to multiple national
interests, such as health and economic prosperity. The central hypothesis in
this work is that a pandemic coronavirus is one that harbors peptide fragments
that strongly amplify immune responses, fragments that can be liberated even
after the virus is proteolytically destroyed by the immune system. Artificial
intelligence methods were used to find fragments in 3 prototypical proteins (S,
M, a non-structural protein) in the SARS-CoV-2 virus that can mimic
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) from the host that amplify immune activation.
These preliminary studies found that these biomimetic viral peptides
(‘xenoAMPs’) capable of amplifying immune responses are strongly enriched in
SARS-CoV-2 relative to ‘common cold’ coronaviruses. Moreover, these peptides
from SARS-CoV-2 but not corresponding homologs from ‘common cold’ coronaviruses
can organize dsRNA commonly found in viral infections into nanocrystalline
complexes capable of amplified immune activation. Such complexes amplify immune
responses in diverse human cell types relevant to COVID-19. The transcriptome
from uninfected endothelial cells exposed to these complexes matches well with
the COVID-19 gene expression pattern from the curated KEGG database in Kyoto.
The goals of this present proposal are: 1) to analyze all proteins of the
coronavirus using x-ray and immune activation experiments, and 2) to examine why
the Omicron variant is less toxic to hosts, based on first principles of
electrostatic self assembly. The research topics here are conducive to training
for academic and industrial employment. Research internships will be provided
through underrepresented undergraduate and veteran outreach programs. Results
from this will be incorporated into the PI’s advanced undergraduate/graduate
classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.