* 2325632
* III: Small: Semantic Version Management in Data Lakes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Renee Miller, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Cushing
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Data fuels our economy. Those who work with data invest their efforts in finding
effective ways to extract knowledge and to handle its increasing size. This
growth is not only characterized by new sources of data, but also by data
replication - that is, the copying, integration, and modification of datasets
that creates new versions of datasets. Notably, consultants such as the
International Data Corporation estimate that most of the newly generated data
being used in business are versions of existing data. Understanding data
therefore requires a semantic understanding of data versioning, which becomes a
key ingredient in handling and managing data. This project will focus on
advancing the scientific understanding of data versioning and will fundamentally
contribute to any science or activity that uses data, which nowadays covers a
tremendous amount of all human activity. To advance open data science, this
project will lay the foundations for semantic understanding of data changes that
result in new versions of data and will introduce scalable tools to uncover and
explain data changes. This will contribute both to the development of effective
frameworks to handle multiple data versions within a data science pipeline as
well as to the design of systems that incorporate and manage data replication.
This work is expected to also benefit society by facilitating responsible and
open data science. Its solutions will be made publicly available and provided
alongside high-quality highly curated benchmarks that themselves will have
scientific value in allowing comparisons and settling scientific debates in
order to advance this important field. The project will also use aspects of
"responsible data science", aiming to ensure fairness, accuracy,
confidentiality, and transparency when working with data.

This project will develop a new paradigm we call semantic version management.
The vision is to enable users, with minimal upfront effort, to understand the
multitude of versions that typically reside in data lakes. The main objective of
the project is to enable data scientists who currently rely mainly on file names
to find the "right" version of a dataset to see and understand the changes
(cleaning, value imputation, integration, and others) that have been made
between datasets. The research methodology builds-on, integrates, and extends
work on scalable data discovery; program by example and data transformation
synthesis; and learning schema mappings from inconsistent and incomplete
evidence. This project will develop methods to support the semantic
understanding of data versioning, lay the foundations for studying data
versions, and establish new methods for evaluating and benchmarking data
versioning. Specifically, this project will address the following fundamental
research challenges: 1) recovering transformations done to data and explain how
one dataset differs from another version of the dataset; 2) efficiently finding
versions of a dataset from within a massive table repository or data lake; and
3) understanding the version history among a collection of versions and
constructing a graph that expresses the story behind the creation of the data
versions. Throughout the development, this project will also develop new
evaluation frameworks that not only consider the correctness of solutions, but
also their explainability. An important motivation for semantic version
management is to give users more trust in the data they are using. If they
understand the transformations used to derive one version from another, they can
better understand if a version meets the needs of their data science task. In
addition, new benchmarks will be generated and shared with the community to
encourage open science and allow reliable comparison with new or alternative
approaches to version understanding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.