* 2325048
* Collaborative Research: The influence of climate and tectonics on Miocene ecosystems and faunal evolution in the East African Rift, Kenya
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Christopher Poulsen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2025
* USD 378,295.00

A longstanding question at the intersection of Earth and Life sciences is what
roles, if any, do climate and tectonics play in the evolution of life? The East
African Rift is among the best places to study the influences of Earth processes
on the evolution of mammals. Here the regionâ€™s geologic and climate histories,
including the formation of the rift system that is the cradle of humankind, are
preserved in sedimentary rocks in a unique way. The team will investigate these
sediments, and the fossils they contain, to gain insight into ancient climate
and habitats that record the emergence of humans, their primate ancestors, and
African mammals over the last 25 million years. Our research will explore
relationships between tectonics, climate, and mammal evolution in the Turkana
Basin, Kenya using integrated field, laboratory, and modeling studies. New and
existing data will be combined to study the links between rift development,
climate change, and their respective roles in vegetation and mammal evolution.
The team will produce a tectonic model that reconstructs rift evolution in this
region of East Africa for the past 25 million years, and the tectonic model will
be integrated with climate-vegetation models of equal or better resolution.
Independent geological, geochemical, paleoecological, and paleontological data
will be used to validate these model outputs to distinguish the influences of
tectonics and climate on the evolution of Turkana ecosystems and mammals. The
project will also train several postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and
undergraduate students, and provide them with the opportunity to conduct field
work in Kenya.

This project seeks to test multiple hypotheses centered on questions regarding
the complex interplay of tectonics and climate on the evolution of mammals and
late Cenozoic terrestrial ecosystems. The team have designed an integrated
approach to explore the roles of continental rifting and global and regional
climate on the evolution of primates and other mammals in the Turkana Basin from
28 to 5 million year ago. A time-dependent, kinematic and dynamic tectonic model
for East Africa will be used to explore evolution of the entire Rift System. The
tectonic model will be integrated with an Earth system model coupled to a
dynamic vegetation model to test our hypotheses. The model outputs will be
validated with new proxy data from the Turkana Basin that includes
lithostratigraphy, radiometric dating, clumped isotope thermometry, plant wax
biomarkers, enamel isotopes, paleobotany, dental microwear, and ecometrics, that
taken together, enable independent reconstruction of the climate, tectonic, and
faunal evolution in the region. Our multidisciplinary, multi-institutional
project includes training opportunities for the next generation of scientists,
including training of three graduate students, four postdocs, and at least 11
undergraduates. Our broader impacts objectives are to recruit and prepare
students for careers in science, especially students from underrepresented
minorities in the Earth Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.