* 2325381
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Testing Evolutionary Models of Biotic Survival and Recovery from the Permo-Triassic Mass Extinction and Climate Crisis
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Adam Huttenlocker, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2026
* USD 328,756.00

The Permo-Triassic mass extinction (PTME, ca. 251.9 million years ago) was the
most catastrophic of the “Big Five” mass extinctions in Earth’s history. Massive
volcanic events likely triggered a runaway greenhouse, resulting in the loss of
about 85-90% of species globally. Studies over the last 20 years agree that
modern species loss rivals the PTME, making it a significant and underutilized
“deep time” study system that connects environmental change to functional
biodiversity. While past studies have focused on the external causes of the
extinction, this research will investigate ecosystem recovery from the PTME in
South Africa’s Karoo Basin. Awareness of which species and ecosystems were more
vulnerable or resilient to climate warming in the past is essential to guide
conservation management by predicting long-term biotic responses to future
environmental change.

This research will comprise a multidisciplinary geochronologic and
paleontological study of South Africa’s main Karoo Basin. We will assemble a
stratigraphic database of fossil vertebrate occurrences and investigate the
timing of vertebrate extinction and recovery relative to the geologic timescale,
and we will test whether pulsed shifts in ecological diversity correlate to
distinct climate events (e.g., the Early Triassic hyperthermal). To achieve
these goals, we will 1) Synthesize geochronologic age controls and identify the
precise position of the Permo-Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin; 2) Identify
shifts in ecomorphological and body size disparity within a novel high
resolution stratigraphic framework; 3) Elucidate the influence of higher-level
factors such as community structure on vertebrate diversity during the Early
Triassic climate crisis; 4) Emphasize public outreach through educational
theater in local South African languages (Puppet Planet), capacity-building,
permanent archiving of physical specimens and digital data for future study
(Virtual Field Trips, museum exhibit upgrades), and strengthening international
collaborations between the USA and South Africa. Our collaborative research and
outreach initiatives will raise awareness of the impacts of extreme
environmental instability on vertebrate functional diversity and size evolution
over time, with great value not only for understanding the PTME, but also
conservation efforts in our modern biodiversity crisis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.