* 2325444
* Creating Bold STEM Leaders Through Graduate Entrepreneurial Training
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Leila Daneshmandi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 09/30/2026
* USD 496,183.00

The National Academy of Engineering recommends instilling innovative and
entrepreneurial qualities in students as a part of their formal education to
address pressing problems and maintain global competitiveness in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Developing entrepreneurial
skills and an entrepreneurial mindset reinforces and complements the technical
skills, knowledge, and competencies traditionally acquired in STEM disciplines.
An interdisciplinary workforce trained in entrepreneurship skills will be well
positioned for the rapidly changing landscape of careers in STEM. This National
Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award to the
University of Connecticut will implement the Entrepreneurship Fellowship program
with the goal to progressively train STEM graduate students in entrepreneurial
skills, knowledge, and competencies through a unique framework of educational
and experiential opportunities. The entrepreneurial skills and diverse mindsets
gained through the program will help serve the fellows and broader society as
the fellows: lead scientifically innovative startups; hold research and
innovation roles at established companies, government, and academia; or enter
more traditional roles in the engineering workforce.

The Entrepreneurship Fellowship program consists of a framework of carefully
designated courses, programs, and activities to guide students in their
entrepreneurship fellowship journey as they learn, practice, and refine
entrepreneurial skills. Over the course of the one-year fellowship, students are
introduced to multifaceted and diverse entrepreneurship concepts through
experiential educational modules and are encouraged to develop entrepreneurial
skills and mindsets along with burgeoning entrepreneurial networks. The
objectives of the project are to build, pilot, test, assess, refine, and
validate the proposed fellowship program. Multi-level and multi-dimensional
assessment tools will be used to evaluate the program with formative and
summative data and to test, refine, and amplify its educational and
developmental values, and disseminate the details, outcomes, and impacts of the
pilot model to advance knowledge and understanding in entrepreneurship and
engineering education. Knowledge generated from this project could illuminate
future approaches to integrate interdisciplinary frameworks, pedagogy, and
leadership practices, and allow for wide implementation and test interventions
that could potentially narrow the gaps in STEM entrepreneurship pathways and
better prepare communities for present and future work opportunities.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.