* 2325832
* GP-IN: Connecting Opportunities for Research Experiences (CORE) in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Thulani Jwacu, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2025
* USD 843,830.00

There is an increasing need for trained geoscientists to tackle societally
relevant issues such as climate change, natural hazards, and energy resources.
Meaningful progress on these complex scientific and societal issues will require
a diversity of viewpoints and voices. However, the geosciences are one of the
least diverse STEM fields. The Science Museum of Minnesota (SMM) has developed a
program titled Connecting Opportunities for Research Experiences in the
Geosciences (CORE) to develop holistic strategies to create more inclusive
pathways in the geosciences. This project brings together two highly successful
groups within SMM: the St. Croix Watershed Research Station (SCWRS), a field
research station specializing in primary research in the geosciences, and the
Kitty Andersen Youth Science Center (KAYSC), a group that provides out-of-school
programming for hundreds of underserved youth each year with the goals of
building leadership and science communication skills, career readiness and
workforce development, and fostering appreciation of and confidence in working
with STEM. Bringing together these two areas of expertise, along with a
community network support of geoscience faculty and professionals, will create
an effective, long-lasting, and supportive pathway to geoscience careers.

CORE will be built around the KAYSCâ€™s STEM Justice framework, an ecosystem
learning model for engaging youth in STEM learning through a justice-focused
lens centered around solving real-world community issues. Youth will engage with
an ongoing SCWRS research project in paleolimnology focusing on the effects of
road salt on lakes in the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro region. Additionally, CORE
will build a Community Network of Support of geoscience faculty from regional
colleges and universities, as well as geoscience professionals from community-
based organizations; this will build a professional support network as program
youth take the next steps in geoscience programs or careers. Through the
application of the STEM Justice model, CORE will develop strategies to
inclusively introduce youth to geoscience research and networks, increasing the
likelihood that they pursue college or career pathways in the geosciences. The
three project goals are: 1) Train adult mentors/geoscience professionals in STEM
Justice practices; 2) Engage young people in a defined and meaningful research
project in paleolimnology; and 3) Provide young people with access to geoscience
undergraduate programs and careers. By training geoscience professionals in more
inclusive practices, engaging youth in relevant geosciences research, and
creating systems of support between these groups, we will develop and share a
sustainable, inclusive pathway for youth in the geosciences that will live
beyond this project and can serve as a model for other institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.