* 2325668
* Conference: Inaugural Tribal College and University CI Community of Practice Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Alfred Anderson, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,935.00

The Tribal College and University Cyberinfrastructure Community of Practice
workshop provides an opportunity for the IT Directors, CIOs, and other
administrators, IT staff or faculty at TCUs, who are geographically isolated
across the United States, to meet in person, exchange best practices, interact
with invited national cyberinfrastructure (CI) experts, and collaborate across
TCU CI initiatives, academic areas, and/or geographical regions. The workshop is
organized by the American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC) and led by
a program committee consisting of AIHEC, TCU and external experts.
Cyberinfrastructure topic areas expected to be addressed through both
presentations and in-depth panel discussions include CI Strategic Planning and
Academic Engagement, Cybersecurity and Technology, TCU Future Directions and CI
Funding Strategies. Workshop panelist and presenters come from the TCUsâ€™ IT
staff and faculty but also include external subject matter expects and research
and education community members.

The intellectual merit of the workshop includes the opportunity for TCU staff
knowledge and skill development focused on new and existing cyberinfrastructure
technologies in support of science and engineering applications relevant to the
tribal community. Given the important role the TCUs play in their communities,
implementation of capacity-building relationships with TCUs will enable them to
serve a similar function to their area K-12 schools and Tribal agencies,
advancing them through the adoption of the shared CI tools and resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.