* 2325361
* Collaborative Research: Mechanoregulation of Amnion Patterning through Activation of Bone Morphogenetic Protein Signaling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jianping Fu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 32,918.00

This project is to support the fundamental research to study amnion development
using a stem cell-derived human development model. As the innermost layer of the
fetal membrane, amnion plays a crucial role in mediating nutrient transportation
and producing a variety of cytokines that are important for maintaining
pregnancy. The insights generated by this project will advance our knowledge in
early human development. The methods will assist in the rational design of
three-dimensional stem cell culture systems for disease modeling, cell
replacement therapy, and reproductive medicine. This research will promote the
progress of fundamental science and advance maternal health. Outreach and
educational activities include high school and undergraduate curriculum
development, which will be achieved by offering hands-on research opportunities,
enrichment workshops, and mentoring program. Special emphasis will be placed on
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in the researched
activities.

The objective of this project is set to address the significant challenge in
understanding the mechanobiology governing amnion development during early human
development. This work will be the first attempt to guide the formation of stem
cell-derived multicellular tissues with tunable biomechanical environments.
Successful completion of the project will lead to new innovative platforms for
three-dimensional human pluripotent stem cell culture. The researched
quantitative morphological and gene expression characterizations will provide
valuable knowledge towards a better understanding on how mechanical cues control
amnion patterning and the formation of the human embryonic sac, and the
morphological and gene expression dynamics involved in this process. The
methodologies will be highly valuable for characterizing the development of
complex stem cell-derived tissues that resemble human embryos (embryoid) and
organs (organoid) in general. Mechanistic investigations researched in this
project will elucidate how bone morphogenetic protein signaling pathway and its
cross-regulations with mechanical signals regulate amnion development, and will
lay important foundations for advancing our understanding of the emergent self-
organizing principles and developmental mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.