* 2325750
* CMMI-EPSRC: A Novel Multifunctional Platform to Study Cell and Nuclear Mechanosensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Melikhan Tanyeri, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 479,413.00

Cells can detect and interpret mechanical signals, turning them into chemical
signals that impact important biological processes such as tissue development,
regeneration, and diseases. However, how cells sense and respond to mechanical
forces are not well understood. This project aims to explore how cells respond
to mechanical signals and how they pass these signals to neighboring cells,
helping us to better understand how mechanical forces shape our bodies. This
project will enable training of a diverse group of researchers and involving
them international partnerships. The project also involves efforts to recruit
more women and undergraduate students to participate in science and engineering,
and outreach activities to share information about biomedical devices and their
use in improving human health.

Mechanical forces play a critical role in many physiological processes including
cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, differentiation and morphogenesis
during tissue formation and organogenesis in development. However, how
mechanical cues are transmitted to neighboring cells and whether such
intercellular mechanotransduction leads to nuclear reorganization and changes in
gene expression in adjacent cells remains elusive. Using microfluidics, 3D
imaging, and machine learning, this project aims to develop a high throughput
mechanobiology platform capable of applying physiologically relevant mechanical
forces to single cells with high spatiotemporal resolution and imaging real-time
cell response to elucidate molecular mechanisms of intra- and intercellular
mechanotransduction. The platform will advance our understanding of how cells
respond to mechanical stimuli and help reveal molecular mechanisms that underlie
the transmission of forces from the cell periphery to the nucleus and
neighboring cells.

This research was funded under the NSF Directorate for Engineering - UKRI
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead Agency Opportunity (ENG-
EPSRC), NSF 20-510.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.