* 2325687
* Influences of Coherent Structures on Validity of the Constant Flux Layer Assumptions in the Unstable Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Heping Liu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 440,764.00

In many applications such as weather and climate modeling, it is assumed that
the transfer rate for scalars (i.e., scalar fluxes), including heat, water
vapor, CO2, and other greenhouse gases, is constant with respect to height in
the atmospheric surface layer, the lowest layer of the atmosphere. This so-
called constant flux layer assumption is also widely used in land-surface flux
measurements to quantify scalar fluxes to and from land surfaces. However, the
reported failure of this assumption implies that scalar fluxes measured and
modeled in the atmospheric surface layer are not equivalent to the fluxes across
the surface-atmosphere interface, leading to uncertainty in measured and modeled
fluxes in these applications. Despite the abundant studies on the roles of large
turbulent eddies (i.e., coherent structures) in contributing to scalar fluxes,
it is not well understood as to how large turbulent eddies contribute to changes
in fluxes with height in the atmospheric surface layer. The objective of this
project is to study what physical mechanisms regulate the attributes of large
eddies across height that lead to varying contributions to fluxes with height,
contributing to the failure of the constant flux layer assumption across a wide
range of atmospheric conditions.

By leveraging the existing facilities and as guided by flux budget equations, a
field experiment will be conducted over the large water body of Ross Barnett
Reservoir in Ridgeland, Mississippi, with a flux tower equipped with five levels
of eddy covariance systems and other instruments. The field experiment will
provide a unique dataset that minimizes the influence of advective terms and
enables more precise examination of the attributes of large turbulent eddies. A
combined approach of several analysis methods, such as fast Fourier transform,
wavelet transform, and ensemble empirical decomposition mode, will be used to
characterize the attributes of large turbulent eddies and their variations with
height across instability ranges. Quadrant analysis will be used to quantify
asymmetric flux contributions from sweeps and ejections of large turbulent
eddies, enabling an analysis of the underlying mechanisms that modulate changes
in fluxes with height. Further, such analyses will allow the study of mechanisms
that lead to different behaviors of height-varying fluxes for different scalars.
The field experiment will generate a unique dataset valuable for studying a wide
range of topics in micrometeorology, hydrometeorology, boundary-layer
turbulence, lake evaporation, water-atmosphere interactions, carbon emissions
from inland waters, water budget for freshwater management, and aquatic
ecosystems. An involved Ph.D. student will gain first-hand experience in
designing, preparing, and conducting micrometeorological experiments and learn
eddy covariance techniques, data analysis theories and tools, and many other
research skills. Mini-research projects using the datasets collected in this
project will be developed and incorporated into the curriculum of one
undergraduate course and two graduate courses being taught by the PI for
students’ term projects. Short films and presentations about the field
experiment and research findings will be disseminated in scientific conferences
and seminars as well as the PI’s department websites for diverse audiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.