* 2325416
* Collaborative Research: Network Control Systems Science for Graph Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Waseem Abbas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 240,417.00

Representing graph-structured data accurately and effectively is paramount for
developing machine learning systems and models capable of learning, reasoning,
and generalizing from such data, ubiquitous throughout natural and engineering
systems. Utilizing modern machine learning (ML) approaches to solve complex
computational tasks in networks relies on successful graph representation as
points in a finite dimensional vector space. This project offers a new paradigm
grounded in networked control system theory to represent graph data for graph ML
effectively. By modeling graphs as controlled networked dynamical systems, this
project designs graph representations with overall superior performance,
including expressiveness, task accuracy, scalability, computational overhead,
and broad applicability. The proposed control-based approach leverages the
interplay between network dynamics and the underlying graph structure, enabling
the design of powerful and expressive graph representations. This is achieved by
externally probing networks through signal injection at nodes and observing
their responses to decode the network structure, ultimately leading to superior
graph representations. Additionally, these methods establish fundamental
performance limits and guarantees for distinguishing graphs from each other
using control-based representations.

The proposed research brings substantial intellectual merits, including a
network control-based framework that generates graph representations suitable
for a wide range of graph machine learning tasks, such as graph and node
classification and link prediction. The project explores mechanisms to integrate
control-based embeddings with existing approaches and extend the methods to
complex networks, including time-varying networks and the fundamental graph
distinguishability problem. The direct impact of the proposed research is to
bridge the knowledge gaps in “control for learning” and improve data-driven
learning approaches in networks by leveraging the control-theoretic methods.
This alliance of control and network learning significantly advances network
learning and optimization with broad technological, economic, and societal
implications. The broader impacts are achieved through interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students, broad dissemination of research
results, and experimental data. The outreach activities include workshops
designed to prepare and inspire high school and minority students to pursue STEM
careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.