* 2325526
* I-Corps:  Anti-Fibrotic Self-Delivering siRNA Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Audrey Bernstein, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a potential therapeutic treatment that promotes healing with
significantly decreased scarring. Fibrosis and scarring are the accumulation of
excess extracellular matrix components, which is a pathological component of a
wide spectrum of clinical indications including scleroderma and fibrosis of the
heart, lung, liver, cornea, and skin. Approximately one-third of all fatalities
are associated with fibrotic outcomes, which represents a significant problem
and market opportunity. The initial focus of the proposed technology is corneal
and dermal scarring. Cornea and skin have a similar treatment modality by
administration of a topical solution. Cornea and skin may serve as model tissues
for studying the pathobiology of fibrosis in all tissues, and may lead to
expansion into other indications with fibrotic underpinnings such as pulmonary
fibrosis, non-Alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH), cardiovascular disease, and
neurodegenerative diseases.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a self-delivery siRNA
therapeutic treatment to prevent scarring and fibrosis. A genetic target has
been identified that slows pathology and supports regenerative healing of
wounded cornea and skin, two model tissues of fibrosis. Data show target
knockdown in corneal and skin wounding models promotes regenerative healing, a
type of wound healing with limited to no scarring. The current standard of care,
topical administration of steroids to wounds (cornea and skin), yields
unpredictable, mixed results, that vary widely between increased rates of
healing, no effect, or decreased healing rates. The proposed technology uses
topical administration of a siRNA that effectively penetrates cells and
functions as both an anti-inflammatory and anti-scarring agent for topical
wounds. The proposed therapeutic is optimized to penetrate tissues and is
designed to be efficacious for 2-3 months with a single dose, which may
revolutionize subretinal scarring and systemic fibrotic diseases. In addition,
in vivo results in small and large animal models demonstrate efficacy and also
present favorable safety profiles with no evidence of cellular/tissue toxicity,
which may lead to a treatment for scarring and fibrosis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.