* 2325755
* OPUS: Robustness and complexity: how evolution builds precise traits from sloppy components
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2024,03/31/2026
* Steven Frank, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 03/31/2026
* USD 246,762.00

Organisms often repair damage to their tissues and correct errors in their
physiology. Similarly, humans often try to make their engineered systems perform
robustly, recovering from damage and errors. This project develops the
similarities and differences in how natural biological processes and human
engineering build robustly performing systems. Understanding the principles by
which organisms are built to perform well provides insight into how things
sometimes go wrong and how disease develops. For example, our bodies have many
different mechanisms to protect against cancer. The time to failure for systems
with multiple protections follows the same pattern in both biology and
engineering. By understanding these general characteristics of robustness and
failure, we understand better how biological organisms are built, how they fail,
and how such principles apply also to human engineered systems. Prior studies by
this researcher and many other scientists have developed basic understanding of
the principles of robustness and failure. However, the ways in which these
insights apply to many problems in biology have not been developed completely.
This project will bring together the separate studies of the past into a more
complete synthesis. That synthesis will help us to apply what we know to a wider
range of problems. The synthesis will also help us to see more clearly what we
do not understand, identifying the challenges that need further study.

How do organisms actually make relatively precise traits from inherently
stochastic and often unreliable biological components? How does precision arise
from sloppiness? We know many pieces of the puzzle. Redundancy and extra
capacity provide backup. Robustness keeps organisms on track. Repair fixes
damage. Signal processing and control follow classic engineering principles.
These various mechanisms for regulating traits have important consequences for
evolutionary dynamics. For example, when a system corrects component-level
errors, the direct selective pressure on component performance declines.
Weakened selective pressure on components may cause those components to become
less reliable, maintain more genetic variability, or drift neutrally in design,
creating the basis for new forms of organismal complexity. To understand how
these pieces of the puzzle fit together, recent advances in engineering control
theory, computational machine learning, and artificial intelligence augment
evolutionary theory to provide a broad conceptual foundation. This project
builds on that modern conceptual foundation to synthesize diverse biological
theories and to unify a wide variety of biological observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.