* 2325739
* Development of advanced quantitative tools for laser radiation safety evaluation in laser urology
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Adam Maxwell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 11/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Laser lithotripsy is the most common procedure to treat urinary stones. In this
procedure, a small flexible endoscope is introduced up the urinary tract to the
location of a stone. An optical fiber is passed through the endoscope and the
tip is placed near the stone. High-energy laser pulses are delivered through the
optical fiber to the tip. The laser energy transmitted to the stone breaks it
into small pieces that can pass through the urinary tract. Recently, high-power
laser systems have been created that make the procedure easier, shortening
operating time and producing smaller fragments. However, the energy from these
high-power lasers turns into heat that can damage kidney and other tissues. The
FDA and the public health community do not presently have standard regulatory
science tools for safety evaluation of laser lithotripsy devices. The objective
of this project is to develop advanced tools to be used by industry, researchers
and regulatory groups to evaluate heating from these lasers to improve the
safety of future devices. This project will perform computer simulations and lab
experiments to identify how heating is impacted by different laser
characteristics. The project will create a database to identify safe power
limits, and guidance documentation for evaluating new devices. It will also
involve training future scientists and engineers in regulatory science, and
educating physician and medical student groups on these effects. The project
will support public health by reducing the risk of serious complications during
these procedures and introduce protocols for safe use.

Laser lithotripsy is the most common intervention for urinary stones, where a
laser fiber is passed through an endoscope to deliver pulsed laser energy
causing stone fragmentation. The recent introduction of high-power laser systems
has expanded the capabilities of laser lithotripsy. However, higher laser power
presents a risk of overheating the calyceal fluid and tissue. The impact of
various physical, biological, and operator factors on this thermal effect is
unknown. Furthermore, the biological sequelae from thermal injury to these
tissues are not fully characterized. The FDA and public health community are
lacking standard test tools, test protocols and guidance documents for laser
radiation safety evaluation of these technologies. The objective of this project
is to develop advanced quantitative regulatory science tools to evaluate
photothermal effects to the urinary tract during laser lithotripsy and improve
the safety of future devices. A computational finite-element model for laser
lithotripsy will be developed to simulate physical processes of laser-induced
heating, as well as laser, irrigation, and gravity induced fluid flow within the
urinary tract to determine the spatiotemporal distributions of heat and
pressure. The models will include realistic parameters of the biological fluids
and tissues. The models will be used to simulate clinically relevant scenarios
of laser lithotripsy to assess and predict thermal and pressure effects to the
tissues, and a database will be defined for relevant limits of the exposure
parameters required to produce bioeffects. Finally, guidance documents will be
produced for evaluating future devices and exposure scenarios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.