* 2325453
* Applying Cognitive Theories of Learning to Improve Graduate Training in STEM Communication
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Elise Demeter, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dorian Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,973.00

In order to successfully address the challenges facing the global community,
STEM researchers must possess the ability to convey their work to policymakers,
journalists, business leaders, the general public, and to other scientists. Yet
communication training in graduate STEM education remains inadequate,
particularly at public, non-flagship or minority-serving institutions. Though
STEM students graduate with a high level of expertise in their field, they often
lack the skills to share their work in an effective, clear, and culturally
sensitive manner that a general audience can understand. This National Science
Foundation Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) award to UNC Charlotte will
address this problem by creating and delivering an innovative STEM communication
graduate training curriculum that will test the hypothesis that foundational
training in cognitive science theories will improve students’ ability to
communicate STEM, and will lead to the development of a cutting-edge STEM
communication curriculum that will be made publicly available for other
institutions’ implementation. Participants in the program and students of the
resulting curriculum will become better collaborators, more confident in their
communication abilities, more competitive on the job market, and better equipped
to impact the general public with the significance of their work.

This project will recruit UNC Charlotte STEM graduate students, who will be
randomized into one of two groups in order to test the effectiveness of
providing versus not providing education in cognitive science theories in a STEM
communication curriculum. Group one will participate in a foundational short
course devoted to theories of human cognition relevant to communication (e.g.,
information processing, choice framing, decision-making, and cultural impacts on
cognition), before launching into five sequentially-delivered STEM communication
short courses. Group two will participate only in the five STEM communication
short courses. These courses will be non-credit bearing and delivered in a
hybrid format, and will address topics such as non-scholarly writing, speaking
to lay audiences, and communicating with diverse teammates. Raters blind to
group assignment will assess students’ mastery of learning outcomes based on
individual course capstone projects. Students will also participate in
experiential learning events with community members and industry professionals,
which will allow them to demonstrate their knowledge and skills in a field
setting and to engage the public in STEM topics. Attendees will be surveyed to
assess students’ communication skills. The data provided by the blind raters and
the event attendees will be used to answer our educational research question,
which evaluates the hypothesis that students undergoing the foundational
cognitive science training will demonstrate better STEM communication learning
and skills than students not receiving cognitive science training. The project
curriculum, implementation guide, and results will be shared publicly so that
STEM educators and researchers, learning scientists, and the public can access
the findings and implement the curriculum. The dissemination of this innovative
approach to STEM communication graduate training will support transformative
improvements in graduate STEM education.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.