* 2325095
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE Communications Society School Series Boston, USA Event on 6G Communication and Wireless Technologies (IEEE ComSoc School Boston)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Josep Jornet, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The main goal of the 2023 IEEE ComSoc School Series Boston, USA Event on “6G
Communication and Wireless Technologies”, June 5-9, 2023 is to educate
participants on key findings and open problems in the field of 6G-enabling
technologies. Lectures and activities will be led by an outstanding cohort of
international cross-disciplinary experts from academy, industry, and government.
The school program is expected to include talks, hands-on activities, demo
sessions, industry career development opportunities, extramural visits, as well
as student-centric competitions (i.e., best student poster award). The school is
set to illustrate the state-of-the-art of 6G tech, and to open doors to
technologies beyond 6G, still at an early stage of exploration, such as
molecular communications and quantum networking. The school is to be held in
June 2023 in Boston, USA, a city famous for its top academic institutions and a
world-renowned hub for technology advancement and trailblazing innovation.

This award will support 20 students in the United States to attend 2023 IEEE
ComSoc School Series Boston, which will be held in Boston, USA, on June 5-9,
2023. Attending such high-quality and internationally recognized educational
event on 6G wireless systems is extremely valuable for future researchers and
engineers. 6G is only some 5 years away, which, incidentally, is roughly the
average time for completing a Ph.D. program in science and engineering. Students
will not only be exposed to the state-of-the-art in the field, but they will
also experience various interactive demo and lab sessions, present their own
research results. The students will have the opportunity to interact with peers
from institutions worldwide, meet with leading academic and industry researchers
in the field, as well as take part in discussions that are likely to shape the
future of the field. The travel grants will target senior undergraduate and
graduate students who will substantially benefit from attending this conference
but have limited travel funds. Priority will be given to underrepresented
student groups in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.