* 2325775
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Inference of Phylogenetic Trees and Networks under Multispecies Coalescent with Hybridization and Gene Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Julia Chifman, American University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 196,861.00

The DNA of every organism retains a trace of its evolutionary lineage, and as
the DNA is copied, new genetic variations are introduced. Researchers analyze
patterns in DNA sequences to piece together organisms' evolutionary histories,
and the estimation of these relationships has diverse applications. Examples
include characterizing the evolutionary patterns of metastatic colorectal cancer
or determining the relationship between different viral strains. The
evolutionary history is often represented by a phylogenetic tree that displays
the ancestry and descent relationships among organisms; however, genetic
information is not always transferred vertically, and in these cases, the
relationships should be represented by a network. For example, two viral genomes
can co-infect the same host cell, leading to the exchange of genetic segments,
called recombination, and thus contributing to their diversity. Additionally,
organismal evolution occurs at two distinct levels: at the level of individual
genes and at the level of species, which constrains the histories of the
individual genes. Accurate estimation of evolutionary trees and networks is a
major problem in mathematical and statistical inference since the precision of
their estimation has a direct impact on fields such as epidemiology, forensic
medicine, biosecurity, and cancer biology. The main objective of this project is
to improve the scalability and accuracy of current methods and develop new
methods for inferring phylogenetic species networks. The project is a
collaboration between the American University and University of Florida and
offers valuable educational and outreach opportunities. Specifically, graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in phylogenetic methodologies as part
of the process, resulting in a vertical transfer of knowledge. The work for
inferring species-level relationships from multigene alignments are specific to
models that simultaneously account for variability in individual gene histories
due to processes such as incomplete lineage sorting, gene flow, hybridization,
and recombination. The focus is on site-based species methodologies, with the
goals of (1) improving quartet species inference and scalability; (2)
implementing inference of rooted species trees from rooted triples; (3)
developing more efficient site-based methods for identifying hybrid species or
recombination events without the need for an outgroup; and (4) implementing
site-based species network inference from quartets and 4-taxon networks. To
achieve these goals, the PIs will extend multiple mathematical ideas from Markov
models in the single gene tree setting to models under coalescent and gene flow,
such as leaf transformations and a measure based on paralinear distance, which
so far have not been formally described, tested, or implemented under the
species tree model. The method for hybrid species identification is based on
deriving functions whose ratio approaches the ratio of the mixing parameter,
which is distinct from current algebraic methods that look for vanishing
polynomials over networks. As a result, this work contributes to the
mathematical, statistical, and biological sciences, and has the potential to
spark new discussions in the theoretical and computational communities. A
complete software package implementing our site-based species-level inference
methods will be freely available to the empirical phylogenetics community.

This project is jointly funded by the Mathematical Biology Program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and Systematic and Biodiversity Science
Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.