* 2325392
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Predicting Molecular Interactions to Stabilize Viral Therapies
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Sapna Sarupria, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 567,653.00

Non-technical Description: Many vaccine production and delivery systems remain
dependent on a cold chain requirement, which prevents millions of people from
receiving vaccines annually. To increase the availability of current and future
vaccines, the vaccine cold chain needs to be eliminated. While sugars and
bulking agents are being explored to increase the thermal stability of viral
vaccines, the cold chain is still the main method to stabilize viral vaccines.
This is not only an issue for developing countries; proper temperature storage
of vaccines is also a challenge in the US, with an outbreak of influenza having
been potentially linked to improper vaccine refrigeration. A more standard and
promising method to stabilize vaccine formulations is to add stabilizing
excipients. With excipients, vaccines can be stored under refrigeration
conditions. However, this approach has suffered from both a lack of
generalizability and the absence of a fundamental understanding of the mechanism
whereby stabilization is achieved. Empirical evidence has identified several
excipients such as sugars, amino acids, and bulking agents like gelatin,
dextran, and cellulose that help to stabilize proteins/viruses in both wet and
dry formulations. In addition, it has been demonstrated that complex
combinations of excipients (mixtures) are often used in final formulations.
Experimental observations suggest that many of the excipients help to structure
water and/or replace hydrogen-bonding interactions with the surface of the
protein/virus to provide stability. However, most of the work published in this
area has been empirical and experimental in nature and would be difficult to
perform at the scale needed to elucidate the subtle ways in which molecular
structure affects water structure and thus stability. In this project, a
combination of experiments, modeling, and machine learning will be used to
identify molecular features/motifs that impart this stability and use this
framework to discover excipient mixtures for vaccine formulations. This approach
has the potential to shift the paradigm for vaccine formulation â€“ allowing for
tailoring of formulations based on knowledge of the virus itself, rather than
through an iterative, Edisonian process.

Technical Description: In this research, the team will use molecular dynamics
simulations and machine learning in concert with a panel of experimental
techniques to identify and understand the key molecular motifs needed for
excipient molecules to create a stable virus-containing formulation. The
interactions of both viruses and excipients with water is a critical design
parameter for the creation of stable formulations; however, the complexity of
these interactions represents a vast parameter space that is difficult to
deconvolute and not suited to traditional materials design. This DMREF program
will combine experimental measurements of excipient-virus interactions with a
rapid computational scheme to design stabilizing formulations to enable the
minimization of cold chain requirements for viral vaccines. The stability of
viruses and other proteins is directly connected to interactions with water.
However, the complexity of the available interactions has prevented bottom-up
prediction. A materials design protocol will be developed that predicts how
molecular motifs such as hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions give
rise to the structuring of water and correlate with changes in virus stability.
During the project, high school and community college student will be exposed to
graduate level science and their interest piqued towards future careers in
science and engineering. The goals of this project will be to (1) attain a
comprehensive protocol for testing the potential effects of a new excipient
molecule on virus stability and (2) use the resulting data to develop a machine-
learning algorithm to enable the predictive design of more complex excipient
formations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.