* 2325121
* Robust and Generalizable AI Models for Label-free Cellular Organelle Identification
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cho-Jui Hsieh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 219,087.00

Light microscopy is an essential research tool for characterizing cell's
internal organs, known as organelles. Unfortunately, it is often challenging to
experimentally label these structures for visualization without substantially
disturbing the cells. Recent studies have shown that artificial intelligence
(AI) can virtually label organelles in microscope images. Despite the promising
potential, AI techniques have not been widely used due to the complicated AI
training processes and requirement of large training data. To overcome such
obstacles, this project will develop two groundbreaking AI image translation
features. First, the research team will implement a transfer learning technique
that allows the AI model to apply its previous learning experiences to new
tasks, reducing the need of training images. Second, the research team will
develop an adaptation mechanism to ensure accurate and consistent predictions
across different imaging conditions, enabling model transfer and sharing between
different laboratories. This new bioinfrastructure will provide scientists with
a valuable tool for visualizing organelles and important biological processes
within living cells. The project will support education and diversity through
the recruitment of underrepresented researchers.

Light microscopy is an essential research tool for characterizing cell's
internal organs, known as organelles. Unfortunately, it is often challenging to
experimentally label these structures for visualization without substantially
disturbing the cells. Recent studies have shown that artificial intelligence
(AI) can virtually label organelles in microscope images. Despite the promising
potential, AI techniques have not been widely used due to the complicated AI
training processes and requirement of large training data. To overcome such
obstacles, this project will develop two groundbreaking AI image translation
features. First, the research team will implement a transfer learning technique
that allows the AI model to apply its previous learning experiences to new
tasks, reducing the need of training images. Second, the research team will
develop an adaptation mechanism to ensure accurate and consistent predictions
across different imaging conditions, enabling model transfer and sharing between
different laboratories. This new bioinfrastructure will provide scientists with
a valuable tool for visualizing organelles and important biological processes
within living cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.