* 2325267
* eMB: Enhancing Mathematical Models to Investigate the Influences of Climate Change on Zoonotic Spillover
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Pranav Pandit, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 265,000.00

Most infectious disease outbreaks involve transmission from animals to humans,
known as zoonotic spillover. Several studies provide evidence that climate
change can influence the frequency and occurrence of zoonotic spillover.
Nonetheless, current mathematical models have largely overlooked the effects of
climate change on zoonotic spillover. By enhancing the modeling approaches, the
researchers of this multidisciplinary project seek to understand what challenges
zoonotic pathogens must overcome to transmit from wild animal hosts to humans or
other animals, how climate change can reduce these challenges and make it more
plausible for zoonotic pathogens to live within and between new species, and
what kinds of environments have a higher likelihood of zoonotic spillover in the
view of climate change.

The research team will use decades of weather, wildlife population, and zoonotic
disease data to identify significant variables that can be incorporated into the
models and to accurately estimate epidemiological predictors of spillover (e.g.,
the force, speed, and direction of disease spread and the basic reproduction
number) as functions of significant weather and environmental factors. The
numerical simulations of the calibrated models will help the researchers
elucidate the underlying mechanisms governing the ecology of zoonotic disease
and predict possible influences of climate change. Furthermore, this study
builds on the existing wave theory of pathogen and population dispersal to
advance the theoretical knowledge of traveling and stationary waves, including
their existence, uniqueness, stability, and asymptotic behaviors. The analytical
and computational tools, template codes, and tutorials for enhanced modeling and
simulating zoonotic spillover will be released on a GitHub page dedicated to
this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.