* 2325467
* A Value-Driven Multi-Sector Stakeholder Decision-Making Framework to Support Disaster Resilient Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Lu Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 84,196.00

This project provides a framework to solicit multi-sector stakeholder values
related to decision-making to improve community disaster resilience. It will
help decision-makers prioritize resilience strategies by showing them
systematically and quantitatively how much value stakeholders will gain from
different strategies. This will lead to higher levels of satisfaction among the
stakeholders and enable more collaborative decision making in disaster
resilience. It will also help decision-makers better communicate the decisions
involved in resilience investments with the public and make these investments
more transparent. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve community disaster
resilience, which will save lives and reduce economic losses in the future.

The goal of this project is to improve collaborative decision making towards
more resilient communities through an innovative value-driven framework. To this
end, the specific objectives are to: (1) identify and understand multi-sector
stakeholder value systems on disaster resilience, (2) systematically aggregate
the value systems of multi-sector stakeholders while accounting for social
influences, (3) measure the value of alternative disaster resilience decisions
to multi-sector stakeholders based on their aggregated value priorities, and (4)
inform decision-makers on collaborative decision making in building more
resilient communities for wider impact. This research will advance theories and
methods in the interdisciplinary disaster literature as well as stakeholder
theory with a new paradigm for conceptualizing and measuring the value of
resilience decisions to multi-sector stakeholders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.