* 2325146
* eMB:  Mathematical Classification of Complexity in Population Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* John Nagy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

As Darwin famously observed, life is a struggle with various limiting resources
constantly inhibiting its growth. With unlimited nutrients and space, a single
E. coli cell can multiply into the size of planet Earth in two days. In reality,
population growth is a complex nonlinear process influenced by environmental
cues and constrained by numerous factors. All cell growth is dependent upon the
availability of various essential nutrients and space. The complex dynamics of
life is thus shaped by ubiquitous multiple resource limitation (MRL) from gene
expression up to the global ecosystem level. Such dynamics may be described in
the forms of nonlinear mathematical models based on laws of conservation that
govern nutrient limitations. These models may embody rules of life that exhibit
emerging systematic properties applicable to multiple temporal and spatial
scales. Discovering such rules is the goal of this team of researchers. This
project will generate a variety of biological and mathematical modeling
resources for the scientific community. The project will produce uniquely
trained graduate students and undergraduates with experiences in integrating
studies across ecology, evolutionary biology, and applied mathematics fields.
The research will further advance society's ability to predict, design and
engineer controllable population dynamics in laboratory and natural settings. In
addition, the project's intimate association of modeling with experimental work
affords the scientific community an opportunity to develop both modeling and
experimental approaches in synchrony to better understand the complexity
observed in experiments.

Motivated by and based on complex time series data sets from existing and
ongoing experiments of flour beetle (Tribolium) populations, it is anticipated
that this proposed work will address one specific and compelling question about
how the MRL shapes the spatiotemporal organization of life. More specifically,
the investigators seek to classify complex population dynamical patterns
according to three main stages: 1) the transient and seemingly chaotic dynamics
characteristic of the initial exponential growth stage that may be subject to
influence by random factors to 2) the stable intermediate growth stage, and 3)
final or asymptotical growth stage. It is expected that new hidden interactions
will emerge between organisms and these stages due to competition for shared
limiting resources, leading to complex and highly nonlinear properties that are
rare under a single resource limitation concept but could lead to catastrophic
problems in real-world ecosystems. Understanding the rules of behavior of these
emergent properties consisting of the nutrient state of living individual,
living systems, their environments and interactions will help the society to
identify early-warning signals and formulate control strategies to address the
issues of resilience and sustainability in evolving environments. The main
objective of this proposal is to formulate a family of MRL population growth
models, validate them via experimental data and understand their complex
dynamics with the help of emergent mathematical theories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.