* 2325090
* Student Poster Competition &amp; Networking Breakfast at ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress &amp; Exposition (IMECE); New Orleans, Louisiana; 29 October to 2 Novemb
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Wenbin Yu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This grant provides funds to support travel for 40 students who are currently
working with Principal Investigators through NSF funding from the Directorate
for Engineering (ENG) or Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs
to present at a special poster session at the 2023 ASME International Mechanical
Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE), to be held in New Orleans,
Louisiana, from 29 October to 2 November 2023. These funds will also facilitate
a breakfast networking event for rising researchers and junior faculty that is
expected to be attended by 400 participants. The networking event will be open
to all eligible conference attendees. Consideration in the poster travel award
selection process will be given to the inclusion of members of underrepresented
groups, diversity of institutions that the students represent, and diversity of
programs within engineering. The award will benefit the nation through the
education of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce better prepared to
provide transformative solutions to the challenges of their chosen fields. This
participation support is expected to benefit students' professional, scientific,
and technical development as they present their NSF funded research projects at
the largest mechanical engineering conference in the nation. Attendance at the
conference will provide the students a wonderful opportunity to learn about the
engineering profession and state-of-the-art research in their fields via access
to technical and professional development talks by domestic and international
speakers. Students will enhance their communication skills through lively
discussions of their work with the top researchers in their fields. The
participants will also have an opportunity to attend many technical
presentations, join the keynote and plenary sessions featuring technological
pioneers, and network with potential mentors, colleagues, and employers. The
breakfast networking event will provide an opportunity to students and faculty
alike to delve into longer discussions about career opportunities and
trajectories with senior faculty and industrial representatives, who will serve
as facilitators and mentors.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) in the Directorate for Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.