* 2325015
* Conference: Nobel Prize Summit 2023: Truth, Trust, and Hope
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Emi Kameyama, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,990.00

The National Academy of Sciences, in partnership with the Nobel Foundation will
host the second Nobel Prize Summit: Truth, Trust and Hope on May 24-26, 2023.
This will be a hybrid meeting, with in-person component held in Washington, DC.
The second Nobel Prize Summit will explore misinformation and disinformation in
the context of the broader information ecosystem looking at the global impact of
information technologies in nature and society. The Summit will bring together
Nobel Laureates, leading scientists, business leaders, writers, artists, and
young innovators to share insights, challenges, and solutions around trust and
information. With a positive narrative and the accelerating prevalence of
artificial intelligence, Big Data, and other emerging information technologies,
the Summit will explore the challenges and opportunities of democratization of
knowledge and information, the dilution of expertise and authoritative facts,
and the erosion of trust. The Summit will also tackle the intricacies of
balancing between top-down government regulations and bottom-up, community-
driven innovative ideas that can foster global peace, stability, and prosperity.
A Proceedings of a Summit with a synopsis of key messages will be prepared by a
designated rapporteur in accordance with institutional guidelines. This event is
a follow on to 2021 Nobel Prize Summit: Our Planet, Our Future on April 26-28,
2021, which included more than 21,500 unique visitors and 38 Nobel laureates as
a virtual Summit.

Nobel Prize Summit: Truth, Trust and Hope aims to facilitate a forward-looking,
solutions-focused dialogue that shapes our collective understanding of our
reliance on science, knowledge, and information; and strengthen understanding on
the complexities of the global information ecosystem, and the adverse
implications and risks of misinformation and disinformation. The 2023 Nobel
Prize Summit is envisioned as a three-day event to reach both an in-person and
remote global audience, including an open public session on May 24, more focused
technical sessions on May 25 in partnership with other organizations (by-
invitation only), and follow-up events on May 26 geared towards education
initiatives in the Washington, DC area and across the globe. The Summit plans to
feature approximately 30 Nobel Laureates, together with approximately 30
additional international scholars, thought leaders, decision makers, and early-
career professionals, identified by a Summit Steering Committee co-chaired by
the NAS President and the head of the Nobel Foundation. The intended audiences
include Nobel Laureates, experts from government, the private sector, academia,
non-governmental organizations, international organizations, early-career
professionals, and students interested in addressing Summit topics, including
opportunities to engage underrepresented populations in the global dialogue. The
Summit hopes to motivate governments, nongovernmental organizations, and a
global audience to work together to raise awareness, minimize threats to experts
and institutions, and contribute positively to global public discourse on
critical issues of trust and information.

This project is funded by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communication, and
Impact (SoS:DCI) program and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which is committed to funding research and practice with continued
focus on investigating a range of informal STEM learning experiences and
environments that make lifelong learning a reality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.