* 2325011
* Workshop: Developing Community in Engineered Living Materials; Bozeman, Montana; 13 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Robin Gerlach, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2023
* USD 39,794.00

Engineered Living Materials (ELMs) are an emerging class of materials that have
additional or unique functionalities resulting from the inclusion of living
cells on or within the material. ELMs are expected to provide improved
sustainability in material development, manufacturing, and use. For instance,
using living cells as (micro)factories would facilitate generation of desirable
materials from sustainable inputs, such as the production of biopolymers from
simple sugars or waste materials. Currently, the development of ELMs is hindered
by limited exchange of findings, ideas, and innovations between academic and
industry teams working in this area because ELM programming does not have a
dedicated conference. A major challenge is that participants in this new field
span many research communities, and thus established conferences only assemble
small cross-sections of the ELM community. This grant supports two meetings to
bring together ELM community to exchange ideas, challenges, and solutions that
move the field forward with the goal of establishing an ELM conference series on
an annual or biannual schedule.

This grant supports two meetings. The first is an evening meeting adjacent to
the Materials Research Society Spring conference to assemble attendees and
discuss the priorities for the one-day summer ELM workshop. The second meeting
is a one-day workshop which will bring together teams working in ELM research
across the fields of materials science, engineering, microbiology, synthetic
biology, as well as social, legal and ethical considerations. Academic and
industry participants are expected. The workshop will feature invited speakers,
small working groups, and moderated discussions to define priority research
areas, identify central challenges and potential solutions, and define the needs
of this emerging community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.