* 2325419
* Microcirculation and oxygen transport through the diffuse-domain lens
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hector Gomez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 320,155.00

This project aims to investigate how the complex flow and transport processes
that occur in microvascular networks regulate vessel remodeling. By integrating
a novel computational model with high-resolution imaging data, the project will
help unveil mechanisms underlying both structural adaptation of blood vessels
and the crucial role of oxygen transport in tissue function. This project will
lead to a better understanding of the relationship between blood flow, vascular
remodeling, and oxygen transport that may lead to advancements in wound healing
strategies, tissue engineering approaches, and the development of artificial
organs. The research program will involve graduate and undergraduate students
and outreach efforts based on creating an interactive visualization of the
circulatory system for local high school students.

Vascular networks undergo structural adaptation driven by mechanical and
metabolic cues, including vessel growth, shrinkage, and pruning. Microvascular
networks undergo rapid and significant changes, making vascular remodeling a
critical element of the flow and transport dynamics. While the circulatory
system has been extensively studied, the flow and transport processes that occur
within microvascular networks and their influence on vascular remodeling are
poorly understood. In particular, the role of three-dimensional geometry,
transvascular and extravascular flow in blood dynamics and oxygen transport on
microvascular networks that are undergoing remodeling has been understudied
partially because of limitations of existing computational methods. To bridge
this gap, a unique computational method based on integration with in vivo
imaging data through the diffuse-domain approach will be developed in this
project. The model will lead to new fundamental understanding of the flow and
transport processes that control structural adaptation of microvascular
networks. This research has significant implications in diverse disciplines,
offering a valuable tool to explore the intricate flow and transport processes
in microvascular networks and their role in different biological phenomena,
including wound healing and tissue regeneration. The project may also lead to
advances in drug delivery and organoid development. The project will also use
the data obtained from 3D simulations to produce an interactive visualization
using a video game engine that will be presented in a local High School.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.