* 2325317
* Biosensing of chromatin packing in live cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

In order to pack a two-meter-long DNA molecule that contains the genetic code of
an organism into a several-micron sized nucleus, the molecule compacts into a
dense structure called chromatin. Some parts of chromatin display a more open
form called euchromatin, which is characteristic of high gene expression, while
others exhibit a more densely packed chromatin called heterochromatin.
Currently, there is no biosensing technology capable of sensing the conversion
from heterochromatin to euchromatin and back in real time, which is a critically
important question for understanding how cells function and how the human genome
is regulated. Thus, the goal of this project is to develop a method for dynamic
biosensing of chromatin packing in live cells and to achieve this without
employing external markers that can affect cell function and, as a result,
chromatin dynamics. This will be achieved by using properties of scattered
light, which carries information about the object it is scattered by, even if
the structure of the object is so tiny that regular microscopes cannot resolve
it. An important part of this project will be an educational outreach program to
share the technology with underrepresented groups and K-12 students. This
outreach program is designed to reach K-12 educationally disadvantaged students
from local neighborhoods with predominantly ethnic-minority student populations.

The novel label-free technology for dynamic biosensing of chromatin packing in
live cells, proposed in this application will address fundamental unsolved
problems in genetics and epigenetics. It should help to answer a poorly
understood question of how signal transduction pathways directly communicate
with chromatin to change the epigenetic landscape. It can also facilitate a
novel synthetic biology biosensing approach as chromatin can serve as a sensor
of metabolic changes during early development. It should also have important
implications in public health, including chromatin changes in cancer or the role
of epigenetics in infectious diseases. The approach will advance both
engineering and life sciences and will be based on a combination of the
principles of fractal sensing, since it is known that chromatin in live cells is
organized as a fractal with heterochromatin and euchromatin domains exhibiting
different fractal dimensions, and coherent confocal light absorption and
scattering spectroscopic microscopy. The proposed approach is motivated by the
new fundamental insights that self-similar properties of the chromatin fractal
are reflected in the chromatin light scattering spectra, and these spectra can
be continuously and rapidly recorded creating a 3D dynamic map of chromatin on a
multitude of spatial and temporal scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.