* 2325415
* Role of Msh2-Msh3 in determining outcomes in pathways of DNA metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jennifer Surtees, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

The DNA mismatch repair (MMR) pathway functions as a spellcheck when cells make
copies of their genome, preventing errors and thereby reducing mutations and
increasing the stability of the genome. However, in the presence of specific DNA
sequences, particularly repetitive elements, mismatch repair activities get
altered. These changes, which are poorly understood, promote mutations instead
of preventing them and compromise genome stability. This project will identify
key molecular changes in the behavior of mismatch repair proteins that lead to
the switch from genome stability to instability. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in this project using cutting-edge genetics, molecular
biology, and biochemical techniques. The project will also involve high school
students from Buffalo Public Schools, with a student population that is ~80%
black, indigenous or people of color. The activities will promote STEM education
and encourage awareness of careers in science. The project will also engage K-12
students in classroom workshops and the general public in science-related
events, such as Genome Day.

Although MMR is well-characterized, there are key gaps in our mechanistic
understanding of appropriate and aberrant Msh2-Msh3-mediated MMR, which result
in replication error correction and triplet nucleotide repeat (TNR) expansion,
respectively. This research will address unanswered questions about both
pathways. Msh2-Msh3 binds to insertion/deletion loops in MMR and to DNA
secondary structures in TNR expansions, indicating that distinct DNA structures
lead to the differences in Msh2-Msh3-mediated outcomes and result in genome
stability or instability. The aims include identifying allosteric changes within
Msh2-Msh3 upon binding to MMR versus TNR DNA structures, using cross-linking
mass spectrometry (XL-MS), and identifying interaction interfaces between
Msh2-Msh3 and downstream MLH protein complexes in the presence of MMR or TNR DNA
structures. Genetic approaches will also be used to determine the functional
relevance of protein regions identified by XL-MS. The combination of in vivo and
in vitro approaches will provide a fuller view of the context that influences
the balance between Msh2-Msh3-mediated genome stability and instability. The
outcomes will contribute to our understanding of MMR initiation and signaling
via Msh2-Msh3 and MLH complexes and how it can go on the wrong path in the
presence of alternative DNA structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.