* 2325748
* Soft Materials Friction at Smaller Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Pham, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 78,038.00

Although macroscale friction has been studied for centuries, the mechanism for
sliding on soft surfaces, such as rubbers and gels, remains elusive. Moreover,
when the size scale of contact between soft surfaces becomes small, liquid-like
characteristics arise and it is unclear if solid or liquid descriptions are
appropriate, limiting the design of soft surfaces. This award supports
fundamental research that overcomes current challenges in measuring and
describing friction of soft materials at the microscale. In addition to
promoting scientific advancement, this new knowledge is important for a broad
range of applications towards national health and prosperity. For example,
insights from this work are expected to afford design guidelines for soft
biomaterials, resulting in advanced biotechnologies and healthcare. Knowledge is
also expected to offer routes to designing low-friction coatings to mitigating
energy losses due to frictional drag for manufacturing or transportation
applications. Additionally, the project will provide opportunities to educate
and train graduate and undergraduate students in the cross-disciplinary areas of
micromechanics, surface science, and materials science, through research in the
PI's lab, with a focus on underrepresented students in STEM.

Macroscale friction of soft materials is often assumed to be mediated by
microscale contact points, arising from surface asperities. Therefore,
universally predicting friction arguably requires understanding the behavior of
single microscale junctions. Although research has consistently shown that
friction is related to normal loading, contact area, dwell time, and velocity,
it is unclear how it is described as the length scale is decreased. At small
scales, near the so-called elastocapillary length, surface tension becomes
critical and liquid-like characteristics are expected, leading to large out-of-
plane deformations and capillarity. To characterize how the above parameters
relate to friction force and surface deformation, the PI will utilize an
experimental method that combines lateral force measurements using an AFM with
in-situ imaging of cross-sections via confocal microscopy. A model silicone will
be used, allowing for systematic tuning of the modulus and elastocapillary
length. Experiments that control the normal loading, velocity, dwell time, and
interfacial tension, while measuring the contact area, out-of-plane
deformations, and friction force, are anticipated to reveal when friction is
described by solid and/or liquid-like mechanics. A map of static friction
thresholds and kinetic friction mechanisms, such as smooth sliding or stick
slip, will be generated and new knowledge will be applied to more
comprehensively predict micro and macroscale friction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.