* 2325078
* Collaborative Research: New mathematical approaches for understanding spatial synchrony in ecology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Karen Abbott, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 424,879.00

Understanding what drives ecological dynamics is an important challenge, with
difficulties arising both in measuring ecological populations and identifying
the relevant dynamical interactions. Given this, a useful approach is to base
ideas on measurements that have the most information, even when the accuracy is
not great, which suggests using dynamics that vary both in space and time. This
proposal builds on this premise to develop models from statistical physics
combined with data obtained from remote sensing. The underlying correspondence
between ecological dynamics and statistical physics models is accomplished by
coarse graining the ecological data and using models that permit only a small
number of states of the population. This approach complements more traditional
mathematical approaches based on dynamical systems and is well suited to crude
data. The overall goal will be to predict the features that either facilitate or
prevent synchrony in dynamics across space through time. This will yield new
understanding of ecological dynamics with potential for improving conservation
and agricultural practices.

The overall goal of this project is to develop novel mathematical approaches for
spatio-temporal dynamics in ecological systems, with a focus on relevant time
scales. Understanding the processes that have led to spatial synchrony in
ecological populations across space and at multiple temporal scales is a
substantial challenge, made more urgent by the need to understand and predict
the impacts of a changing climate. Most of the longstanding mathematical tools
for ecological dynamics focus on asymptotic behavior, but real ecological
systems are likely strongly influenced by transient behavior. In addition,
ecological data are often very noisy, generating substantial uncertainty to
which our methods much be robust. The Investigators will apply novel and highly
complementary quantitative methods to questions about the origins and
consequences of ecological synchrony. First, the Investigators will use the idea
of Ising universality – well established in statistical physics but severely
underdeveloped for its potential biological applications – to consider
synchronization in a detail-independent manner. The Investigators will then
apply modern machine learning techniques to better understand the details of how
actual synchrony patterns arise, using remotely sensed orchard data as a case
study. Mechanistic models of intermediate complexity will serve as a bridge. By
connecting the simplified but universal Ising model description with the data-
intensive machine learning methods the Investigators seek to validate, improve
and better understand both approaches to understanding ecological synchrony.
Synchrony and spatial patterning are central to conservation biology and public
health, and uncovering universal rules for pattern formation will open a path to
new insights in these fields.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of
Environmental Biology (DEB) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO),
Population and Community Ecology Cluster (PEC).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.