* 2325720
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Empathy and AI: Towards Equitable Microtransit
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Munindar Singh, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 476,011.00

This Smart and Connected Communities - Integrative Research Grant (SCC-IRG)
Track 1 project will develop and evaluate smart, community-supported solutions
for improving efficiency and equity in public microtransit systems. Poor transit
service in small cities and towns around the US severely challenges the everyday
lives of their many disadvantaged residents. Although public microtransit, which
provides point-to-point service in small vehicles, has recently emerged as a
promising solution, it remains ineffective at accommodating the rising demand
without additional resources (vehicles and drivers). This project seeks to
improve system performance equitably, through increased ridesharing and shifting
flexible trips to off-peak periods. To this end, it will investigate techniques
to motivate microtransit users to act prosocially (volunteer to shift oneâ€™s trip
time to accommodate the high load of work trips, cooperate with the request to
walk more to share a ride with a disabled user, reciprocate after learning that
one previously benefited from another user) by evoking feelings of empathy
towards other community members. Through a program dedicated to commuters, this
project will also provide reliable and stress-free transportation to
disadvantaged workers and students. These innovations will result in fewer
unserved microtransit trip requests and cancelations and therefore lead to
quality-of-life improvements, including reduced wage loss and missed medical
appointments for riders. The prosocial acts motivated through this research will
strengthen community membership, emotional safety, and sense of belonging. This
project has the potential to benefit the thousands of small US communities that
lack access to employment, health care, and other critical destinations.

The awarded research will create new paradigms for facilitating prosocial
behavior in sociotechnical systems, moving away from traditional pricing
mechanisms and incentives. Empathy-building messaging based on real-time user
information and powered by artificial intelligence (AI), will enable and
motivate prosocial behavior in microtransit at a low cognitive burden while
accounting for individual needs and preferences. To increase ridesharing and
operational efficiency, microtransit algorithms will be developed for the
operation of a first-of-its-kind hybrid system that integrates a commuter
program for work and school trips on a fixed, routine schedule with both on-
demand and other trips scheduled in advance. This project will engage with both
governmental and nongovernmental organizations to understand stakeholder needs
and improve stakeholder acceptance of the technology and will advance our
understanding of the contributions of community-based organizations and
education in the success of smart and connected communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.