* 2325765
* Scholarships and Mentoring to Advance Retention and Training in Support of Low-income  STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2029
* Joanna Cielocha, Rockhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Nasser Alaraje
* 09/30/2029
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Rockhurst University, a private liberal arts university located in the
urban core of Kansas City, Missouri. Over its 6-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships for 20 full-time undergraduate students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, or physics. First year students will
receive up to four-years of scholarship support and transfer students will
receive approximately two-years of scholarships. The project aims to increase
student success by using a cohort model and leveraging enhanced student support
mechanisms. Students will benefit from an extensive network of alumni and
industry contacts to help encourage persistence in STEM fields and strengthen
their professional network. In addition, a central component of the project is a
faculty and peer mentoring program centered on diversity, equity, inclusion, and
mental health training.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
objectives of this project are to: 1) recruit and enroll 20 total students into
two cohorts, 2) increase student support in these cohorts with a peer and
faculty mentoring program, 3) increase network connections with alumni and
industry contacts to promote STEM careers, 4) increase 1-year retention and
4-year graduation rates for students in these cohorts, and 5) disseminate
knowledge on how the cohort model impacts retention, graduation, and post-
graduation placement in STEM workforce or graduate school. Cohort models have
been successfully used in higher education to help students succeed but often
are not tailored for low-income students from underrepresented populations at
private liberal arts institutions, where the price of tuition is often a
significant barrier for low-income students. This program will allow scholars to
benefit from an inclusive and supportive campus community which will increase
the likelihood of persistence in STEM careers after graduation. This project
will also identify if a faculty and peer mentoring cohort model, combined with
other university supports, impacts 1-year retention and 4-year graduation rates
for biology, chemistry, and physics scholars. The faculty mentor diversity,
equity, inclusion, and mental health training will be assessed to understand if
this training, combined with discipline-specific mentoring, can positively
impact students' success, and increase their sense of belonging. The project
will be evaluated using surveys and other established measures for both students
and faculty mentors. Results of this project will be presented at national
meetings and submitted for publication in peer reviewed journals. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.