* 2325484
* GP-IN: BUILDING A PATHWAY TO GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION USING DRONES
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ruby Broadway, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2026
* USD 792,398.00

Dillard University, and HBCU in New Orleans, is uniquely poised to engage in a
place-based approach to understand and train pre-college students in key
regional geoscience environmental challenges. The Pre-Freshman Earth Science
Summer program will be a foundational and hands-on experience in this exciting
category of geoscience education. The idea is that students will become
geospatial scientists for the summer. Students will be exposed to experienced
role models, and as a centerpiece activity, will explore applications of drone
technology to the geosciences within their community. The primary goal is to
expose, motivate, stimulate, and encourage thus increasing the number of
students from structurally excluded groups receiving degrees, and pursuing a
geosciences degree and entering the geoscience workforce. In light of recent
climate events, New Orleans is a model testbed to engage and interest students
in growing, ongoing geoscience related environmental issues. Utilizing the Gulf
Coast as a backdrop, this project will center on experiential approaches to
environmental teaching and research, infusing GIS mapping, geometry/calculus,
earth science and drone analysis, to improve and advance undergraduate STEM
education pathways into the geosciences.

Students who have graduated from high school in metropolitan New Orleans and the
surrounding areas as well as students from out of state will be selected to
participate in an 8-week Pre-Freshman Earth Science Summer Program. These
students will engage in four courses with multiple hands-on activities embedded
within each. A capstone or highlight of the program will be the Introduction to
Drone Technology Course which will serve to integrate all course topics (GIS,
geometry/calculus, earth science) within an interdisciplinary activity-based
format. The proposed activities are designed to: 1) build students' interest and
capacity to engage in a geoscience-focused STEM career pathways; 2) introduce
drone technology and their relevance to understanding earth and geosciences; 3)
motivate and increase the participation of students from structurally excluded
groups who major in earth science/geoscience; and 4) empower students from
diverse backgrounds with scientific knowledge and skills in the geosciences.

This project is co-funded by NSF's Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership in
Diversity Program (GOLD-EN), the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to strengthen STEM
undergraduate education and research at HBCUs, and the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities Excellence in Research Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.