* 2325446
* IGE: Integrating Data Science into the Applied Mathematics PhD: Generalized Skills for Non-Academic Careers
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sanlyn Buxner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,985.00

This National Science Foundation Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) award
to the University of Arizona will revolutionize the graduate program in Applied
Mathematics (AM) by integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) and enabling non-
traditional research careers in National Laboratories (NLs) and Industrial
Laboratories (ILs). AM is a versatile science that plays a crucial role in
cutting-edge research across all STEM disciplines. By infusing AI into AM, this
research project team aims to take the ongoing AI revolution to new heights,
solving emerging national and global challenges. The Applied Mathematics
Graduate Interdisciplinary Program at the University of Arizona (AM@UA) will
serve as a testing ground for this innovative graduate training model, in
partnership with NLs and ILs. The overarching goal is to create a pipeline of
researchers equipped with the skills needed to address complex issues and foster
solutions that benefit society as a whole. By modernizing the AM curriculum and
aligning it with national security needs, we not only advance the field of study
but also attract and retain a diverse group of students, including women and
underrepresented minorities, to pursue non-academic STEM careers. This project
will provide a blueprint for other AM Ph.D. programs nationwide, forging a path
towards a diverse, competitive, and future-ready workforce capable of thriving
in the era of AI.

The AM@UA project is driven by the vision of transforming STEM graduate
education through an integrated approach that bridges the gap between classic AM
and novel AI disciplines. The project seeks to understand and address the
challenges of crossing disciplinary divides between academia and non-academic
STEM domains. With the current national focus on areas of priority, we aim to
explore effective strategies for crossing these divides to meet the growing
demand for specialized skills. The proposed social science research will
evaluate the effectiveness of these approaches and delve into the underlying
processes responsible for their success. The project will introduce innovative
triadic collaborations involving a PhD student, their university advisor, and a
co-advisor from a national or industrial laboratory. This collaboration model
will offer long-term research opportunities and internships, nurturing students'
expertise in both traditional and contemporary AM, including data science and
AI.

At its core, the project will generate new knowledge in STEM graduate education,
advancing the field by integrating AI into AM to create a workforce capable of
tackling AI-driven and mathematics-enabled challenges. Through its emphasis on
diversity and inclusion, the project aims to attract and retain a talented pool
of students, ensuring they are well-prepared for a variety of non-academic STEM
careers. By collaborating with esteemed partners like Raytheon and Department of
Energy laboratories, the project team will further bridge the academic-industry
gap, facilitating seamless transitions for graduate students between these
settings. The outcomes of this project will pave the way for generalized models
of graduate applied mathematics workforce training, applicable to other AM Ph.D.
programs and national and industrial laboratories. Ultimately, this endeavor
will make significant contributions to society by nurturing a diverse and
globally competitive workforce equipped to address the most pressing challenges
of today.

The Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) program is focused on research in
graduate education. The goals of IGE are to pilot, test and validate innovative
approaches to graduate education and to generate the knowledge required to move
these approaches into the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.