* 2325516
* 2023 Nanoporous Materials and Their Applications Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Rimer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 11/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

The 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Nanoporous Materials and Their
Applications: Expanding the Horizons of Porous Materials Design and
Applications, and the associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS): Leveraging Order
and Disorder in Nanoporous Materials are being held at Proctor Academy (Andover,
New Hampshire) from August 2-8, 2023. The combined GRC/GRS will support
registration expenses for approximately 26 student and postdoc attendees from
U.S. institutions to focus on new developments in the field of nanoporous
materials, including novel materials and their potential application to a wide
range of commercial technologies in areas as diverse as chemical manufacturing,
petroleum and natural gas refining, electronic materials, and medical
applications. Student and postdoc participants will also benefit from
interactions with senior leaders in the field and related networking activities
designed to highlight career opportunities related to nanoporous material
technologies. NSF's Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division
of Materials Research supports stipends for registration fee and/or travel
support for some early-career participants at this conference because of its
relevance to their respective programmatic scope.

Technical Summary

The Nanoporous Materials and Their Applications GRC/GRS will focus on new
developments in the field of nanoporous materials. Porous materials, such as
zeolites, metal-organic frameworks, covalent-organic frameworks, porous carbon,
and related materials, are heavily utilized in todayâ€™s most dynamic and
diversified research fields. The conference, with support from NSF's Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, addresses
important new findings related to the invention of novel materials,
characterization of their unique properties, and the use of these materials in
emerging applications involving catalysis, separations, gas storage, and other
processes of commercial and environmental importance. The program addresses
these topics through invited lectures, poster presentations, and general
discussion focused on linking fundamental understanding to potential
applications. Emphasis will be placed on intermingling different classes of
nanoporous materials. The program also balances theoretical and experimental
approaches to addressing questions related to structure and applicability.
Beyond the technological aspects, the conference seeks to gather leading and
emerging scientists in this field and bring them together to share ideas and
foster new collaborations. With respect to this larger goal, the GRC seeks to
provide a common language for our diverse student body; to raise the comfort-
level of our student/postdoc participants; and, through these efforts, to
develop a tightly-woven community held together by a common interest in
nanoporous materials. The accompanying GRS that is dedicated to and organized by
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers will aid in the active
participation of this new generation of scientists. The collegial, retreat-like
atmosphere of the conference, with exciting invited lectures, which are
complemented by lively poster sessions, as well as communal dinners,
opportunities for informal gatherings, and mentoring panels, provides a venue
for scientists from different disciplines to brainstorm together and promotes
cross-disciplinary collaborations in the various research areas represented.
Additional efforts have been made by the organizers to encourage the
participation of underrepresented minorities and women. At this meeting, 32% of
the invited speakers and discussion leaders are women. In addition, an informal
power hour focusing on the career development of women in science will be
included.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.