* 2325081
* Planning: Beyond Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Julie Brigham-Grette, Alaska Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 99,999.00

The Arctic is warming four times faster as a result of climate change than any
other region, but the impacts of this warming are not well known beyond the
local communities in the region. The Alaska Pacific University (APU) will
organize a one-year planning project to further develop relationships with four
Indigenous communities along the Alaskan Yukon River who are experiencing
environmental and social impacts from the climate crisis. The Beyond Ice project
aims to amplify the local community voices along the reach of the Yukon by
sharing their stories of resilience, challenges of living in drastically
changing conditions and visioning of a future through this transition. The
emerging paradigm of knowledge co-production is the fulcrum for all parts of
Beyond Ice; from project design to implementation and evaluation. The
partnerships involve the villages of Eagle, Nulato, Russian Mission, and Nunam
Iqua which span the heart of Alaska from the interior to the Bering Sea. With
this planning grant, Indigenous community members, artists, scientists, museums,
and evaluators will develop plans to co-produce concrete outcomes, envisioning:
(1) interactive community art exhibits based on local and Indigenous
perspectives (2) educational art experiences at Anchorage Museum’s Northern
Perspectives Festival, and (3) a STEM education program featuring K-Adult
curricula. The planning process will build critical partnerships required to
design and implement a viable co-production model rooted in equity and
inclusion. This planning grant will support development of tangible frameworks
aimed at stories through photography, sound, video, and documentary methods in
order to engage in multiple ways of knowing and to examine, support, and empower
multiple community members, elders, and especially young people.

The goal of collaborations between Indigenous communities, scientists and
museums is to provide rapid dissemination of ongoing research studies and
highlight the co-production of knowledge for more effectively communicating this
invaluable work to the public. Beyond Ice will ultimately provide Yukon Arctic
Indigenous communities with a platform to share Indigenous perspectives beyond
their borders. Beyond Ice’s inclusive process supports multiple community
members, elders, and young people, empowering each to engage in the co-
production of knowledge highlighting Indigenous observation of the changing
Arctic.

This award is co-funded by the Office of Polar Programs in the Directorate of
Geosciences and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) Program in the
Directorate for STEM Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.