* 2325477
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Accountability for Central Bank Digital Currency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Giulia Fanti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 98,723.00

Today, several central banks worldwide are actively exploring the deployment of
a centrally-banked digital currency (CBDC). A (retail) CBDC is central bank
money that is (a) digital in nature, and (b) widely accessible to the public.
Some of the proposed benefits of CBDCs include greater flexibility in
implementing monetary policy, improved financial inclusion, and more efficient
money transfers at lower fees. However, many fear that CBDCs will make it easier
for cybercriminals to attack the financial system. For example, a CBDC might
make it easier for malicious users to steal central bank money by spending the
same digital token in two places. These security concerns are commonly addressed
with algorithmic and cryptographic advances, often at the cost of serious
performance degradations. The project’s novelty lies in exploring an alternate
approach to CBDC security: accountability. That is, if a cybercriminal
misbehaves in a CBDC, the underlying protocol should be rich enough to prove,
cryptographically, who was the culprit. The project’s broader significance and
importance is that it can impact the design and development of secure-by-design
CBDCs.  

The project studies accountability at the consensus and application layers of a
canonical CBDC. At each layer, the project first modifies existing algorithms
(e.g., consensus, anti money laundering restrictions) to provide provable
accountability. These modifications require innovations in distributed systems
and/or cryptography. The project also studies the fundamental performance costs
of accountability, both theoretically and in practice. The performance cost of
these algorithms is evaluated empirically in implementations, which are
integrated with OpenCBDC, an open-source CBDC implementation that was developed
and maintained by the MIT Digital Currency Initiative in collaboration with the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.