* 2325313
* Multispacecraft Study of the Spatio-Temporal Variability of Solar Energetic Particles (SEP) Profiles in the Inner Heliosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Bala Poduval, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 558,790.00

Solar energetic particles (SEPs) are particles that are accelerated from the Sun
in energetic events, such as solar flares and coronal mass ejections. They can
move at relativistic speeds and when directed to the Earth, can cause space
weather-related issues for human technology as well as radiation risks to
humans. This project aims to gain better insights on SEP characteristics –
including intensity, flux, and spatio-temporal evolution in the inner
heliosphere. The research products will be made publicly available and the work
is led by women. Undergraduate students will be mentored.

The project investigates how the near-Sun characteristics of solar energetic
particles (SEPs) and their spatio-temporal variability help determine their
origin, acceleration and propagation in the inner heliosphere, and constrains
modeling of the seed population from which they arise. Data sets from NASA’s
Parker Solar Probe and Solar Orbiter will be used. Additionally, the Energetic
Particle Radiation Environment Model (EPREM) will be used for simulating the SEP
events and the Current Sheet Source Surface (CSSS) model used for mapping the
PSP locations back to the Sun for establishing the magnetic connectivity. The
three objectives of the study are: Obj 1: Obtain SEP Time Profiles (intensity,
integral flux, fluence, spectral index and composition) at multiple locations in
the heliosphere and investigate their temporal variability. Obj 2: Model
Comparison - use the knowledge gained in Obj 1 to constrain the parameters of
EPREM simulations of SEP transport in the steady solar wind and heuristic models
of shocks and switchbacks. Obj 3: Preparation of AI-ready Data and Data
Reconstruction using algorithms developed using techniques of artificial
intelligence and following the recommendations of Poduval et al. 2022 for AI-
ready data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.