* 2325460
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Dynamic Learning in Comparative Courts: A Cross-National Analysis of Judicial Decision Making in Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Ali Masood, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 27,711.00

Common law intermediate appellate courts have typically functioned well out of
the limelight and out of public scrutiny. In recent years, however, the number
of appeals within common law judiciaries have significantly increased while the
number of cases heard by High Courts has remained relatively stable. In light of
burgeoning caseloads, the intermediate appellate courts effectively serve as the
court of last resort for the vast majority of judicial appeals. This project
develops, assesses, and advances a new and innovative theoretical framework on
the dynamic transmission of information between two tiers of courts across the
judiciaries of Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. This study
represents the first comprehensive assessment of hierarchical influences on
judicial decision making within a comparative context. Specifically, this
project explores hierarchical interactions between lower intermediate appellate
court judges and their High Court counterparts in Canada, the United States, and
the United Kingdom. The comparative focus of this project presents scholars,
policymakers, and practitioners with exciting, innovative, and new opportunities
to explore how ideological and institutional differences within judicial systems
and different tiers of the judiciary can influence decision making. This project
also contributes to a broader understanding of courts in a comparative context
by illustrating that scholars cannot easily assume that frameworks developed for
American courts are automatically transportable to other countries. Beyond
contributions to the academic sphere, the proposed project has broad policy and
social impacts. Understanding how judges behave in this dynamic decision making
process is necessary for understanding how law and policy is developed and how
institutional designs seemingly condition judicial decision-making behavior.

The extensive data collection, both quantitative and qualitative, for the
project will facilitate the sharing of a vast database of information on
appellate courts and hierarchical responses to Supreme Court precedents for a
variety of future analyses. The database of intermediate court decisions
assembled for this project provides a valuable supplement to the National High
Courts Database. The combination of new and reliable data on two tiers of the
courts has the potential to foster extensive new analyses for academic faculty,
students, and legal professionals. By providing comparable data on the
intermediate courts over a substantial period of time, this study will create a
rich resource that will enable future research on judicial policy making in a
variety of settings. Such data will benefit both established scholars as well as
their students including doctoral students throughout related disciplines
seeking data for comparative judicial dissertation projects. This project also
incorporates the insights gained from in-depth interviews with judges to provide
a more nuanced understanding of the way judges understand their approach to
decision making. These resources hold significant promise for many analyses
beyond this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.