* 2325761
* Atmospheric Chemistry Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Fundamental Chemistry and Societal Changes; Sunday River, Maine; July 30-August 4, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Joel Thornton, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports the 2023 Gordon Research Conference on Atmospheric
Chemistry. The theme of the conference is “Fundamental Chemistry and Societal
Changes: Shaping Air Quality and Climate from the Molecular to the Planetary
Scale.” This conference brings together researchers from universities,
government laboratories, and private research institutes, to promote the
discussion of information and ideas on topics of contemporary interest in
atmospheric chemistry. The workshop concentrates on the latest developments in
the field, including the fundamental understanding of chemical processes from
the molecular level to global impacts on Earth and space.

The intellectual merit of this symposium lies in bringing together leaders and
scholars in experimental and modeling studies covering a broad range of research
in the field of atmospheric chemistry, including research on the sources, sinks,
transport, transformation and impacts of gases and aerosols in the atmosphere
through models, observations, and experiments. This conference will have
sessions on the following topics: atmospheric chemistry and policy, chemistry of
aerosol formation, evolving urban atmosphere, aerosol-cloud-chemistry
interactions, aerosol particle chemistry and properties, chemical evolution of
aerosol physical properties, remote environments from the ocean surface to
Saturn’s moons, advancing models of short-lived climate forcings, and methane
sources and chemistry.

The broader impacts of the symposium derive from the exchange of ideas that help
to focus the research community on the most pressing questions, as well as
provide an opportunity for young scientists to meet, network, and exchange ideas
with leaders in the atmospheric and sciences. Young scientists are also invited
to the ACCESS colloquium (“Atmospheric Chemistry Colloquium for Emerging Senior
Scientists”) that immediately precedes the conference. The Gordon Conference on
Atmospheric Chemistry creates a broad intellectual impact on the atmospheric
scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.