* 2325523
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Trust but Verify: The Use of Intuition in Engineering Problem Solving
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Elif Miskioglu, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2026
* USD 77,167.00

The project, “Collaborative Research: RUI: Trust but Verify: The Use of
Intuition in Engineering Problem Solving” is a three-year study about
engineering intuition conducted at Bucknell University, Arizona State
University, and Embry Riddle Aeronautical University. The goal of this project
is to examine the application of intuition by engineering practitioners and
generate knowledge that promotes the professional formation of engineers and
development of a stronger engineering workforce. Engineering intuition is a
problem-solving skill developed through experience that engineering
practitioners subconsciously use when under pressure from constraints (e.g.,
lack of time). Engineering practitioners regularly use and develop intuition on-
the-job; however, the use of intuition is often discouraged in undergraduate
education. Research questions in this study focus on the application of
intuition in engineering problem solving, solving “ill” versus “well” structured
engineering problems, and prior engineering experience levels when engineers
solve structured problems. The study will use a variety of methods and
techniques (such as Simulation Interviews). New engineering practitioners
(senior undergraduates and those with less than one year of experience) and mid-
career practitioners (6-10 years of experience) will participate. The knowledge
generated from this study will provide a foundation for bridging the disconnect
between classroom and real-world engineering practices, designing educational
interventions that promote intuition development, and understanding how early
intuition development can help level the playing field for all students
regardless of individual background, including past engineering experiences.

The project, “Collaborative Research: RUI: Trust but Verify: The Use of
Intuition in Engineering Problem Solving” is a three-year study about
engineering intuition conducted at Bucknell University, Arizona State
University, and Embry Riddle Aeronautical University. The goal of this project
is to examine the application of intuition by engineering practitioners and
generate knowledge that promotes the professional formation of engineers and
development of a stronger engineering workforce. Engineering intuition is a
problem-solving skill developed through experience that engineering
practitioners subconsciously use when under pressure from constraints (e.g.,
lack of time). Expertise in a specific area is a prerequisite of intuition and
is a defining characteristic of the expert. Engineering practitioners regularly
use and develop intuition on-the-job; however, the use of intuition is often
discouraged in undergraduate education. The disconnect between intuition’s use
in engineering practice and in engineering education, coupled with limited
knowledge of the relationship between intuition, expertise, and experience,
presents an important gap in our existing understanding of engineering problem
solving and future workforce preparation. A qualitative approach will be
employed to investigate four research questions: RQ1: How does the application
of intuition manifest in engineering problem solving? RQ2: How does the
application of intuition vary when approaching “ill” versus “well” structured
engineering problems? RQ3: How does the domain of practitioner expertise
influence the application of intuition when approaching “ill” versus “well”
structured engineering problems? RQ4: How does prior engineering experience
influence the application of intuition when approaching “ill” versus “well”
structured engineering problems? Cognitive Task Analysis (CTA) will elicit
expert knowledge from a sample of new engineering practitioners (senior
undergraduates and those with less than one year of experience) and mid-career
practitioners (6-10 years of experience). Per best practices, CTA methods
(Simulation Interviews, Critical Decision Method, and Knowledge Audit Method)
will be used to support robust data collection. The knowledge generated from
this study will provide a foundation for bridging the disconnect between
classroom and real-world engineering practices, designing educational
interventions that promote intuition development, and understanding how early
intuition development can help level the playing field for all students
regardless of individual background, including past engineering experiences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.