* 2325047
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Sea Star Wasting Disease in the High Antarctic: Deciphering the Role of Shifting Carbon and Climate Cycles on a Keystone Predator
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Amy Moran, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 46,834.00

This RAPID project aims to study a sporadic occurrence of sea star wasting
syndrome (SSWS) in McMurdo sound by leveraging diving resources of a CAREER
grant to Thurber. The disease was first noted in 2019, with a second occurrence
documented by the group at their study site near a methane seep at Cinder Cone
in McMurdo Sound in 2022. Sea stars are key species in many benthic ecosystems,
including the Antarctic, and this disease has caused significant losses in
populations worldwide. In the Southern Ocean, the sea star Odontaster validus
preys upon Acodontaster conspicuous, a predator of Antarctic giant sponges. In
2022, about 30% of the O. validus at the methane seep were affected. The
conditions associated with the disease in other areas are environmental hypoxia,
warm temperatures, and organic enrichment. This recent outbreak provides the
opportunity to study how the disease may progress in the Southern Ocean, and
test the hypothesis that oxygen dynamics play a key role in the development of
SSWS.

The investigators aim to measure oxygen concentrations on and off the Cinder
Cone seep and at the surface of affected and unaffected sea stars and identify
whether the disease causes and microbiome characteristics of SSWS are similar
between Antarctic and non-Antarctic outbreaks. These findings can be used to
understand the potential effects of future climate conditions on disease
outbreaks of Southern Ocean marine organisms critical to ecosystem function and
health. In addition to disease dynamics, the study will also help to understand
how methane seepage impacts benthic oxygen dynamics. Other broader impacts
include communicating the research through a student led YouTube documentary and
facilitating the transition of an early career URM researcher from NSF postdoc
to a faculty position (lead on viral component of the project).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.