* 2325368
* Groundwater Connection between Glaciers and Streams under a warming Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Suzanne Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

The role of melting glaciers in groundwater replenishment and consequent
groundwater discharge to streams is often overlooked. Glacier meltwater seeps
into soils and emerges back into downslope streams. These processes could play a
critical role in sustaining streamflow when groundwater is the main source of
water for the streams. Under warming in watersheds with glaciers, groundwater
can be an increasingly important contributor to streamflow. Better understanding
of seasonal and long-term variations in streamflow will improve predictions of
how melting glaciers impact downstream hydrology and ecosystems and inform water
management. This project examines the groundwater connection between melting
glaciers and mountain streams. The overarching question is: What is the role of
groundwater in connecting melting glaciers to streamflow in mountain watersheds?
This study has direct implications for water resource management in a changing
climate. This project is a collaboration between University of Colorado Boulder
and Salish Kootenai College, which has 75% Native American students. Through
planned research and mentoring activities, this project will provide
opportunities for education and professional development of students from a
diverse background and for outreach to Native American communities.

Streamflow in glacierized watersheds has increased in recent decades during late
summer to winter when surface runoff to streams is minimal. It is hypothesized
that melting glaciers enhanced recharge to groundwater, aquifers are more
permeable because of thawing frozen ground, and consequently groundwater
discharge to streams increases. In the long run, such groundwater discharge to
streams cannot be sustained as melting glaciers may disappear. Three specific
research questions are: (1) How does glacier meltwater correlate to streamflow
temporally and spatially? (2) How does a changing climate affect aquifer
permeability as aquifers undergo seasonal freezing and thawing and long-term
degradation of frozen ground? (3) How do changes in groundwater and streams
affected by glacial meltwater influence downstream ecosystems? To address these
questions, the project has three main tasks: (1) Characterize two representative
watersheds with glaciers in Colorado and Montana that share commonalities but
are distinct in scales and hydrologic conditions; (2) Analyze relevant data
focusing on air temperature, glacier melt, streamflow, groundwater levels, and
water temperature; (3) Synthesize the data and conduct numerical modeling that
couples heat transfer and water flow. These tasks will be carried out in both
field and laboratory settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.