* 2325247
* EAGER: Understanding Photocatalytic Reduction-Enabled Continuous Nucleation of Multimetallic Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jill Millstone, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jill E. Millstone of the
University of Pittsburgh is developing new ways to make nanomaterials using
visible light. Light has been a powerful tool in molecular chemistry, leading to
gains in reaction efficiency, precision, and sustainability. However, light is a
much less common reagent in the synthesis of nanomaterials but could afford
similar gains. This project aims to opens a new avenue for materials synthesis
that promises advances in both structural control and fundamental chemical
understanding of how nanoscale matter forms. The diverse nature of methodologies
necessary to carry out this project will provide cutting edge education and
training for students and prepare them to be future leaders in a variety of
technical and pedagogical settings. The connection of research and education are
central to this work and involve training undergraduates, incorporation into
both graduate and undergraduate curricula, and outreach activities to a wide
range of stakeholders including junior faculty, high school science teachers,
K-12 students, and community-based STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) efforts.

The objective of this work is to develop methods that leverage the advantages of
light in chemical synthesis, and specifically to use a catalytic, photoredox-
mediated nanoparticle synthesis to elucidate how the nucleation of bimetallic
nanoparticles impacts their size, stoichiometry, and chemical ordering. Thus
far, catalytic photoreduction provides a new pathway to nanoparticle formation
that is not observed in traditional chemical reduction-based syntheses,
including the continuous formation of nanoparticles as well as suppression of
particle growth once formed. Key synthetic parameters contributing to both
continuous nanoparticle nucleation and suppressed nanoparticle growth will be
studied, including metal ion reduction rate and nanoparticle surface chemistry.
This new particle formation pathway will then be used to understand metal atom
incorporation into multimetallic nanoparticles as function of particle size and
formation rate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.