* 2325197
* GP-GO: A near-peer mentoring ecosystem revealing new pathways into the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mikelle Nuwer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,584.00

Geosciences have the lowest participation by underrepresented groups of any
science. This project aims to enhance the diversity and retention of
underrepresented groups in academic Geoscience, and the Geoscience workforce
more broadly, by creating a “stepping stone” pathway allowing underrepresented
undergraduates to “see” themselves as successful geoscientists. The program will
also help graduate student mentors gain confidence, new mentorship skills, and
identities as successful mentors who can support all of their students more
holistically. The researchers will address these goals by piloting and testing
the effectiveness of an active learning program where graduate students in the
Geosciences receive skill-based training in evidence-based mentoring practices
and are then paired with an underrepresented undergraduate student in
Environmental, Biological or Physical Sciences, and with a demonstrated desire
to explore the Geosciences for a mentored research experience. The program is
expected to create a learning ecosystem model that strengthens the cohort by
developing and deepening the community (including faculty) and connecting all
students to networking opportunities showcasing academic and nonacademic
pathways within the Geoscience workforce for both graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups.

When historically excluded groups enter the Geosciences, and other predominantly
White science fields, the underrepresentation and exclusion of people from their
racial/ethnic groups leave them vulnerable to feelings of uncertainty about
their fit in these settings, which can ultimately impact their educational
pursuits and career aspirations. Through this project graduate students will
receive skill-based training in evidence-based mentoring practices and then
engage in research mentoring of undergraduate student from historically excluded
groups likely to pursue a bachelor’s degree in the Geosciences. Surrounding the
pairs of graduate and undergraduate students is a Geoscience Learning Ecosystem
composed of activities and support structures that individually and collectively
address issues that may impede success in Geoscience Programs. The expected
outcomes of the project are (1) elevating the competency of the graduate
students as skilled mentors as they transition into the next stage of their
career; (2) provide discovery-based research training, skill building and
networking opportunities to undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds as
they explore careers and secure their pathways into the Geosciences. The work
tests a piloted model of a "stepping stone" pathway in the Geosciences, and
assigns a series of assessments, pre- and post-intervention, addressing both
academic and non-academic/psychosocial metrics. The goal is to create a
sustainable model of near-peer mentoring that can not only continue post-award
at the university, but also be exported to other institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.