* 2325608
* GP-UP: Project RESTORES (Retention of Earth Science Trainees through Opportunities in Restoration and Environmental Sciences)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jodi Evans, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 407,527.00

Highly urbanized coastal areas—such as the New York City metropolitan area—are
among the nation’s most susceptible to the effects of sea-level rise. Coastal
geoscientists in these areas will be in high demand to help restore and prepare
coastal environments, yet the challenge of producing a diverse and talented
workforce to match this need remains. Project RESTORES (Retention of Earth
Science Trainees through Opportunities in Restoration and Environmental
Sciences) builds on a body of evidence regarding the needs of students who have
been historically excluded in STEM and implements best practices for supporting
these students through geoscience pathways from high school to careers. The PIs
plan to leverage Molloy College’s established success in recruiting a diverse
STEM student body to forge new opportunities in coastal geoscience education.
The demographics of the targeted "recruitment" schools ensure the project will
help close the gap between workforce needs and the skills of graduating
geoscience students. The project seeks to produce geoscience professionals
capable of helping to prepare coastal ecosystems for climate change and other
stressors in our changing world.

The overarching goals of RESTORES are to increase the number of students in the
geosciences; retain a high rate of students who have historically been excluded
in STEM; build faculty and institutional capacity that supports these students
sustainably; and produce highly qualified geoscience graduates to fulfill the
growing need for these professionals in the project area. RESTORES entails three
objectives in support of these goals: 1) to implement and evaluate targeted
recruitment activities to increase geosciences enrollment by 55% over three
years; 2) to develop a robust framework to support and retain participants in
the education-career pipeline; and 3) to provide rigorous geosciences research
experiences for project participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.