* 2325033
* Conference: The Eighth Annual Meeting of SIAM Central States Section
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Adam Larios, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 07/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The eighth SIAM (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics) Central States
Section Annual Meeting will be held on Oct. 7-8, 2023, on the campus of the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. Since its foundation in 2014, the SIAM Central
States Section (SIAM-CSS) serves SIAM members in eight central U.S. states:
Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, and Oklahoma.
The annual meeting, which attracts over 200 participants, aims to promote
applied and computational mathematics by providing a platform for researchers
and practitioners at all stages of their careers to exchange ideas and foster
collaborations. The majority of the participants are members of the growing
SIAM-CSS community, including faculty, postdoc researchers and graduate students
from the 30 universities and 12 SIAM student chapters in the eight central
states. In particular, the conference offers an opportunity for early career
faculty members, postdocs, and graduate students to showcase their research
results, exchange ideas with people from different disciplines, and gain
experience to improve their skills in communication and presentation. The
conference aims to invite, encourage, and support participation from researchers
from historically underrepresented groups, and faculty from institutions where
opportunities to attend major research conferences might be limited. Six out of
the eight central states, including Nebraska, are EPSCoR states, and this
conference will play an important role in stimulating research activities in
applied and computational mathematics in these states.

The eighth SIAM-CSS Annual Meeting in Lincoln will provide an opportunity for
researchers to facilitate a transfer of knowledge and exchange of ideas among
specialists in applied mathematics, numerical analysis, scientific computing,
and related applied fields. The conference’s interdisciplinary nature will
provide avenues for collaborations between researchers in the Central States
region and beyond. In addition, the conference will particularly promote the
participation of early career mathematicians from all over the U.S., thereby
influencing the research interests and directions of those researchers attending
the event. The conference website is located at https://math.unl.edu/siam-2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.