* 2325451
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Creating Windows Advanced Memory Corruption Attack and Defense Teaching Modules
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xinwen Fu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Microsoft Windows operating systems have a large market share and are
pervasively used. As such, they are also major targets for cyberattacks, such as
malware. It is critical to teach software security topics on the latest Windows
versions. However, there are currently no systematic advanced software security
education modules for the latest Windows system. The goal of this project is to
develop advanced teaching modules on software security, particularly memory
corruption attack and defense for the latest systems. A memory corruption attack
triggers memory errors through malicious and delicate inputs and is often part
of an advanced cyberattack. The developed teaching modules will help students
understand how various security features of Windows compilers and linkers are
used to fight against miscellaneous memory corruption attacks and their
limitations. This will help prepare students for real-world bug hunting and
software security.

This project will achieve six objectives. 1. Innovating Armitage, an open-source
graphical user interface front end of Metasploit, which is a tool used to
identify security vulnerabilities. Armitage is an ideal open-source tool to
demonstrate attacks and raise security awareness given its ease of use. 2.
Developing defense modules on Exploit Protection features of the latest Windows.
3. Incorporating a variety of memory corruption vulnerabilities into a
vulnerable chat server (VChat), which will be developed as a Visual C++ project,
and developing corresponding attack teaching materials in Python. 4. Developing
Metasploit modules in Ruby for all memory corruption attacks, which can be used
with Armitage. The purpose of Metasploit modules is to demonstrate those attacks
easily and motivate students to learn the principles. 5. Integrating developed
teaching modules into related courses at the two participating institutions,
University of Massachusetts Lowell and University of Central Florida. 6.
Disseminating developed teaching modules, software and systems through a faculty
development workshop, project websites, GitHub repositories, video tutorials,
CLARK (a cybersecurity curriculum hosting platform), academic publications, and
field trips as outreach venues to K-12 students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.