* 2325410
* Theoretical Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 10/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education with
the goals of understanding the electronic, optical, and magnetic properties of
materials and nanostructures at the microscopic level, predicting new materials
and phenomena, and educating young scientists for research in this field. The
fascinating properties and phenomena of condensed matter emerge from mutual
interactions of the electrons and ions that make up materials. Understanding
these interactions are central to modern technologies such as electronics,
optoelectronics, photovoltaics, and energy conversion devices in general. These
properties can be dramatically altered, and new phenomena can emerge, by varying
the chemical composition or confining the materials to nanometer scales or
exploring materials at the one- or two-dimensional level. This project is
centered on using quantum theory, modeling, and simulations using analytical and
computational tools to explain and predict the existence and properties of novel
materials and nanostructures. New theoretical approaches and the availability of
modern high-performance computers allow the team to obtain first-principles
(i.e., with no empirical parameters) explanations and predictions of the
behavior of materials including atomically thin materials, nanostructures,
interfacial and defect phenomena, new superconductors, and photocatalytic
materials. The educational component is focused on preparing students (graduate
and undergraduate) and postdoctoral fellows for research and development in the
current quantum technological revolution. The computational tools developed from
the project will be incorporated into several software packages, which are made
freely available on the web to the research community. Another educational
activity is related to public education, which is done through articles and
interviews published in lay media and via public lectures by the PI and co-PI.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education towards
understanding the electronic, transport, optical, and magnetic properties of
materials and nanostructures at the microscopic level by performing first-
principles quantum calculations. The research is grouped into three topical
areas of condensed matter physics and materials science: 1) novel phases and
structures of materials; 2) optical and spin physics of reduced-dimensional
systems, and 3) electron-phonon coupling, light-matter interaction, and
superconductivity. The major objective is to use many-body quantum theory, high-
performance computing, and new concepts such as those from topology to explain
and predict the properties of and phenomena in real materials, including lower
dimensional systems.

Several state-of-the-art approaches based on many-body quantum theory are
employed to enable accurate first-principles calculations for real materials.
Ground-state properties are obtained using the ab initio pseudopotential density
functional theory formalism. Excited-state properties are calculated from the
interacting one-particle Green's function within the GW approximation for
quasiparticle excitations and the interacting two-particle Green's function via
the Bethe-Salpeter equation for optical properties. Electron-phonon couplings
are computed using a new methodology based on GW perturbation theory. Time-
dependent phenomena under driven fields and nonlinear optical responses are
computed using another newly developed time-dependent adiabatic GW method. A
host of properties are shown to be accessible with the above methods. Examples
include structural information, electronic structure, energy gaps, optical and
photoemission spectra, electronic topological invariants, surface and interface
characteristics, vibrational and mechanical properties, magnetic properties,
transport properties, pump-probe spectroscopies, nonlinear optical responses,
and properties of conventional superconductors. Theoretical and methodological
developments are also carried out to further advance our conceptual and
computational capabilities. The first-principles calculations are augmented with
model Hamiltonian studies when appropriate, especially for understanding
topological effects and systems with stronger electron correlations.

The educational component is focused on training of students (graduate and
undergraduate) and postdoctoral fellows for research and development in the
current quantum technological revolution. The computational tools developed from
the project will be incorporated into three open-source software packages -
Berkeley GW, PARATEC, and EPW - which are freely available to the community on
the web. Another educational activity is related to public education, which is
done through articles and interviews published in lay media and via public
lectures by the PI and co-PI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.