* 2325406
* Travel: SDM 2023 Student Travel Grant
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Liyue Fan, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 04/30/2024
* USD 24,000.00

Data mining is one of the critical technologies that drives our economy.
Exposure of students to these concepts and technologies are critical to our
future. The SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM) is one of the
top-tier conferences in the field of data mining. It provides a venue for
researchers who address problems in data mining to present their work in a peer-
reviewed forum. The 2023 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2023)
is being organized by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM)
in cooperation with the American Statistical Association. SDM 2023 will be held
in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA from April 27 to April 29, 2023. This project
will support approximately 17 graduate students from universities in the United
States to participate in a Ph.D. student forum that is to be held as part of SDM
2023.

The SDM conference gathers data mining researchers worldwide to present and
discuss cutting-edge research. Student participants will attend the conference
technical sessions, plenary talks, tutorials, and workshops to learn about the
frontiers of data mining. The Ph.D. student forum consists of a poster session
where student participants will be able to present their work, interact with
peers from other universities as well as hundreds of leading researchers in data
mining from around the world. A mentoring panel will help graduate students in a
variety of career-related topics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.