* 2325316
* GEOPAths: Informal Networks Vocational Experiences and Research Training in Marine Science (GP-IN:VERT)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gina Hodsdon, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 397,905.00

GEOPAths Informal Network Vocational Experiences and Research Training in Marine
Science (GP-IN:VERT) is a project designed to increase pre-college student
exposure to and participation in marine STEM activities in an effort to increase
the number of undergraduate students pursuing a degree in marine STEM. Marine
STEM remains one of the least racially and ethnically diverse fields despite
increased emphasis and efforts to increase participation from groups who have
been structurally excluded in STEM. GP-IN:VERT aims to increase the pursuit of
marine STEM degrees by: engaging students primarily from structurally excluded
and marginalized groups in authentic, marine geoscience career-relevant
experiences; providing access to students that might otherwise not encounter
geoscience before deciding on a major; and creating mechanisms to engage local
high school students in experiences that demonstrate the geosciences as a viable
career path. This will be done through a school-year afterschool program
followed by a two-week immersive experience over the summer. Participating
students will engage with marine STEM content, hands-on experiences and higher
educational opportunities as well as various marine STEM professionals to gain a
better understanding of the broad landscape of the field as well as pathways
into careers.

GP-IN:VERT aims to engage students from structurally excluded and marginalized
populations in meaningful marine STEM activities in an effort to increase high
school student: awareness of marine STEM career opportunities; understanding of
marine STEM career pathways; self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and science
identity in marine STEM settings, feelings of social support through
participation in a learning ecosystem-based program; and confidence in pursuing
undergraduate programs and careers in marine STEM. A Social Cognitive Career
Theory approach will be utilized in which learning experiences of student
participants are influenced by their prior experiences, predispositions, and/or
cultural backgrounds and identities, which all impact the complex decision-
making process of career choice. Under the guidance of trained staff mentors and
returning student peer mentors, students will be provided a scaffolded learning
framework to build their knowledge base of marine STEM concepts and topics as
well as career relevant information like careers available and pathways into
those careers. This program has the potential to serve as a model for other
institutions looking to create a career exposure and exploration program, both
in marine STEM and in other STEM fields. Ultimately this project seeks to
diversify the marine STEM landscape in order to produce productive and creative
problem solving in geoscience research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.