* 2325577
* GP-IN: Bridging the Gap into Geosciences for Underrepresented Pre-college Populations through Experiential Learning Opportunities
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Amanda Tazaz, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2026
* USD 415,863.00

Despite investments of time and resources over the past few decades, there has
been little increase in the number of students majoring in STEM degrees and
entering the STEM workforce. This is particularly problematic in the geosciences
as many students are unaware of the field and its career trajectories until late
in their undergraduate years. This project aims to improve the awareness and
increase the percentage and diversity of students interested in geoscience by
exposing structurally underrepresented pre-college students to the geosciences
through experiential learning opportunities facilitated through the Boys and
Girls Club summer camp programs. Research has shown that among the various
informal learning environments, out-of-school activities, such as summer camps,
play an important role in providing large scale opportunities for students to
engage in science by providing an aspect of recreation and social activities
that students find appealing.

This project will develop and implement four distinct 4-week summer camp modules
that will actively engage pre-college students in the process of science,
through inquiry-based learning around environmental challenges facing their
local community. To achieve the goal of increasing awareness of the geosciences
the project leaders have created a Geoscience Learning Ecosystem (GLE) comprised
of approximately 10 vested geoscience partners who will volunteer resources
and/or serve as research mentors for participating summer camp students. Every
module in the summer camp will reflect cross-disciplinary characteristics of
environmental issues and involve students in data collection with active
geoscientists, analysis and interpretation of data collected, as well as
communication of research findings both in written and in video formats. These
activities will broaden student experiences and awareness of their community
while also providing opportunities for the students to see how geoscience is
relevant to their own lives and potential future career pathways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.