* 2325485
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2023 ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Gang Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services
(MobiSys) is a premier venue for innovative and high-impact research on the
design, implementation, usage, and evaluation of mobile computing and wireless
systems, applications, and services. Attending MobiSys is of paramount
importance for students pursuing research in this field. Authors will have the
opportunity to present their work and all attendees have a chance to interact
with other researchers who perform leading-edge research in this domain. The
goal of this student travel support is to widen the student audience, raise the
level of interaction and the potential for new research collaborations, and
support students who are not well-funded or under-represented. This project
provides travel support to approximately 10–12 students from U.S. institutions
of higher education. By enabling students (who might not otherwise be able) to
attend the conference, this project increases the dissemination of the
conference’s research results to a larger and more diverse audience. It also
integrates research and education of students by enabling students to observe
high-quality presentations and interact with other researchers. By giving
consideration in granting awards to women and minority students, it widens the
participation among underrepresented groups. Furthermore, by advertising the
opportunity among a wide range of colleges and universities, participants from a
more diverse set of institutions would be able to attend and benefit from the
conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.