* 2325570
* GP-IN: Air Across Texas: Scattered and Supported: A program introducing high school students from underrepresented groups to air quality monitoring, research, and careers
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Jessica Spott, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2026
* USD 320,637.00

Geoscience programs across the nation have seen a decline in enrollment, which
will impact the geoscience workforce. A strong geoscience workforce is needed to
build a resilient planet and help address issues important to the well-being of
the nation, including air pollution, environmental change, extreme weather, and
the compounding impacts that these events will produce. The geoscience fields
remains some of the least diverse among the science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) fields. The project Air Across Texas (AAT) will support high
school students from underrepresented backgrounds in science to encourage them
to pursue undergraduate degrees in STEM focusing on atmospheric science. The
project will provide knowledge and research experiences for the students but
will also support their parents/guardians enabling them to learn STEM concepts
and educational avenues, enhancing the support of the next generation of
scientists. At the end of the project a traveling lab kit will be developed and
distributed to a network of high school teachers across the region with a
preference for rural school districts that have limited access to resources.

Air Across Texas will introduce high school students from across Texas (mainly
from rural areas) to atmospheric science topics, with a focus on air quality.
The goals of the project are to 1) Improve students’ knowledge and skills in
research and atmospheric science topics (with a focus on air quality) 2.
Increase STEM interest and STEM self-efficacy of high school students. 3.
Increase parental awareness of STEM concepts, careers, and collegiate
opportunities. 4. Introduce students to college experiences and STEM careers,
increasing collegiate belongingness. The project goals will support the
student’s engagement and interest in scientific fields, emphasizing the quality
and development of the research process. It will use hands-on and project-based
learning to foster students’ understanding on how to use a research-based
approach when encountering challenging scientific concepts or subjects. AAT will
operate in three phases including virtual and in-person settings, emphasizing
parallel active learning and teamwork. In phase-1, in an online setting,
students will be introduced to different scientific topics to increase their
knowledge and prepare them for phase-2. During phase-2, student activities will
focus on research learning activities. Each student will perform a research-
based project using a low-cost air quality sensor that will be placed in their
homes. In phase-3, students will take part in a 1-week Summer Research Symposium
(SRS) at Texas Tech University (TTU), participating in cohort building and
scientific activities to prepare them for college experiences. Parents or
guardians will also participate at the beginning of SRS and learn about
potential STEM careers, collegiate opportunities, and ways to support their
children pursuing STEM. At the end of SRS, the students will present their
research in a conference setting and will have university applications ready for
submission. Students who complete the program will be invited to present their
research at the Transformative Undergraduate Experiences Symposium held every
year in the fall semester at TTU.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.