* 2325195
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic models for seasonal avian migration: Analysis, numerical methods, and data analytics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* King Yeung Lam, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 112,240.00

Migratory animals including many bird species travel a spectacular distance
annually between their summer breeding ground and overwintering site to track
the appearance of key resources and maximize reproductive success. However,
these migratory cycles are potentially disrupted as the timing of these
resources are impacted by global climate change. To address the above knowledge
gap, the interdisciplinary team of principle investigators (PIs) comprising a
mathematician, biologist, and data scientists will develop novel mathematical
models such as stochastic dynamic programming and agent-based models to gain
mechanistic understanding of how migratory animals determine their routes and
timing in response to environmental cues, and how those can be affected by
climate change. The project will promote the use of the eBird database, which is
a grassroots effort enabling citizens to directly contribute bird observations
data using a mobile app. The project is a collaboration between Ohio State
University and Oklahoma State University and offers valuable educational,
training, and outreach opportunities. In addition to training of PhD students,
the PIs propose to establish a K-12 program with a daylong workshop to engage
the public and raise awareness of bird conservational efforts and impacts of
climate change, as well as a summer undergraduate research program targeting
underrepresented groups (ROMUS program at Ohio State). At the professional
level, the PIs will organize synergistic activities to facilitate exchanges
between mathematicians and biologists. These include a confirmed week-long
workshop at Banff International Research Station in October 2024, for over 100
virtual and in-person participants. This research will improve our understanding
of the effects of climate change on migrating bird populations and inform future
conservation and management of wildlife.

A critical question for understanding ecological responses to global change and
conserving biodiversity in a changing world, is whether migrating animals can
adjust their migration routes and schedules to track key resources even as the
phenology of these resources shifts with climate change. In the case of birds
with seasonal migratory routes crossing hemispheres, past studies have detected
asynchrony between spring vegetation green-up and their arrival at breeding
areas. This raised the concern that migrating birds may be negatively impacted
by climate change. This interdisciplinary team of mathematician, biologist and
data scientists will address the above knowledge gap by developing stochastic
dynamic programming (SDP) models and agent-based models (ABM) for migrating
animal populations. First, the aim is to develop an SDP model with switching
costs in a continuous-time framework, in the context of optimal migration
problem. The PIs will formulate and analyze the resulting Bellman equations and
address the theoretical challenge of connecting individual migration decision to
emergent population patterning. In addition, the PIs will also use spatially
explicit agent-based modeling in parallel with and to extend the proposed
mathematical modeling. Finally, the PIS will leverage remote sensing data on
spring green-up across the Western Hemisphere with population level migration
data for bird species from eBird database, for parameter estimation and model
result comparison.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.