* 2326640
* Conference: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM 2023)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Bo SONG, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Computational Biology and Bioinformatics provide tools and methodologies, which
fastens biological research across all biological scales. The 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM2023) will
provide a unique opportunity for multi- and interdisciplinary researchers in
quantitative sciences, life sciences, and their interfaces to collaborate and
share ideas interactively. The conference will cover six synergistic themes to
facilitate the cross-fertilization of ideas, bridge knowledge gaps, and promote
new research collaborations. As an effort to foster the growth of early-career
researchers and students, providing them with travel awards, especially to those
from underrepresented communities who may not otherwise have had the opportunity
to participate, is crucial. At the heart of BIBM2023's commitment, the
conference will promote scientific progress, advance diversity, and benefit
society by supporting the attendance, presentation, and collaboration of the
next generation of researchers.

The goal of this grant is to provide travel awards to the early-career
researchers and students, especially those from underrepresented communities,
who have registered to attend the BIBM2023. It selects a qualified cohort to
receive the travel awards and distributes the fundings to support and cover
their travel expenses. The methods and approaches to be used include advertising
the travel award opportunity, reviewing applications, and selecting the awardees
based on the criteria, financial need, and research merit. The grant will
contribute significantly to the goal of fostering the next generation of
researchers in the fields of Bioinformatics and Biomedicine by supporting their
involvement with experts in the BIBM2023 and gaining experience and exposure in
their areas, which would ultimately advance the progress of science, education,
diversity, and societal benefits that reflect the NSF's mission. The conference
website is “https://bidma.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/IEEE-BIBM-2023/”.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.