* 2326628
* QuSeC-TAQS: Nanodiamond Quantum Sensing for Four-Dimensional Live-Cell Imaging
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Shuo Sun, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,064,554.00

This project aims to revolutionize live-cell imaging by harnessing the power of
nanodiamond quantum sensing and advanced microscopy. By developing nanodiamond
quantum sensors with exceptional sensitivity, this project will study
intricacies of life processes with unprecedented detail. This research aligns
with NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and serves the national
interest by advancing the understanding of fundamental biological mechanisms.
While traditional fluorescence microscopy provides valuable insights into cell
structures and functions, nanodiamond quantum sensors with ultra-high
sensitivity to local electromagnetic fields offer a new dimension to see through
live cells and reveal the underlying physical mechanisms of life processes. By
integrating nanodiamond quantum sensors with advanced imaging techniques, this
project will capture four-dimensional (4D) information, encompassing three-
dimensional spatial data and an additional temporal dimension. This has wide-
ranging implications, from enhancing cancer immunotherapy through the monitoring
of T cell activity to unraveling the mysteries of membrane potentials in cardiac
and neuronal cells. Furthermore, this project extends beyond scientific
discoveries. It encompasses comprehensive educational and outreach programs,
with a particular focus on fostering diversity in STEM fields. By engaging
underrepresented minorities in quantum-related studies, this team aims to create
a vibrant and inclusive community of quantum scientists and engineers. This
project not only supports education but also benefits society at large, offering
new avenues for biomedical research and applications.

The research will involve the fabrication of scalable nanodiamond sensors with
biocompatible interfaces, uniform sizes and shapes, controlled color center
densities, and minimal impurities. By integrating optically detected magnetic
resonance (ODMR) spectroscopy of nanodiamond quantum sensors with light-sheet
microscopy (LSM), this team will achieve high spatiotemporal resolution and low
phototoxicity, enabling precise imaging of live cells. The technical approach
includes the utilization of machine learning algorithms and image processing
techniques to analyze the acquired data and extract valuable insights into the
dynamics of live cells. Particularly, this team will apply the developed ODMR-
LSM quantum sensing imaging technology to study T cell activity in cancer
immunotherapy and measure membrane electrical potential. The synergy between
nanodiamond quantum sensing and advanced imaging techniques will deepen the
understanding of complex biological processes. The proposed nanodiamond quantum
sensing system, with the ability for correlating the ODMR spectroscopy and the
spatiotemporal imaging of LSM, allows for revealing 4D live-cell dynamics which
have not been studied before. This project will bridge the gap between
fundamental quantum science and applied bioengineering and bring quantum sensing
into rich applications in biomedical fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.