* 2326013
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: forecasting functional biodiversity change with satellite remote sensing and modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Stephen Hedges, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2027
* USD 734,320.00

This project will use satellite imaging and species location records in primary
forests of the Caribbean to determine which species are threatened with
extinction and how their loss will affect ecosystem function across the
landscape. The outcomes will help focus limited resources on protecting the most
vulnerable and functionally important species in these highly vulnerable areas.
Biodiversity is essential for the processes that support life, including food
security, medicines and public health. However, with a changing climate, forests
are disappearing around the world, leading to a major loss of species. This
research will improve on current methods of assessing extinction risk by
increasing precision and automation of methods, and by extending the application
to all regional species. The project will also map the location of primary
forest habitats, which are regions of original forest not previously disturbed
that hold the most biodiversity with the greatest number of ecological
functions. An additional outcome of the project will be to identify the most
critical areas for better protection of biodiversity.

Greater knowledge of functional biodiversity will increase understanding of how
ecosystems work and how they will change in coming decades through human
modifications of habitat and climate, and through other threats to species.
Knowing how, when, and where biodiversity changes will occur will help society
prepare for the future and mitigate the losses. This project brings together
expertise from satellite remote sensing, distribution modeling, organismal
biology, and conservation biology to integratively address biodiversity loss
through the development of innovative analytical methods. The project will focus
on primary forest, which has more functional diversity than secondary forests,
because it includes more structure and ecological specialists. The high-
resolution land cover data sets with primary forest included that will be
produced are currently rarely available. The system, which updates as new
satellite imagery, climatic, and biodiversity data become available, is ideally
suited for large areas of biodiversity, where remote sensing and environmental
data are the primary sources of information for extinction risk. This project
focuses on animals and plants in the Caribbean region to test hypotheses of
functional diversity change across landscapes and through time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.