* 2326928
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: AVOID 5G: Automated Verification Of Internet Data-paths for 5G
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Erik Kline, Johns Hopkins University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,999.00

Department of Defense (DOD) use of commercial 5th Generation (5G) networks
entails unprecedented reliance on untrusted third-party communications
infrastructure, including the 5G base stations that connect directly to 5G
devices and the Internet infrastructure that underlies 5G communications. The
core problem when operating through non-cooperative commercial 5G infrastructure
is that the unknown infrastructure potentially exposes communications to an
adversary. Traversing adversary-controlled infrastructure allows DOD’s
adversaries to recognize, disrupt, or extract intelligence even from encrypted
communications. Increasingly complex obfuscation techniques have created an arms
race against network intelligence techniques to detect the obfuscation. With
each new obfuscation, DOD can never know if it fools the adversary, or if the
adversary is simply lulling DOD into a false sense of security.The next great
capability leap for operating through 5G networks will likely come from
sophisticated analytics that provide situational awareness of threats within the
communications infrastructure, and an implementation that dynamically routes
communications along benign paths. Through a team that combines expertise across
disciplines and sectors, this project will pursue this transformative capability
and accelerate convergence on a new DOD 5G defense: restructuring communication
paths to avoid adversary-controlled base stations, networks, and locations,
thereby keeping DOD communications unobservable by the adversary. This project
proposes a system—Automated Verification Of Internet Data-paths (AVOID)—that
creates this unprecedented capability through two deliverables that tackle two
high risk attack vectors for 5G communications. Deliverable 1 targets the
potential for adversaries to control commercial base stations anywhere in the
world, allowing them to subvert DOD communications at the point of entry intro
the wireless network. AVOID will recognize malicious and surveillance base
stations, and provide a mechanism for DOD devices to connect to specific benign
base stations. Deliverable 2 combats the ability of our adversaries to apply
sophisticated and complex network analytics to any DOD communications that
traverse networks or territory they control. AVOID will embed topologic and
geographic awareness into a routing system, and provide a mechanism for DOD’s
communications to avoid adversary-controlled territory across the global
Internet and provide safe paths to DOD-controlled networks. Combined, these
deliverables will provide end-to-end adversary avoidance without requiring
modification to existing applications or routers in DOD networks, or cooperation
by any third-party network.The intellectual merit comes from addressing a
persistently unsolved national security challenge which requires convergence
across seven areas of expertise: 5G communication and network management;
Internet path analytics; overlay routing; operational network security; test and
evaluation that targets DOD scenarios; technology transition; and professional
project management. AVOID 5G will also broadly impact society. The deliverables
complement the broader landscape of zero-trust architectures, secure 5G
implementations, and ongoing obfuscation technique development. Government
partners included in the team provide a channel for research and education
outcomes, including cybersecurity workforce training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.