* 2326506
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Support for 2023 ACM Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (ACM HPDC)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Ali Anwar, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 16,000.00

The Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing 2023 (ACM
HPDC ‘23) is a premier forum for presenting the latest research findings on the
design and use of parallel and distributed systems for high-end computing,
collaboration, data analysis, and other innovative applications. Conference
attendance is a critical component of training and professional development for
Ph.D. students in these study areas. Students trained in these areas take
careers crucial for supporting the development, maintenance, and improvement of
US public and private cyber infrastructure. This project helps fund the travel
of eligible students from US institutions of higher learning to HPDC ‘23. This
support is distributed through travel grants based on financial need and
application merit to domestic Ph.D. students in high-performance, parallel, and
distributed computing domains.

We will provide 10-20 student travel grants to support student registration and
travel. The travel grant co-chairs, together with a selection of PC members,
will prioritize students based on several factors: financial need (particularly
in the case of student authors of accepted or submitted papers), stage of their
education (early-year graduate students will be preferred), the fit in terms of
technical interests, and institutional and individual diversity. The committee
will document the applications received and how the selection criteria were
applied to each of the applications. Our travel grant report will be shared with
the conference organizers of 2023 and the subsequent years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.