* 2326169
* Collaborative Research [FW-HTF-RL]: Enhancing the Future of Teacher Practice via AI-enabled Formative Feedback for Job-Embedded Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Sean Kelly, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,316,358.00

This project envisions a future of work where advanced technologies provide
automated, job-embedded, individualized feedback to drive professional learning
of the future worker. To achieve this goal, it addresses a fundamental question:
Are evaluative or non-evaluative feedback systems more effective in driving
professional learning? This question will be tested on professionals where
objective, fine-grained feedback is especially critical to improvement--the
teaching professions. This research will be situated within English and language
arts (ELA) instruction in middle- and high school classrooms, where
underperformance and inequality in literacy outcomes are persistent problems
facing the U.S. Current methods of supporting teacher learning through feedback
are sparse, cumbersome, subjective, and evaluative. Thus, a major
reconceptualization is needed to provide feedback mechanisms that- meaningfully
affect teacher practice and are accessible to all. In partnership with TeachFX,
an industry leader in technology-enabled instructional feedback, this project
will work with teachers to design and test systems of automated feedback.
Insights from the study will lead to feedback systems that empower teaching
professionals, generate continued professional learning, and ultimately,
increase student achievement.

The scientific merits of the project are centered around the foundational
question of whether instruction can be construed entirely along a continuum of
ineffective to more effective practice. The hypothesis is that the richest
opportunities for on-the-job feedback in the professions are agnostic
technologically-driven feedback systems, which offer choice, withhold
evaluation, make room for varied teacher practices, and promote a greater locus
of control. The project has several goals towards testing this hypothesis,
including: (1) to work with a diverse panel of teachers to design and refine
automated feedback systems; (2) to enhance the robustness and fairness of
computational models that underlie automated feedback; and finally, (3) to test
fundamental design principles of professional feedback. The project will begin
by leveraging TeachFX's corpus of instructional observations from approximately
5,000 educators to develop automated, robust, accurate, unbiased, generalizable,
and interpretable feedback models. Next, working with teacher participants, the
feedback interfaces will be co-designed and iteratively refined. Further, a
variety of observational and survey-based measures will be used to assess
teacher responsiveness to feedback. The project will culminate in a
longitudinal, experimental study contrasting the effects of evaluative- with
non-evaluative feedback on teacher learning, empowerment, and student
achievement outcomes with a sample of 300 teachers. The study will create a
blueprint for effective and efficient professional observation and feedback, and
working systems to implement that feedback, driving the next generation of
advancement in the sciences, technology, engineering, and mathematics.

This project is supported by two programs at NSF: Primary support comes from the
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier program which supports multi-
disciplinary research to sustain economic competitiveness, promote worker well-
being, lifelong and pervasive learning, and quality of life, and illuminate the
emerging social and economic context and drivers of innovations that are shaping
the future of jobs and work. Additional support is from the Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models, and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.