* 2326311
* FW-HTF-RL/Collaborative Research: Elevating Farm Worker-Robot Collaborations in Agri-Food Ecosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Marjorie Visser, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2027
* USD 374,999.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier - Research: Large (FW-HTF-
RL) project advances the agricultural workforce and automation technology
partnership in the context of future precision farming for fresh fruit tree-crop
harvesting (that is, picking and handling fruits that are meant to be sold in a
store). The overarching goal of this project is to shape the future farm
workplace in which human-aware agricultural robots operate in a seamless
partnership with farmworkers to improve future tree-crop harvesting outcomes
while improving the job experience and enhancing the productivity of food
production processes. Not all tasks in fresh fruit tree-crop harvesting can be
automated, and some tasks might be better offloaded to a future robotic co-
worker when doing so would augment farmworker efficiency and improve the quality
of work. The project brings together experts from Engineering, Computer Science,
Social Science, Environmental Science, and Crop Production Management to
discover these new agricultural robotics and farmworker interactions. The team
aims to create scientific and technological foundations of future agricultural
robotics and automation technology developed for and validated by future
farmworkers and farm owners. This human worker validation will increase trust
and adoption toward future precision farming and understand the implications of
this technology’s integration in future agriculture workforce relations.

The project investigates the deployment of pervasive, intelligent, and
autonomous agricultural robotics at the frontier of the farming workforce and
agricultural robotics and automation technology by creating new, expanded, and
unique user-centered frameworks. The project uniquely innovates along five
fundamental agricultural robotics and automation technology and agricultural
workforce research directions. 1) Novel principles to co-design actuation and
perception for safe, reliable, and efficient robotic harvesters. 2) Effective
machine vision mechanisms to understand farmworker activities in harvesting. 3)
Efficient robot planning techniques cognizant of human activities. 4)
Participatory design approach for precision farming technology trust and
adoption. 5) Advancement of human-robot multitasking toward sustainable
agriculture. The project actively engages stakeholders (farmworkers, farm
owners, packing house specialists) to assess current standards and practices and
then integrate feedback after in-field demonstrations to inform iterative
modifications of devices and systems. Taken together, these research directions
will help extend human-robot collaboration with multitasking, explicitly
exploring the trade-offs between harvesting efficiency and sustainable precision
farming while shedding light on the yet-to-be-explored implications of future
agriculture robotics technology on future agriculture workforce, notably as it
may disrupt current compensation schemes in relation to technology ownership
which in turn can further affect the degree of adoption and trust in automation.
The rich set of engaging problems will provide abundant research opportunities
for a diverse cohort of undergraduate students. The project integrates existing
efforts in K-12 outreach events hosted at the project’s three collaborating
sites – University of California (UC) Riverside, UC Merced, and UC Davis – to
broaden the participation of under-represented minority groups.

This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier cross-directorate program to promote a deeper fundamental understanding
of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work contexts by advancing
the design of intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.