* 2326816
* Planning Grant: Developing capacity to attract diverse students to the geosciences: A public relations framework
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2024,06/30/2026
* Debra Johnson, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2026
* USD 252,218.00

A persistent lack of diversity in Geosciences robs the discipline of unique
perspectives, experiences, values, and motivations that contribute to stronger
scientific outcomes. For the field to grow and attract a more diverse
population, geoscientists need to modify how they frame the field to reflect the
breadth of the discipline more accurately and in ways that align with potential
studentsâ€™ interests. This project addresses how to attract students to
Geosciences so they contribute to the field including to a range of socially
relevant career options that impact water quality and sustainability,
alternative energy, pursue solutions to climate-related issues, as well as
careers that use cutting-edge computing and data science. This project will use
surveys and focus groups to discover what types of marketing materials best
appeal to students in various stages of career awareness. By first learning what
appeals to potential geosciences students at California State University, Chico,
the team will then use that feedback to design marketing materials that appeal
to students in high school, two-year colleges, and first-year undergraduates at
CSU, Chico.

It will create an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional team who will
collaboratively investigate representations of the geosciences that attract
diverse populations to the discipline. The team will design, develop, and test
marketing materials intended to attract diverse student populations. The
research team will systematically collect and compile data about what attracts
students to the geosciences through content analysis, focus groups, and surveys.
The study population will be students in introductory-level STEM courses at CSU,
Chico, and in area high schools and two-year colleges. Results will identify the
types of frames that attract current and future students to geosciences and will
be disseminated in geoscience conference presentations and publications. The
evidence-based recruiting materials created from this research will be freely
available to download, adapt and use by geoscience programs and departments at
other institutions. Downstream results of this project are expected to include
attracting more diverse student populations to the geosciences, which will
broaden participation in higher education and the STEM workforce and contribute
to societal needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.