* 2326072
* PFI-TT: Scalable Manufacturing of Novel Catalysts for Converting CO2 to Valuable Products
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 275,496.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a scalable manufacturing
technology for catalysts and electrodes that are capable of converting carbon
dioxide (CO2) into valuable products such as carbon monoxide (CO) via an
electrochemical process. The annual anthropogenic emissions of CO2, the major
greenhouse gas, are about 35 billion metric tons in recent years. To combat the
climate change, it is critical to reduce CO2 emissions and preferably convert
CO2 into valuable products to make the process more economically viable. The
proposed technology aims to lower the overall cost of CO2 capture and conversion
by developing a simple and inexpensive method to fabricate large quantities of
catalysts that are critical to the electrochemical CO2 conversion. The proposed
technology has the potential to create a multi-billion-dollar market of low-
carbon products and chemicals by converting large amounts of CO2 captured from
industry emissions and the atmosphere.

The proposed project will use commercial carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the
feedstock to fabricate effective catalysts via a pyrolysis process and at a
commercially viable scale. This is a more cost-effective approach than
conventional methods using costly metals and carbon precursors for catalyst
synthesis. The project will optimize the process parameters such as pyrolysis
temperature, time, and gas flow rate to ensure a uniform catalyst property from
large-scale manufacturing. This project will also provide understanding of the
relationship between the composition of commercial CNTs and the catalytic
performance of the synthesized catalyst. In addition, the team will fabricate a
large-area electrode coated by a thin layer of the optimized catalyst and test
its electrochemical CO2 conversion performance as well as long-term stability.
These scalability investigations will pave the way for commercial applications
of the new technology for CO2 conversion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.