* 2326160
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RM: Human-in-the-Lead Construction Robotics: Future-Proofing Framing Craft Workers in Industrialized Construction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Susan Simkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 263,595.00

Industrialized construction (IC) can address the pressing productivity and
safety issues facing the construction industry by transferring many tasks to
offsite manufacturing facilities that leverage the power of advanced robotic
technologies. However, highly customizable building designs, the inherent
variability in construction materials, and labor-intensive construction tasks
complicate the integration of traditional craftwork and robotic automation. This
research aims to address these challenges by introducing a revolutionary
approach to human-robot collaboration, named Human-in-the-Lead Construction
Robotics (HiLCR). The proposed HiLCR empowers craft workers to take the “lead”
in industrialized tasks that require design-making or fine motor control, while
leveraging the fundamental physical capacities of industrial robotic arms in a
support role. HiLCR will ensure that advanced technologies and machines serve as
tools that nourish the ingenuity of craft workers instead of suppressing it.
This balanced approach of HiLCR will help future workers overcome the looming
crisis of job loss to machines, one of the greatest workforce fears caused by
the current trends in automating human-centric tasks. Furthermore, HiLCR can
reduce potential physical barriers to entry into the construction industry by
delegating manual work that requires certain physical abilities, such as hand
dexterity and lifting of materials, to the robotic system.

The overarching goal of this research is to establish the technical and social
foundations that promote efficient and well-balanced integration of HiLCR in IC.
To achieve this goal, we have organized our efforts into two primary research
streams: (1) the transformation of robotics-based automation in industrialized
construction; and (2) the evaluation of craft worker need satisfaction and
engagement in HiLCR. In the first research stream, we will analyze the product
and production processes of panelized construction and develop an intuitive
control system for HiLCR. The product analysis will utilize design-based
parametric analysis of building designs and tolerance analysis of construction
systems to develop an assembly-based database for panelized construction. The
production analysis will then develop knowledge-based systems to front-load
HiLCR with standardized manufacturing procedures. The technological development
of the control system will incorporate force-based teleoperation, haptic
feedback systems, and active command centers. The proposed ergonomic analysis
will then identify areas where standardized manufacturing procedures can be
revised to safely improve task completion time and team performance. In the
second research stream, we will employ mixed-method research that combines
qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis to re-evaluate the
knowledge, skills, abilities, and other factors required for successful
performance on craft work in HiLCR applications; identify task assignments
associated with greater need satisfaction and engagement of craft workers; and
develop curriculum to prepare new craft workers for working with and alongside
robotic automation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.