* 2326510
* Collaborative Research: Composite vascularized niches for optogenetically actives beta-cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emmanouhl Tzanakakis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,908.00

The design and manufacturing of bioartificial tissues pose great challenges yet
are essential for developing effective therapies for major diseases. Such
tissues typically require a large number of functional cells, which cannot
survive without vasculature that facilitates the transport of nutrients and
oxygen and the removal of waste products. One way to reduce the requisite number
of cells is to amplify their function using light as the stimulus. Based on
previous work, pancreatic insulin-producing β-cells exhibit 2- to 3-fold higher
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion when stimulated with blue light. Moreover,
vascular network formation in synthetic tissues can be promoted with the use of
appropriate biomaterials. This project seeks to develop design principles and
address fundamental biological issues of implantable engineered tissues with
light-activatable cells utilizing a novel pancreatic tissue equivalent developed
for the management of diabetes. Diabetes afflicts almost 10% of the US
population with the highest healthcare costs. All persons with type 1 diabetes
and >30% of those with type 2 diabetes rely exclusively on the administration of
exogenous insulin. However, blood glucose control is suboptimal and does not
avert serious long-term complications. The project will address these issues
through biomaterial discovery and innovation and cell and tissue engineering,
thereby advancing relevant technologies that improve the quality of life of
persons with diabetes. The research is intertwined with educational activities
including interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students in
STEM fields, outreach to K-12 students and the public, and promoting diversity
in bioengineering sciences.

This project is driven by a critical need to develop implantable engineered
tissues for reconstituting vital bodily processes such as blood glucose (BG)
homeostasis. Such tissues require significant numbers of cells and the formation
of a supporting vascular network, which typically spans a few weeks. To address
this need, this project proposes the use of optogenetically engineered human
β-cells, which show 2- to 3-fold greater glucose-stimulated insulin secretion
(GSIS) with illumination, to ameliorate diabetic hyperglycemia. First, a
gelatin-based engineered tissue will be designed and constructed with oxygen-
generating microparticles (OGMs) and optogenetically engineered human β-cells
encapsulated in alginate. Essential design parameters such as the ratio of cells
to supporting OGMs and the hydrogel formulation will be determined. Upon
characterization of the composite hydrogels, human endothelial cells will be
incorporated into the scaffolds to form a vascular network. Conditions will be
established for intra-scaffold angiogenesis in the presence of optogenetically
engineered, glucose-responsive β-cells. Finally, the functionality of the
engineered tissue will be evaluated in a mouse model of diabetes. The research
will address unique hurdles in the use of light-activatable cells, vascular
network formation in synthetic tissues, and interfacing cells with suitable
biomaterials for optimal in vivo function. These are universal considerations in
the design of tunable tissue systems for the treatment of major maladies such as
diabetes. Additionally, assemblies with photoactivatable human β-cells developed
here will be a much-needed resource for basic research on β-cell physiology

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.