* 2326485
* NSF/FDA SiR: Validation and Standardization of Melanometry as a Quantitative Tool for Clinical Evaluation of Racial Disparities in Biophotonic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Robert Wilson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 09/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Recent studies have shown that medical devices can be less accurate for patients
with darker versus lighter skin. This problem can negatively affect the ability
of doctors to make correct decisions about how to treat these patients, leading
to worse health outcomes for patients with darker skin. Most experts believe
that the primary cause of this effect is the absorption of light by melanin in
the top layer of the skin. There are wide variations in the amount of melanin in
the skin among the population. Instruments called melanometers can measure
variables related to the amount of melanin in the skin. Using data from
melanometers may help to properly account for the effect of melanin on the
accuracy of medical devices in diverse populations. This proposal will develop
materials that mimic skin with different amounts of melanin and blood and
measure these materials with melanometers to better understand the effects of
melanin and blood on the data obtained with melanometers. This project may lead
to improved methods for making sure that medical devices are safe and effective
for patients of all races and skin types. Results of this project will be
incorporated into courses at the University of California Irvine on identifying
disparities in health outcomes to illustrate how technologies can be developed
and validated in a way that is equally accurate across diverse groups of
patients.

Ensuring robustness of biophotonic technologies across the full range of skin
colors is crucial for healthcare equity in clinical environments and personal
health monitoring settings. Over the past two decades, numerous studies have
identified racial disparities in biophotonic devices, from cerebral oximeters to
photoacoustic imagers. These discrepancies can adversely impact clinical
decision making, leading to worse health outcomes for patients with darker skin.
Most experts believe that the primary cause of this effect is the intense,
spectrally varying absorption of epidermal melanin; the concentration of which
varies considerably across the population. To determine the magnitude of impact
on a device, one must accurately determine the correlation between melanin
content and device outputs/accuracy. Prior studies have used subjective methods,
including self-identification of race and the Fitzpatrick phototype scale to
assess subject pigmentation. However, objective, quantitative, and well-
standardized methods based on optical measurements may provide a more precise
and effective way to isolate the impact of epidermal melanin. The PI and
collaborators will pursue this goal via constructing a rigorous set of synthetic
tissue-simulating phantoms and using these phantoms as calibration standards to
systematically characterize commercial (non-FDA-approved/cleared) melanometers
for measuring skin pigmentation. Validating the outputs of these commercial
devices against a well-characterized set of tissue models that simulate both
melanin content and confounding tissue factors (e.g., hemoglobin, tissue
scattering) will provide a critical fundamental step forward in establishing the
credibility of melanometers as regulatory science tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.