* 2326746
* QuSeC-TAQS: Sensing-Intelligence on The Move: Quantum-Enhanced Optical Diagnosis of Crop Diseases
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Quntao Zhuang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,075,000.00

Downy mildew is one of the most threatening diseases to cucurbit crops, and it
can be hardly detected at the early stage of infection using classical sensing
technologies. The late detection of downy mildew can cause reduced crop yields
and excessive fungicide application, thus leading to significant economic and
food losses and environment pollution. Quantum sensing, as a revolutionary
technology, has demonstrated its ability to surpass the limits of classical
sensing, owing to its utilization of nonclassical resources such as entanglement
and squeezed light. The project team, comprised of Principal Investigators from
diverse disciplines including physics, computer science, optics, biology, and
agricultural science, will collaborate to develop quantum sensors tailored for
the fast and accurate diagnosis of downy mildew. This project serves the
national interest for its advancement of national food safety and promotion of
basic and applied scientific research. Moreover, through local outreach
activities, this project will benefit local growers at North Carolina, K-12
students, and underrepresented college students.

This QuSeC-TAQS team will focus on three synergistic research thrusts: (1) the
development of new theories and algorithms, (2) the optimization of the teamâ€™s
pre-established quantum sensing devices, and (3) the experimental evaluation
utilizing the leaf samples infected by downy mildew. Specifically, PIs will
develop an entangled photon source that is directed by an acousto-optic beam
steering device to leaf samples for fast and wide-angle scanning. A quantum
receiver enhanced by adaptive learning system that can optimize the receiver
circuit configurations based on real-time measurements will be developed to
remedy the problem of high photon losses in the agricultural environment. PIs
will also grow cucumber plants, inoculate them with downy mildew spores, and
collect leaf samples for in-lab quantum sensing experiments. The anticipated
outcome is to shorten the detection window from the state-of-the-art of 4-5 days
to a new record of 1-2 days following the downy mildew infection. The scientific
thrusts of this team are further complemented with training of a diverse
workforce, with priority given to underrepresented students in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.