* 2326312
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Communication-Efficient, Fault-Tolerant Private Information Retrieval over Erasure Coded Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rashmi Vinayak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2026
* USD 195,066.00

Many privacy-preserving applications such as anonymous messaging, private
database querying, encrypted search, and privacy-preserving advertising require
implementing protocols that allow a client to read or write to a database
(hosted by one or more servers) without revealing to the servers which item in
the database was read/written. To do so, many applications make use of an
important cryptographic primitive called private information retrieval (PIR),
which allows clients to retrieve values from an untrusted data storage such that
the storage servers do not learn anything about which value is being retrieved.
When considered for practical usage, existing approaches have several
significant drawbacks in terms of communication, storage, and computation
efficiency, as well as fault tolerance. This project’s novelties are to develop
new PIR protocols for both private reads and writes to a database hosted on
multiple servers, and to simultaneously achieve efficiency in communication and
storage overheads, as well as being fault-tolerant against fail-stop and
Byzantine failures. This project’s broader significance and importance are to
improve important aspects of private information retrieval via algorithmic
techniques, which can be used in real world applications that leverage PIR, and
make these applications more efficient, scalable, and practical.

The team of researchers plan to address the research question in two thrusts.
The first thrust focuses on designing fault-tolerant, communication-efficient
distributed point function schemes, which will help the design of queries that
can be later used for PIR reads/writes. The second thrust will build upon the
distributed point function designs from the first thrust to create end-to-end
PIR protocols for enabling oblivious reads and writes over erasure-coded
storage. The team is planning to open source the framework for other researchers
and educators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.