* 2326505
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Investigating and Mitigating Harmful Design in User-Generated Virtual World through Design Moderation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yubo Kou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 185,812.00

User-generated virtual worlds are three-dimensional spaces that offer an
immersive experience and are designed and populated by tens of millions of
users, including a significant number of children. Many children spend
considerable time in these online spaces to create, socialize, learn, and play.
Although online virtual worlds represent new ways for children to create content
and interact with each other, they also have given rise to harmful design.
Harmful design can affect unsuspecting child users in manipulative, insidious
ways, such as inducing them to perform violent role-plays, exposing them to
abusive content, and tricking them into excessive spending. Previous research
has studied how to detect and moderate harmful user-generated content, such as
hate speech and harassment, which typically exist in static forms such as text,
image, and video. However, limited attention has been paid to harmful design in
user-generated virtual worlds. This project aims to tackle this challenge by
employing a mixed-methods, human-centered design approach. The objectives are to
provide comprehensive empirical and conceptual insights into harmful design,
foster broader societal and academic awareness of this challenge, and explore
strategies to mitigate this challenge and alike.

To achieve these goals, the project is identifying and characterizing harmful
design in user-generated virtual worlds and exploring moderation strategies that
can mitigate harmful design. The project uses a combination of qualitative and
quantitative methods to document and analyze instances of harmful design, as
well as how child users experience and perceive harmful design. The project also
uses cooperative inquiry to work with children and design experts to develop
design guidelines that can promote safety design and mitigate harmful design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.