* 2326134
* FW-HTF-RM: Addressing and Amplifying the Skills of the Future Hispanic and Latino Construction Workforce Using BIM and Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joseph LaViola, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 985,135.00

Our nation currently faces a critical shortage of skilled trades workers as more
are retiring than joining these critically important construction occupation
fields. Additionally, a widening foreign language gap forces new construction
workers, who are not native English speakers, to face a job market lacking the
requisite skills gap creating staffing, and safety, and skill issues. This
project addresses this gap created by the changing composition of the labor
force by advancing the theory and knowledge required to train currently
marginalized Hispanic and Latino workers utilizing augmented reality (AR) and
building information modeling (BIM) technology. This new foundational knowledge
will support the creation of an environment where all individuals can fully
participate. Our interdisciplinary team is innovating by investigating how AR,
with real-time voice translation can enable equity, and BIM technology can
facilitate the learning of transferable retrofitting skills to expand
individuals’ aspirational goals, by opening additional career paths to the
‘Missing Millions’ in the construction workforce. Increasing access to better
positions for these workers by amplifying workers with what they bring to
retrofitting jobs. Our goal is to empower non-native English-speaking workers by
utilizing AR to access BIM data in their native language (Spanish), thereby
assisting them to learn in-demand retrofitting skills.

This project will utilize a novel interdisciplinary approach to advance the
fundamental understanding of the learning science supporting in-demand
retrofitting skills and designs at the edge of the AR+BIM human-technology
frontier. We will conduct a language needs analysis to understand the subtleties
and complexities of several Spanish dialects to identify strengths and
weaknesses in future AR+BIM real-time translation interfaces. We will develop
validated processes to leverage these translation capabilities for non-native
English-speaking workers, while developing novel mini-labs to promote greater
transferable retrofitting skills by testing impacts of workers’ first and second
language comprehension on complex construction task completion. This research
project will study how native language and physical actions embody and extend
cognitive processes in complex construction environments and gaining
understanding of the linguistic and cultural competencies of a diverse future
workforce. Our approach is directly applicable towards providing insights into
the alternative problem domains of manufacturing, nursing, and public safety,
all of which are facing the challenges of skilled labor shortages and equitable
access.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.