* 2326482
* LTREB Renewal: Long-term ecosystem responses to directional changes in precipitation amount and variability in an arid grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Osvaldo Sala, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 08/31/2028
* USD 150,661.00

Rainfall plays an important role in dryland environments. Climate is changing
fast and significantly. A drier and more variable climate is expected, which
could affect dryland environments. Predicting the effects of a new climate on
the functioning of ecosystems is the most pressing objective of ecology.
Understanding, the way ecosystems will function under these novel conditions is
necessary to develop management strategies that generate optimal societal
outcomes. Drylands are very important because they cover 40% of the terrestrial
surface and provide invaluable goods and services. These goods and services
range from forage production to recreation. This project will continue two
unique long-term experiments, where researchers separately manipulated rain
amount and variability in a desert grassland in New Mexico for 16 years. Results
from the first 5 years of this project yielded unexpected results. Drought had
indirect effects on the composition of plant species that offset the direct
effects of drought. The continuation of the project will determine how these
different responses occurred. Broader impacts include directly contributing to
increasing participation of underrepresented groups. This project will
collaborate with Asombro Institute for Science Education by building a new
demonstration project at the 960-acre Chihuahuan Desert Nature Park. Asombro is
a non-profit organization that provides award-winning science education to more
than 22,000 children and 4,500 adults annually in southern New Mexico and
western Texas.

This proposal is guided by two hypotheses about dryland responses to changes in
amount and variability of precipitation. (1) Endogenous Mechanisms:
Biogeochemical and demographic phenomena mediate abrupt or continuous changes in
populations, communities and ecosystem processes. (2) Exogenous Phenomena: El
Ni√±o events at 3-4-year periods interact with changes in low-frequency Pacific
Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and Atlantic Multi-Decadal Oscillation (AMO). These
climate events interact with internal mechanisms. Jointly, they affect system
resistance, and lead to changes in species composition and ecosystem processes.
After 16 years, the ecosystem seems to be at crossroads regarding soil organic
nitrogen forms. This condition may result in a new N-water limitation. The
project will continue two unique long-term precipitation-manipulation
experiments that separately manipulated precipitation amount and variability in
a desert grassland in New Mexico for 16 years. The long-term manipulations of
precipitation amount are accomplished using rainout shelters coupled with
irrigation systems. This project will directly contribute to increasing
participation of underrepresented minorities with emphasis on Hispanic students.
This project will collaborate with Asombro Institute for Science Education by
building a new demonstration project at the 960-acre Chihuahuan Desert Nature
Park. Asombro is a non-profit organization that provides award-winning science
education to more than 22,000 children and 4,500 adults annually in southern New
Mexico and western Texas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.