* 2326182
* CAREER: Learning-Based Hardware and Software Techniques for Quality-of-Service-Aware Cloud Microservices
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Christina Delimitrou, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2025
* USD 432,963.00

Datacenters support a large and ever-increasing fraction of the world's digital
computation power, including search engines, social networks, and machine
learning analytics. As modern cloud services grow in popularity, their design
shifts from supporting complex monolithic applications, to supporting
collections of specialized, loosely-coupled microservices. Such microservices
impact resource requirements by requiring fast network processing and low-
latency memory accesses to achieve their quality-of-service (QoS) constraints.
Dependencies among microservices also complicate compute cluster management, and
can cause cascading QoS violations, hurting availability and service
reliability. Guaranteeing the responsiveness expected from cloud services while
using datacenters efficiently requires instead a joint hardware-software
approach. This project takes a holistic view towards designing a system stack
for interactive cloud microservices running on large-scale datacenters that is
QoS-aware, and resource-efficient. By pursuing automated, learning-based
techniques, this project highlights the value of leveraging practical machine
learning techniques to better navigate the increasing complexity of the cloud,
as more datacenter services switch to this new application model.

At the hardware level, this project first quantifies the implications
microservices have on server design, and second, explores their potential for
hardware acceleration. At the software level, this work is developing a new
cluster manager that accounts for the dependencies among microservices in an
automated and transparent-to-the-user way, and guarantees end-to-end
performance. Finally, to eliminate the cascading effects of QoS violations
between microservices, this project includes a data-driven, online performance
forecasting system. This system leverages the massive amount of monitoring data
collected by cloud systems to anticipate upcoming QoS violations, and act on
them before they degrade performance. By innovating in both hardware and
software, this work will achieve performance and efficiency gains that neither
hardware- nor software-only approaches can provide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.