* 2326758
* QuSeC-TAQS: Entanglement- Enhanced Multiphoton Fluorescence Imaging of in Vivo Neural Function
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Alan Bristow, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,205,498.00

This project is jointly funded by the Quantum Sensing Challenges (QuSeC)
Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
Two-photon imaging uses intense laser pulses to excite fluorescent proteins
within living tissues and is widespread in the biological sciences for
functional imaging of time-varying processes. The two-photon absorption process
has increased spatial resolution compared to one-photon absorption but is less
efficient and thus requires high light intensity to increase the likelihood that
two photons will arrive at a fluorophore simultaneously. This research project
will produce excitation light sources with quantum entanglement between photons,
which will increase the likelihood of two photons arriving simultaneously, thus
making two-photon absorption and imaging more efficient. Improved efficiency
will enable lower laser intensities, reducing damage to tissue, enabling longer
and more frequent measurements. Similar entanglement effects will also improve
the efficiency of three-photon absorption, which operates at a wavelength that
penetrates more deeply into tissue. Existing two-photon imaging facilities at
West Virginia University will be upgraded with quantum-entangled light sources.
Postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers will be trained in an
interdisciplinary laboratory setting combining physics, biology, and
neuroscience. Teaching modules will be devised to raise quantum awareness in a
Quantum Summer School for undergraduates.

Fluorescence imaging using 2-photon excitation represents the state-of-the-art
for functional imaging of neurons within the nervous system. Neural dynamics can
be captured by recording fluorescence images as a function of time. Yet there
remain limitations to 2-photon fluorescence imaging stemming from the
inefficiency of the excitation process, which relies on simultaneous absorption
of two independent photons from a laser pulse. Simultaneous absorption is
unlikely with classical photon distributions; thus 2-photon excitation requires
intense excitation that can damage tissue and reduces the experimental duration
in live animals. This project leverages quantum correlations between time-
energy-entangled photons to enhance the efficiency of multi-photon imaging in
the brains of living animals (fruit flies and mice). Multi-photon imaging will
report neuron activity through the excitation of the GCaMP family of fluorescent
calcium indicators. Improved efficiency will enable imaging deeper into the
tissue, better imaging earlier in development, and imaging of otherwise weakly
expressed fluorophores, all while reducing damage due to phototoxicity. This
will allow longer measurement times and require fewer live animals to be
prepared, increasing the efficiency of time and money allotted to research.
Extension to 3-photon absorption with even longer wavelengths will allow
penetration through more opaque materials such as insect cuticle or rodent
skull.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.