* 2326808
* QuSeC-TAQS: Improving Geodesy and Gravitational Sensing with Quantum Sensors of Time
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Scott Diddams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,434,675.00

One of the more surprising predictions of Einstein’s theory of general
relativity is that time evolves more slowly under the influence of gravity.
Known as the gravitational redshift, the effect predicts that a clock further
from the Earth will tick faster relative to one closer to the Earth. From the
human perspective, the magnitude of the effect is small, but it has important
impacts for GPS navigation, fundamental timekeeping, and as this project will
show, for measuring gravity and the shape of the Earth. This concept is known as
relativistic geodesy, and it employs the some of best optical clocks, which are
advanced quantum sensors of time. Specifically, this project will use optical
clocks and time transfer systems to advance geodesy beyond the state-of-the-art.
This will involve transporting a cold-atom optical clock to the mountainous
regions of Colorado to measure geopotential differences using relativistic
geodesy, showing the value of precision timekeeping for measuring the shape of
the Earth at the 1 cm level. This team also expects to make the best test of the
gravitational redshift predicted by Einstein’s theory. The proposed effort
uniquely explores how research and technologies from quantum, atomic, and laser
physics can be better engineered and applied for the benefit of gravitational
and geophysics through high temporal and spatial resolution measurements that
will ultimately impact the fields of hydrology, mineral exploration, and
seismology.

A minimum requirement for relativistic geodesy is the ability to operate two
optical clocks at distinct locations of interest, as well as a measurement link
to observe the gravitational redshift between them. For the geodesy proposed
here, this team will use an ytterbium optical lattice clock currently operating
at NIST as the reference clock. This clock is located in the fixed gravitational
reference frame, and has already demonstrated systematic uncertainty, frequency
stability, and reproducibility at 1 part in a billion billion (10^18) or better.
The second clock system will be a transportable optical clock, also based on
ultracold ytterbium atoms in an optical lattice. In this program, the robustness
of the transportable clock will be improved, and its systematic uncertainty will
be fully evaluated to match that of the laboratory clock. The fixed and
transportable clocks will then be compared via optical time transfer that relies
on the two-way exchange of laser light from frequency combs across the air
between NIST and the mountaintop. Ultimately, the transportable clock will be
moved to a mountain summit (Mt. Evans, 14,264 feet) to perform relativistic
geodesy. Direct line of sight from Mt. Evans to Boulder does not exist, so a
two-arm link will be utilized that combines free-space laser link, followed by a
fiber-optic based link from Broomfield to NIST Boulder. Connecting the pieces,
this quantum-sensor-based geodesy measurement will yield accuracy at or below 2
cm. More significantly, the sizeable elevation difference between Mt. Evans and
Boulder (>2600 m) corresponds to a large gravitational redshift of nearly 3
parts in ten to the thirteen (10^13). Since the optical clocks can measure at
the level of 2 parts in 10^18, the redshift will be resolved at 10 ppm level or
better. Together with classical geopotential determination, this proposed
measurement will yield the most precise test of the general relativistic
redshift ever, either for terrestrial or space-based measurements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.