* 2326194
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RL: Trapeze: Responsible AI-assisted Talent Acquisition for HR Specialists
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Frederick Oswald, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2027
* USD 495,033.00

Human Resources (HR) Specialists fulfill a range of critical staffing functions
in organizations. This project focuses on supporting HR Specialists in the
technology and “big-box” retail industries, who source and screen candidates for
entry- to mid-level positions. These HR Specialists often find themselves under
enormous pressure to fill roles, and they turn to automated decision systems
(ADS) for managing the meticulous balancing act of talent acquisition: sifting
through pools of candidates to find people who meet job requirements and have
the “right” culture fit, while adhering to ethical standards and legal
compliance. AI models that match and rank candidates are at the heart of these
ADS. Poorly designed models can produce incorrect and inconsistent results that
fail to match candidates appropriately to job requirements, or that limit the
visibility of well-suited candidates. Together, these problems can lead to
unaccountable decision-making processes and unfair decision outcomes, harming
individual job seekers and members of already disadvantaged communities, and
putting employers at risk of litigation.

This project reimagines the role of HR Specialists (future worker), empowering
them with the agency to reason about, validate, audit, and influence the ADS-
assisted hiring process (future work context). These interventions are supported
by a human-in-the-loop framework called Trapeze (future technology) that
supports transparent automation in talent acquisition, along with innovative
educational materials and methodologies that train HR Specialists to become
better informed about AI and accountability in ADS-assisted decisions. Outcomes
of Trapeze include open-source software, allowing the broad and diverse
community of responsible AI researchers and practitioners to build and evaluate
tools for sourcing and screening more effectively. This project also advances
the understanding of the behavioral, social, legal, and technical contexts in
which HR Specialists in the technology and retail domains make ADS-assisted
decisions. Publicly available training materials and methodologies from this
project help HR Specialists become more informed, responsible, efficient, and
effective in their use of ADS. All shared materials, taken together, serve as a
strong blueprint for strengthening accountability in ADS use within other high-
stakes sectors of industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.