* 2326798
* Conference: 2023 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Suveen Mathaudhu, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Non-Technical Summary The purpose of the conference support request is to enable
the participation of early career attendees and key invited speakers to the 2023
Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference (GRC), which has a long history
of catalyzing new directions and sparking critical discussions of fundamental
concepts in the science and engineering of metals in complex, heterogeneous
applications. As a result, the Physical Metallurgy GRC is become a key network-
and community-building event for metallurgists and materials scientists, from
graduate students, post-docs, and other early career scientists to senior
scientists and engineers. The unique format of Gordon Research Conferences with
in-depth presentations at the forefront of science with equal discussion time,
integrated poster sessions where all attendees are encouraged present their
work, and informal discussion sessions and workshops provides a forum to probe
our scientific understanding and share expertise among the community members.
This Physical Metallurgy GRC is subtitled “Metallurgy Matters for Creating a
Sustainable World”, reflecting the community’s commitment to the principles of
the National Science Foundation’s efforts to support fundamental science that
will lead to a more sustainable future for generations to come. The GRC will be
preceded by an associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) where early career
researchers present and discuss their work and participate in mentoring and
career-building activities. The GRS will be held on July 8-9, 2023 and the GRC
will be on July 9-14, 2023, at Stonehill College in Easton, MA.

Technical Summary One of the most pressing challenges and opportunities for the
physical metallurgy community lies in our ability to harness the latest
scientific advances to have a positive impact on the environment, economy, and
society. The community must learn to design, produce, and implement metals and
alloys in a rapid and sustainable manner. Germane to these goals is the
necessity to examine the field of physical metallurgy for intersections between
fundamental science and the sustainability of proposed technologies. The
research objective of this meeting is to enable the community to explore the
complex relationships between processing, structure, property, and performance
that are needed to overcome acute barriers to discovery and implementation of
sustainable metals. Advances in physical metallurgy are needed to enable
forward-looking sustainability concepts in light weighting, recycling, extreme
environment, magnetic/energy and others, and technical approach for this meeting
will be to focus on the fundamental scientific underpinnings (material defects,
thermodynamics and kinetic interactions, microstructure) necessary to achieve
these goals. Further, new discoveries in these domains are being enabled through
3D/4D high-resolution microstructure probes, emerging theories, computational
models and data science-driven simulations, novel processing pathways, and the
measurements and tools to provide connectivity between them. The oral and poster
sessions at the GRC and GRS will provide a robust venue for discussion of the
fundamental science, methods and tools, and new discoveries, with the
anticipated outcome of providing a vision for using physical metallurgical
sciences to enable a more sustainable future. The potential impact of the
meeting will be represented through the engagement of the diverse structural
metals research community to harness the dialogs of the meeting toward
accelerating the design and development of advanced materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.