* 2326792
* QuSeC-TAQS: Quantum Sensing with Strongly Nonclassical Light Based on Third-Order Nonlinearities
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Jelena Vuckovic, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 669,791.00

Optical quantum sensing holds promise for revolutionizing extremely sensitive
detection of various physical quantities such as molecular spectra or
frequencies by harnessing resources such as quantum correlations and
entanglement. In fact, it is already deployed in niche areas such as
gravitational wave detectors. However, several unsolved challenges remain that
prevent widespread adoption of quantum sensors at scale compared to classical
counterparts. For example, stringent demands on vacuum-compatibility and low-
temperature operation combined with the substantial additional complexity to
generate the fragile quantum resources often limit the environments in which
these quantum sensors can be widely deployed. The team aims to overcome these
limitations using room-temperature quantum sources generating what is called
squeezed light that take advantage of quantum correlations to reduce noise below
classical bounds. This multidisciplinary team combines cross-cutting expertise
in applied physics, quantum science, electrical engineering, biophysics,
mechanical engineering, materials science, nanofabrication and bioengineering.
The quantum light sources developed under the program will be on-chip, compact,
scalable, and mass-manufacturable through advanced nanofabrication techniques,
allowing for the planned seamless integration with the sensors. Additionally,
the team will contribute to training a quantum-ready workforce through
collaborative work with federal labs, by providing multidisciplinary mentoring
of graduate and undergraduate students, and by designing new tailored curricula
on emerging quantum technologies.

The project combines fundamental innovations in the generation and detection of
quantum light with practical advances in device design towards scalable
integrated systems that exhibit improved sensing performance. The effort will
develop three platforms for quantum light generation – all based on the
ubiquitous third-order Kerr nonlinearity, but with different levels of maturity
– towards quantum sensing applications. The quantum resources harnessed in this
project for enhanced sensing consist of nonclassical states of light called
squeezed states, which exhibit quantum noise reduction below that of the vacuum.
These three platforms of rubidium vapor, silicon nitride and silicon carbide
have their unique advantages such as ultralow loss, high confinement or large
parametric gain, but the integrated nanophotonic platforms have been stymied by
low squeezing levels. To overcome this, the goals of the project include the
generation of large squeezing levels over wide wavelength ranges using four-wave
mixing on nanofabricated chip-scale platforms and their integration with the
quantum sensors. The improvements in squeezing levels will be achieved through
innovations in noise suppression, device design, precise dispersion engineering
and multi-frequency analysis. A wide variety of quantum sensors will benefit
from the strong quantum noise reduction inherent to squeezed light and their
close integration with the sensor. Overall, the project promotes advances in
quantum sensing by increasing access to portable, frequency-agile strongly
nonclassical light sources in relatively compact and stable atomic vapors and
especially in integrated nanophotonic chip-scale platforms. This project was co-
funded by the Quantum Sensors Challenge for Transformative Advances in Quantum
Systems (QuSeC-TAQS) program, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.