* 2326807
* 2023 Crystal Growth and Assembly Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Kristen Fichthorn, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 11/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Summary

The 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Crystal Growth and Assembly:
Mechanistic Understanding of the Growth and Assembly of Ordered Materials, and
the 2023 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Crystal Growth and Assembly are being
held at Southern New Hampshire University on June 18-23 and June 17-18, 2023,
respectively. Our society continuously beneﬁts from the development of a wide
range of advanced materials to solve technological challenges in applications
ranging from solar cells, ﬂexible electronics and catalysts to new therapeutics
for human diseases such as malaria. Such materials are developed by scientists
with diverse backgrounds including chemistry, physics, materials science, and
engineering. Novel materials are often developed at the boundaries of these
disciplines and the aim of the Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Growth &
Assembly is to bring together leading scientists from these diﬀerent backgrounds
to stimulate cross-fertilization. To promote broader impact, the format of the
meeting emphasizes interaction with and active participation of young
scientists, i.e., students and post-docs, to educate a new generation of
researchers that will have to meet future materials challenges in a changing
world where (some) resources become increasingly scarce. NSF's Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
Program, both in the Division of Materials Research, support stipends for
registration fee and/or travel support for some early-career participants at
this conference because of its relevance to their respective programmatic scope.

Technical Summary The Crystal Growth and Assembly Gordon Research Conference and
Seminar are dedicated to the knowledge and understanding of the fundamental
atomic and nanoscale physics and chemistry that are central to the nucleation
and growth of crystals, as well as their assembly into ordered materials for a
wide array of technologies. Such knowledge is needed to develop advanced
materials for a diverse range of applications. The 2023 GRC conference has a
particular focus on the integration of theory and experiment to predict and
understand crystal growth and assembly. This conference, with support from NSF's
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program and the Condensed Matter and
Materials Theory Program, both in the Division of Materials Research, gathers
leading scientists representing the major areas in crystallization and assembly,
and brings them into contact with each other and, more importantly, with the
next generation of researchers to promote broader outreach within the crystal
growth community. With respect to this larger goal, the meeting seeks to provide
a common language for our diverse student body; to raise the comfort-level of
our student/postdoc participants; and, through these eﬀorts, to develop a
tightly woven community held together by a common interest in the principles of
materials assembly. The accompanying Gordon Research Seminar that is dedicated
to and organized by graduate students and post-doctoral researchers aids in the
active participation of this new generation of scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.