* 2326528
* QuSeC-TAQS: Driving Advances in Magnetic Materials and Devices with Quantum Sensing of Magnons
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Xiao-Xiao Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 995,658.00

The aim of this project is to accelerate the development and adoption of quantum
sensing platforms to drive technologically-relevant advances in magnetic
materials, including near-term materials needed to address critical clean energy
challenges, such as the need for miniature and efficient power converters in
electric vehicles. At a more fundamental level, this project will also
accelerate progress in understanding cutting edge ultrathin magnetic materials.
The project brings together an interdisciplinary team of experimental
physicists, theorists, and engineers to develop a magnetic quantum sensing
platform and bring it from proof-of-concept to practical application.

The proposed quantum sensing approach is based on the electron spins of defects
in diamond (the nitrogen-vacancy defect). The quantum state of the spins will be
used to detect magnetic waves known as magnons in novel magnetic materials,
yielding information about a materialâ€™s magnetic properties and dynamics with
high spatial and time resolution. On the basic science of quantum sensing, this
team will use testbed systems and theory to develop new modalities of magnon
quantum sensing. These new modalities will be developed with an eye towards
solving outstanding problems in magnetic materials. In order to accelerate
progress, the team will engineer Quantum-Enabled Magnon Sensing (QuEMS) devices
based on micro/nano-electromechanical system (MEMS/NEMS) expertise to allow high
throughput application of these quantum sensing techniques with diverse
materials. The team will apply the QuEMS platform to two currently relevant
magnetic materials systems: atomically-thin magnets and nanocrystalline soft
magnetic (NSM) alloys. Atomically-thin magnetic materials are interesting from a
fundamental perspective, as their two-dimensional nature results in novel
magnetic properties for individual layers, and complex interactions when these
layers are stacked. NSM alloys are an emerging class of magnetic materials with
near-term application due to their extremely low energy loss in devices such as
transformers and power converters. These two materials classes both exhibit
phenomena on fast time scales and nanometer length scales, making the quantum
sensing platform in this prject a powerful tool for understanding and developing
these materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.