* 2326895
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Quasi Weightless Neural Networks for Energy-Efficient Machine Learning on the Edge
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Subhasish Mitra, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently enabled revolutionary advances in a
wide variety of tasks, however these deep networks demand large amounts of
memory and computation resources. Such demands can be highly difficult (or even
impractical) for systems on the edge. Although DNNs are very accurate, the
energy consumed by DNNs is orders of magnitude higher than biological neural
activities for similar tasks. It is important to reduce the computational and
energy demands of machine learning hardware so that inferencing on the edge can
become a low-cost, low-energy task. Weightless Neural Networks (WNNs) represent
a distinct class of neural models which derive inspiration from the processing
of input signals by the dendritic trees of biological neurons. WNNs do not use
weights or multiply-add operations to determine their responses. Instead, they
rely on value lookups implemented using look-up tables. This project explores
small models that are more energy efficient compared to multiplication-and-
addition-based deep learning models. WNNs are very promising from the
perspective of energy-efficiency, and low latency, and our effort is directed at
enabling a myriad of ultra-low energy edge applications otherwise impossible.

This project explores low-energy machine learning hardware which combine the
benefits of traditional DNNs and the computation-less weightless neural
networks. Techniques used include (1) utilizing multi-layer networks and
hierarchical networks to create novel weightless neural network architectures,
(2) devising novel training algorithms for WNNs utilizing multi-shot training
with feedback (3) exploring quasi-weightless neural networks using emerging
novel memory technologies, and (4) designing systems for energy-efficient edge
intelligence. The collaborative project between the University of Texas and
Stanford University innovates across multiple layers of the system stack,
including architecture and circuit layers. The collaborative activity between
the University of Texas and Stanford involves many underrepresented communities
from a STEM perspective, including minority and women, undergrads, and first-
generation college students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.