* 2326785
* EAGER: Collaborative Proposal: Probabilistic Scenarios for Megathrust Earthquakes and Tsunami Genesis
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Sui Tung, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 191,927.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Subduction zones, known for parallel chains of towering
volcanoes and deep oceanic trenches, host Earth's most geologically complex and
heavily populated regions. Subduction zones represent the continuous convergence
of two tectonic plates, one of which subducts (“dives”) into the mantle while
the other rides over the top of the subducting plate. Stress in this converging
system continuously builds until it exceeds the frictional strength of the
boundary separating the two plates. At this point, the pent-up stress is
released in the form of an earthquake and warps the seafloor. This warping
seafloor shifts the overlying ocean surface, a process known as tsunami genesis.
Only subduction zones can generate mega-earthquakes, which can warp the seafloor
over tremendously vast areas and trigger devastating tsunamis. Predicting
tsunamis is a challenging problem because it requires an understanding of the
inaccessible details of the stress release along the plate boundary and how it
deforms the structure of the entire subduction zone. This research presents a
new approach that brings the combined power of mathematics and statistics to
bear on this problem. Mathematics describes the physical processes of
earthquakes and tsunamis and the statistics account for what is known, or more
importantly, what is unknown about the subduction zone system. Results of this
research could provide the tools to evaluate risks for coastal locations that
are prone to tsunamis. Numerical modeling is the key to this approach and demand
for numerical modeling skills is increasing in parallel with expanding data
collection initiatives and advances in computational capabilities. This project
includes an educational component that will engage students from
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in
formalized training in numerical modeling.

This research will develop numerical tools with a probabilistic perspective to
investigate the coupling of seafloor deformation from megathrust earthquakes and
tsunamis. These tools will address the challenging problem of embedding
sophisticated finite element models of earthquake deformation into automated
Monte Carlo sampling strategies. The deformation models will have geodetically-
informed slip distributions over curved fault surfaces embedded in domains
having the geometric irregularities of topography and bathymetry. Domains will
simultaneously account for seismic tomography and reflection models, submarine-
based seafloor observations, and tsunami observations. These models will
propagate uncertainties from geodetic data into probability density functions
for tsunami run-up behavior along coastal locations. This research will, for the
first time, quantify how the larger uncertainties for near-trench slip propagate
into tsunami predictions. Finite element models are necessary to simulate the
complex mechanical behavior of subduction zones and Monte Carlo sampling will
reveal how uncertainties in the data and model configurations propagate into
deformation and tsunami predictions. These objectives will be achieved using the
well-documented 2004 Sumatra megathrust earthquake and tsunami as a case study.
A short course on finite element models of earthquake deformation will be
developed and delivered. The curriculum will comprise Protocol-based Modeling,
Forward Modeling, Inverse Modeling, and discussions of Target Applications.
Graduate students from U.S. institutions will be recruited by the Graduate Women
In Science chapter and the Women in Science and Engineering program at the South
Dakota School of Mines to promote participation of underrepresented students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.