* 2326986
* I-Corps: Surface Innovation for Energy Efficiency and Water Management
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Lenan Zhang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
hybrid coating to improve the energy efficiency and water conservation in power
plant condensers. Coatings are rarely found in a power plant condenser due to
their poor durability. Existing enhanced condensers rely on low-fin tubes, which
are costly and can only improve the condensation heat transfer of water
marginally (< 150%). In addition to efficiency limitations, fouling and
corrosion also are two major pain points for heat exchangers. The proposed
technology is designed to achieve superior thermal and chemical properties,
including high thermal conductivity, anti-corrosion, self-healing, and
potentially anti-fouling. It is based on an engineered surface that can be
retrofitted into existing or incorporated into newly built heat exchangers. In
addition, the proposed technology has shown the potential to enhance energy and
water efficiency across multiple industries and applications, including power
generation, chemical processing, and marine applications. Due to its water
repellency, this technology potentially may address fouling and corrosion
problems for even broader applications, such as industrial cooling, agriculture,
and the petrochemical industry.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a hybrid coating to enhance
thermal conductivity and durability. The proposed technology is the combination
of densely packed metal nanostructures with a hydrophobic thermoplastic polymer.
In laboratory experiments conducted over 200 days, it was shown that over 700%
condensation heat transfer of water was achieved on a coated sample as compared
to a bare metal surface. In addition, the corrosion rate measured on the coated
sample was 100x slower than on a copper substrate, demonstrating high anti-
corrosion performance. Further, the manufacturing process does not require
chemical vapor deposition, which may allow scalable and affordable
manufacturing. The proposed technology shows potential to improve energy
efficiency and water conservation in power plant condensers as well as other
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.