* 2326666
* I-Corps: Omniphobic Anodic Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Chang-Hwan Choi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
revolutionize the anodizing process in manufacturing and surface finishing for
metals. The anodizing market continuously grows due to the increasing demand for
lightweight and durable materials in various industries. The global anodizing
industry sector was estimated more than USD 1.5 billion in 2020 and is expected
to grow at a CAGR of 5%, reaching about USD 3 billion by 2030. Adapting the
anodizing process, omniphobic anodic coatings can make the metallic surface not
only slippery and frictionless but also non-sticky, anti-corrosive, anti-
biofouling, and anti-icing/frosting. The technology can be applied to diverse
metals including aluminum, steel, titanium, copper, and magnesium alloys, thus
broadly impacting various applications including marine, aerospace, automotive,
energy production, construction, and medical. Other potential applications
include food processing equipment, home appliances, and sporting goods where
non-stickiness and corrosion resistance are required. The technology is facile,
economical, scalable, and eco-friendly so that it can readily be applied to
current industrial manufacturing processes with little change and risk in their
practices, having great commercialization potential for the broad range of
metallic materials and applications.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of novel anodic coatings that
can make metallic surfaces omniphobic to repel various types of fouling and
corrosive agents in both solid and fluid states. Anodizing has extensively been
employed in manufacturing industry to improve surface properties and passivate
the metallic surface from corrosion. However, the porous layer resulting from
the anodizing process is still prone to corrosion so that the pores are
typically filled with anti-corrosion sealants in a solid phase. However, they
are neither durable nor self-repairable. The omniphobic anodic coating is to
fill the pores with water-immiscible and non-corrosive lubricating fluid such as
air or oil. The omniphobic anodic coating enables the stable retention of the
lubricating fluid within the nanopores and the self-healing capability to
restore the lubricating fluid against damages. In addition to the durability,
health/environment hazards and maintenance cost are critical factors for
commercialization and broad applications. The omniphobic anodic coating does not
require thick coatings or additives, because it is based on the oxidation of the
original metal surface, so that the surface can easily be restored or repaired.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.