* 2326924
* Conference: Evolution, physiology and biomechanics of insect flight
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Caroline Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 15,904.00

Public Award Abstract

This conference award supports a symposium and associated workshop on insect
flight at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology in January 2024. Flight is a key adaptation of insects, enabling their
capacities to migrate and pollinate, and thus is critical to the roles of
insects both as beneficial animals and pests. However, there are many remaining
unknowns about insect flight, limiting the understanding of the evolutionary
origins of flight, how ecological conditions such as climate change will affect
flying insects, and how to manage flying insect pests. Answering questions about
insect flight requires an integration of molecular, biochemical, physiological,
ecological, and biomechanical perspectives. The award addresses these needs by
bringing together scientists from diverse backgrounds and characteristics, and
from a range of biological subdisciplines including molecular evolution,
biomechanics and physiology, as symposium speakers. In addition, a workshop,
eleven publications, and community building activities are being supported.
Travel awards will be provided for trainees in the complementary sessions, and a
network that will allow for student training exchanges will be created. A
database and email listserv will be created to connect researchers across
fields, training levels, and institutions. Promotion of a diverse scientific
workforce will occur as trainees will be involved in all aspects of the
preparation, execution, and community building for the symposium. Diversity and
inclusion in biological sciences will be enhanced by featuring research from
groups historically excluded from science.

The unparalleled diversity of insects is often attributed to the evolution of
powered flight in the Pterygote (winged) insect lineage around 400 million years
ago, providing benefits of dispersal from inhospitable sites, mate finding,
resource acquisition, and escape from predators. Despite the critical importance
of flight to insects, many questions remain, including an understanding of how
insects evolved flight, how genetic differences translate to functional
differences in flight morphology, physiology, and behavior, and how clade-
specific variants in flight morphology and physiology are related to ecological
conditions. In terms of physiology, many areas remain poorly understood,
including how insects manage the costs of migration, the relationship between
life history and flight muscle plasticity, and the relationship between flight
mechanics and flight muscle cost. In terms of biomechanics, a solid
understanding of how insects steer and fly in complex, turbulent environments,
the neurosensory and aerodynamic mechanisms of flight, and the location and
dynamics of energy storage are lacking. The supported symposium will bring
together researchers working on the evolution, ecology, physiology, and
biomechanics of flight to stimulate integration of these fields to answer
questions about how and why flight arose and is maintained in insects. By
bringing together researchers, including early-career investigators, from
different disciplines who share an interest in insect flight, an
interdisciplinary community will be built that will enhance our ability to
overcome obstacles and generate new research directions in integrative biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.