* 2326797
* Elastic Fiber Regeneration Potential During Postpartum Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Kristin Miller, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 284,266.00

This work will promote the progress of science by measuring the potential of
elastic fibers to regenerate during postpartum healing and how this potential
varies with the age of the mother. Elastic fibers may regenerate during
pregnancy to accommodate the growing fetus. This also benefits the mother during
postpartum healing. However, the ability of these elastic fibers to regenerate
may decrease as the mother ages. This may cause complications such as pelvic
floor disorders. This award will support fundamental research to better
understand how elastic fiber regeneration in the female reproductive system
changes during postpartum healing and with aging. This award will also develop a
new mathematical model to describe how elastic fiber regeneration controls
tissue function. These elastic fibers are critical to the function of most soft
biological tissues. Therefore, this model may also be used to better understand
the mechanical behavior of other soft tissues that elastic fibers, such as the
lungs, blood vessels, or skin. Further, the mathematical model will tell us if
the results we learn by studying postpartum healing can be used to identify
therapies that aim to treat, and ultimately prevent, medical problems that arise
due to disrupted elastic fibers in other tissues. Research findings from this
project will be incorporated into a tabletop board game, teaching modules for
K-12 education, and into undergraduate and graduate biomedical engineering
courses.

Elastic fibers are critical for biological tissue homeostasis as they not only
provide resilience and recoil but may also physically tether cells and other
proteins within biological tissues that dictate function. Prior work suggests
that regeneration and remodeling of elastic fibers during postpartum healing is
critical to maintaining reproductive tissue health. Elastic fiber composition
and relative arrangement to other cells and proteins during postpartum healing
and aging is unknown. Therefore, this award will determine how elastic fibers
dictate the evolving biological tissue microstructure and mechanical function
during aging and postpartum healing. In particular, the evolving orientation and
relative arrangement of elastic fibers with respect to cells and other
biological proteins will be quantified and directly incorporated into a new
mathematical model to better understand how elastic fiber regeneration dictates
tissue contractility and function. This will be accomplished by: 1) Formulating
and validating a biomechanical model that describes the vaginal extracellular
matrix, mechanics, and contractility with increasing maternal age; and 2)
Determining the effect of maternal age on elastic fiber regeneration and
evolving mechanical properties during postpartum healing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.