* 2326781
* I-Corps: Machine Learning-Based Burn Injury Diagnosis and Care
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Alan Pang, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of machine learning technology to evaluate patients with skin burns.
The proposed software tool is designed to determine burn severities and surface
area percentages quickly and accurately. Currently, medical professionals use a
visualized method to look at wounds and determine burn severities and to
estimate burn percentage versus unburned skin. This may result in a wait of 3-7
days during which time doctors determine the burn degree by comparing pictures
from the first day and following days of continuous monitoring. The proposed
image processing and machine learning algorithm may provide clinicians with the
ability to predict total burn surface area, expected resuscitation amount,
delineate second- and third-degree burns, as well as prognosticate
indeterminate-degree burns. The proposed technology may reduce ICU cost for both
patients and hospitals, and may allow for better, more efficient patient care,
better survival, and better functional outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a machine learning algorithm
to process imaging from burn patients. The proposed assist tool is designed to
determine the total body surface area of burns using an image capture
technology. Image capture technology may be used to calculate total body surface
area based on image recognition of burned areas, providing physicians and other
medical personnel with more objective data on which to base resuscitation. In
addition, the proposed technology may be used to delineate between full
thickness and partial thickness of burn injuries. Also, it may be used to
delineate between operative and non-operative indeterminate thickness burn
injuries. Burn wounds are always evolving, and based on the depth of a burn
injury, an operation may be required. The lengthy observation period with
current visual methods exposes patients to infection, hospital-related
comorbidity, and life-altering hospital cost. Using image capture technology and
machine learning to analyze a standardized image of burn injuries to delineate
between operative and non-operative burns may mitigate these risks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.