* 2326960
* RAPID: In-situ Observations to Characterize Multi-Scale Turbulent Atmospheric Processes Impacting Climate at Southern High Latitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Tyler Mixa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,704.00

This international collaboration between the University of Colorado, the
University of Kyoto, and the National Institute of Polar Research in Tokyo, will
investigate the sources of atmospheric turbulence in coastal Antarctica. Strong
winds forced against terrain produce waves called atmospheric gravity waves,
which can grow in amplitude as they propagate to higher altitudes, becoming
unstable, breaking, and causing turbulence. Another source of turbulence is
shear layers in the atmosphere, where one layer of air slides over another,
resulting in Kelvin-Helmholtz Instabilities. Collectively, both play important
roles in accurately representing the Antarctic climate in weather prediction
models. Collecting new turbulence observations in these remote southern high
latitudes will improve wind and temperature forecasts of the Antarctic climate.
This project will observe gravity wave and shear-induced turbulence dynamics by
deploying custom high-altitude balloon systems in coordination and collaboration
with a powerful remote sensing radar and multiple long-duration balloons during
an observational field campaign at the Japanese Antarctic Syowa station.

This research is motivated by the fact that the sources representing realistic
multi-scale gravity wave (GW) drag, and Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability (KHI)
dynamics, along with their contributions to momentum and energy budgets due to
turbulent transport/mixing, are largely missing in the current General
Circulation Model (GCM) parameterization schemes, resulting in degraded
synoptic-scale forecasts at southern high latitudes. This project utilizes high-
resolution in-situ turbulence instruments to characterize the large-scale
dynamics of 1) orographic GWs produced by katabatic forcing, 2) non-orographic
GWs produced by low-pressure synoptic-scale events, and 3) KHI instabilities
emerging in a wide range of scales and background environments in the coastal
Antarctic region. The project will deploy dozens of low-cost balloon systems
equipped with custom in-situ turbulence and radiosonde instruments at the
Japanese Syowa station in Eastern Antarctica. Balloon payloads descend slowly
from an apogee of 20 km to provide high- resolution, wake-free turbulence
observations, with deployment guidance from the PANSY radar at Syowa, in
coordination with the LODEWAVE long duration balloon experiment. The combination
of in-situ and remote sensing turbulence observations will quantify the
structure and dynamics of small-scale turbulent atmospheric processes associated
with GWs and KHI, thought to be ubiquitous in polar environments but rarely
observed. Momentum fluxes and turbulence dissipation rates measured over a wide
range of scales and background environments will provide datasets to validate
current GCM parameterizations for atmospheric GW drag and turbulence diffusion
coefficients in the lower and middle atmospheres at southern high latitudes,
increasing our understanding of these processes and their contribution to
Antarctic circulation and climate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.