* 2326599
* NSF-AoF: NeTS: Small: Local 6G Connectivity: Controlled, Resilient, and Secure (6G-ConCoRSe)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Luiz DaSilva, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2026
* USD 599,943.00

Local 5G, otherwise known as private networking, has a huge economic potential,
with some studies estimating its valuation at $36 billion in 2030, up from $1.1
billion in 2022. Its evolution, local 6G, will predominantly serve highly
localized scenarios where wireless connectivity enables new vertical
applications and digitalization in fields as diverse as healthcare,
manufacturing, or retail. Unlike conventional broadband, these use cases require
reliable, resilient, and secure connectivity. This can be achieved with the
reflective intelligent surface technology that can reflect or scatter signals
already propagating in the environment. However, reflective intelligent surfaces
cannot effectively direct the reflected signals without sufficiently accurate
information about the wireless environment. This research project focuses on
addressing this issue and developing a new neural network-based method for
channel representation with a focus on advancing the concept of local 6G. To
this end, the project investigates the theoretical foundations of the proposed
method, experimental validation, and its implications for local 6G architecture,
design, and security. The project contributes to an inter-continental alignment
between visions for 6G by engaging the academic research and industry
communities involved in pre-standardization activities in the U.S. and Europe.
Other broader impacts include advances in workforce development and educational
activities, enhancing diversity, and disseminating academic results to the
public.

This project advances the concept of private networks by introducing
controllable, resilient, and secure local 6G that features novel neural network-
based wireless channel representation, a network architecture that integrates
reflective intelligent surfaces, and security solutions based on geofencing. The
project is divided into three research thrusts, addressing different pillars of
local 6G: controllability (Thrust 1), resiliency (Thrust 2), and security
(Thrust 3). Thrust 1 develops a novel method of Neural Wireless Channel, based
on neural processes, to track, predict, and control the wireless channel. The
experimental validation of the method entails capturing a unique dataset that
may be used to advance research in artificial intelligence applications to other
areas of communications. Thrust 2 develops a novel stochastic framework for
analyzing reliability and resiliency in local 6G that comprises reflective
surfaces and neural network-based channel representation. Thrust 3 reports on
new security vulnerabilities and threats associated with using reflective
surfaces and neural network-based channel models and proposes a mechanism based
on geofencing to address these security gaps. Overall, the proposed research
agenda focuses on the new channel representation methods to advance reflective
intelligent surface technology and enable local 6G connectivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.