* 2326754
* QuSeC-TAQS: Integrated Squeezed-Light Magneto-Optical Sensor
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Galan Moody, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 886,111.00

Quantum sensors promise a new level of accuracy and precision, beyond what is
possible classically. They will enable detection of minute variations in
magnetic, electric, strain, and gravitational fields. For detecting magnetic
fields, improved, compact, portable magnetometers with high sensitivity and low
energy consumption are needed for geoscience, navigation, space exploration, and
bio-imaging. For these applications, bringing to fruition a chip-scale
magnetometer that leverages quantum mechanical phenomena to improve the
sensitivity and precision could pave the way for new frontiers in research and
cutting-edge technologies. This project will develop a new approach to
magnetometry that combines magneto-optical materials with chip-scale integrated
photonic circuits using quantum sources of light. By combining magnetometry with
quantum entanglement on a single semiconductor photonic chip, this team aims to
demonstrate a 10-fold improvement in sensitivity beyond the classical limit,
while also demonstrating ultralow power requirements, portability, and room
temperature operation. These capabilities could lead to compact and precise
sensors for a range of scientific applications such as inertial navigation,
studies of planetary magnetospheres, and biomedical sensors. This team will
leverage synergies with industry, national labs, and international
collaborations to enable student mobility, access to modern tools and
instrumentation, and outreach and educational activities that connect with K-12
students and their families. Students in this project will also benefit from
exposure to international scientific research.

This project will develop a novel quantum magnetometer based on a photonic
integrated magneto-optic interferometer where a 10-fold enhancement in the
sensitivity beyond the standard quantum limit will be enabled via squeezed light
injection. This team expects to achieve a resolution on the scale of femto-Tesla
per square root hertz with a dynamic range larger than 100 dB on a
monolithically integrated chip-scale platform. This level of sensitivity,
dynamic range, ultralow-SWaP, and 300 K operation, enabled by the integration of
new magneto-optical materials, an integrated photonic interferometer, and a
squeezed light source for noise reduction, would be transformative for the field
of precision sensing. Through the duration of the project, this team will
develop new magneto-optic materials that improve the sensitivity and efficiency
of sensors, develop an ultra-low-loss nonlinear photonics platform for the
injection of squeezed light, and integrate them for drone- and space-based
quantum-enhanced magnetometry. Interwoven with the research goals is a full-
spectrum approach to developing new pathways for a diverse and vibrant quantum-
ready workforce that spans K-12 learners and their families to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, the development of online curriculum for
quantum sensing applications, and an international student exchange program.
This research could lead to compact and precise quantum-enhanced sensors for
many applications that benefit society, from geo-positioning to navigation,
space exploration, and bio-imaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.