* 2326023
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RL: Building an Inclusive Future of Work: Accessible Collaboration for Visually Impaired Information Workers
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Sharon Koppman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,056,653.00

Information workers use digital collaboration tools for project management,
preparing and sharing documents and presentations, and team communication and
coordination. People who are blind or low vision are performing computer-based
work at increasing rates, yet only 44% of the 8.1 million visually impaired
Americans are employed. While advances in collaboration tools (e.g., shared
document editors, video conferencing, and chat platforms) make it possible to
work together in new ways and create new career opportunities, these tools
remain largely inaccessible for blind workers. More than 2 billion people
worldwide use collaboration tools on a monthly basis, yet learning to use them
with a screen reader – software blind people use to read and navigate a
graphical display – is extremely challenging. For example, collaborative writing
tools offer only partial access for screen reader users, making it difficult to
understand where other team members are working in a shared document. This
project advances future AI-augmented collaboration tools and creates a more
equitable and inclusive future of work by improving job-related skill
development, increasing worker self-efficacy, and providing access to all
aspects of teamwork experienced by current and future information workers.

This project is grounded in formative research and close partnership with four
Disability Service Organizations across Orange County, CA and Chicago, IL that
serve as the primary work contexts and both employ visually impaired information
workers as well as offer training and placement programs. This research
contributes: (1) foundational knowledge of accessibility needs for blind
information workers through a taxonomy of accessibility barriers and provides
design guidelines for AI-powered collaboration tools; (2) an accessible
infrastructure of new interaction techniques and AI-augmented tools that support
ability-diverse team communication, coordination, and knowledge sharing; (3) an
open-source online community that fosters peer learning and support; (4)
empirical evidence of system effectiveness for individual and collaborative
interaction, skill development, self-efficacy, and collaboration readiness; and
(5) a multidisciplinary consortium that will impact on industry products and
policy related to the future of accessible work, AI, and equity in the tech
industry. An integrated evaluation plan assesses individual and collaborative
interaction with the systems as well as large-scale naturalistic use by blind
workers and those seeking employment. To further ensure the project’s broader
impact, an advisory board includes experts from industry, disability law, and
public policy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.