* 2326678
* CAREER: Cellular Mechanics at the Nanoscale: Lipid Membrane Elasticity and Force Transduction in Mechanosensitive Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Juan Vanegas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 10/31/2025
* USD 255,760.00

Juan M. Vanegas of The University of Vermont & State Agricultural College is
jointly funded by the the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
(CTMC) program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) to characterize the mechanical behavior
and response of cellular components to physical stimuli at the nanometer scale
through novel computational methods. Professor Vanegas develops state of the art
computational tools to investigate two fundamental questions in the area of
nano-scale biomechanics. The first question is "What is the role of fat (lipid)
structure in a model biomembrane?" The second question is, "How does a protein
sense external physical stimuli such as pressure?" Answering these questions is
essential to understanding how biological systems function during membrane
fission and fusion, organelle and cellular shaping, cardiovascular control and
development, osmotic regulation, and touch and pain sensing. The open-source
computational tools and methods developed by Professor Vanegasâ€™ group are
enabling a broad range of studies on other areas of biochemistry, biophysics,
and materials science. The educational component of this CAREER proposal focuses
on transitioning introductory physics courses at the University of Vermont to an
active learning studio/workshop environment designed to significantly improve
understanding of core concepts and increasing participation from women and
underrepresented minorities. Professor Vanegas is also actively participating in
student recruitment and developing new curriculum to support the newly-
established Ph.D. program in physics at the University of Vermont.

Mechanics of biomembranes and mechanosensitive channels are investigated through
the development and application of state of the art molecular simulation tools
in steered molecular dynamics and local stress/elasticity calculations. This
CAREER proposal by Professor Juan M. Vanegas pivots around two independent yet
highly complementary research objectives aimed at understanding the connection
between the molecular structure of biomolecules such as lipids and membrane
proteins and mechanically-coupled, biological functions. The research component
focuses on two main tasks. These include the direct estimation of local and
macroscopic elastic moduli from molecular dynamics simulations, and force
transduction and energetics of gating in mechanosensitive proteins through non-
equilibrium simulations. Professor Vanegas is developing innovative
computational methods to capture mechanical properties from molecular models
through calculation of the microscopic stress and elasticity tensors which
measure the local balance of forces and elastic response within a material.
These continuum-like fields provide a unique connection between molecular
structure, mechanical properties at the nanoscale, and large scale mechanical
behaviors. Complimentary steered simulation methods developed by Vanegas further
allow efficient exploration of mechanically-driven biological processes in
mechanosensitive channels to establish a general framework for their function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.