* 2326027
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: The influence of different nutrient delivery modes on functional biodiversity of marine plankton in a changing ocean
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Harvey Seim, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,597,527.00

All living organisms must acquire nutrients from their environment to survive
and grow. Phytoplankton and their zooplankton grazers in the ocean, which
constitute the base levels of the planet’s largest food webs and play an
essential role in global carbon cycling, are no exception. However, the rules
governing how different physical mechanisms of nutrient delivery to marine
ecosystems structure plankton biodiversity and interaction networks along with
their trophic dependencies are poorly understood. This project examines how
these specific physical mechanisms influence the functional biodiversity of
plankton communities through increasing nutrient inputs into the mixed layer,
leading to strong, yet perhaps predictable biological variability in a changing
ocean environment. This research reveals details on how environmental
disturbances of varying spatial and temporal scales affect ecosystem function
and elucidates the dynamics between taxonomic biodiversity and functional
diversity with respect to ecosystem stability. Insights gained from this program
about controls on productivity and biodiversity are applicable to many island
and upwelling systems globally. Engagement of local partners to collect
additional observations and dissemination of research findings to the Galápagos
community enable a two-way dialog about system function and the issues faced by
the indigenous community due to climate change. The project also provides
training for graduate students and undergraduates from underrepresented groups
and a K-12 teacher.

This project combines field and laboratory studies with a modeling effort to
evaluate if different physical modes of nutrient delivery, in close proximity to
each other, exert sufficient controls on nutrient availability that influences
plankton functional diversity and associated dynamics. The study site is the
Galápagos archipelago in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean where intensive
shipboard sampling is augmented by 12-month deployments of a vertical profiler
mooring to observe i) an isolated island wake and ii) interaction of the
archipelago with the Equatorial Undercurrent (EUC) and upwelling on the western
side of the archipelago. Internal tides, believed to have a significant
influence on the system, are also being observed. Varying functional traits of
plankton such as nutrient acquisition strategies and storage are being measured
to investigate whether they are selected upon by these inputs. The cruise and
longer-term observational efforts generate a spatial survey and time series of
physical, chemical and biological properties. Laboratory culture studies using
phytoplankton isolates obtained from the region are used to quantify
phytoplankton functional traits in relation to nutrient acquisition and storage.
The results inform parameterization of a plankton NPZ model forced by time
series of nutrient delivery representative of the three physical modes at play,
used to test if bottom-up control can explain observed distributions and
temporal variability. This research advances ecological theory on biodiversity
dynamics and functional biodiversity by testing the hypothesis that functional
redundancy drives ecosystem stability, achieved through resistance to change or
resiliency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.