* 2326588
* Validation of the Equity and Access Rubrics for Mathematics Instruction (VEAR-MI)
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Jonee Wilson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,283,838.00

High-quality mathematics instruction remains uncommon and opportunities for
students to develop the mathematical understanding are not distributed equally.
This is particularly true for students of color and students for whom English is
not their first language. While educational research has made progress in
identifying practices that are considered high-quality, little attention has
been given to specific instructional practices that support historically
marginalized groups of students particularly as they participate in more
rigorous mathematics. The main goal is to validate a set of rubrics that attend
to the existence and the quality of instructional practices that support equity
and access in mathematics classes. In addition, the project team will clarify
the relationships between the practices outlined in the rubrics and aspects of
teachers' perspectives and knowledge as well as student learning outcomes.

This project will make use of two existing large-scale datasets focusing on
mathematics teachers to develop rubrics on mathematics instructional quality.
The datasets include nearly 3,000 video-recorded mathematics lessons and student
achievement records from students in Grades 3 through 8. The four phases of this
research and development project include training material development, an
observation and rubric generalizability study, a coder reliability study, and
structural analysis. Data analysis plans involve case studies, exploratory and
confirmatory factor analyses, and cognitive interviews.

The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.