* 2326644
* RAPID: Antecedents and Consequences of Disaster-Related Conspiracy Theories
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Joanne Miller, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 04/30/2024
* USD 100,827.00

A conspiracy theory is the belief that powerful actors are engaging in wide-
ranging, black-boxed (often criminal or ambiguously legal) activities for their
own political or personal gain. Conspiracy theories often arise in response to
large-scale, surprising, negative events as an attempt for people to satisfy
epistemic and existential needs for order, certainty, and control that are
triggered by the event. Although conspiracy theory beliefs often the result of
mundane psychological and strategic processes, they can have negative
consequences for democratic governance/accountability, national security, and
national health, prosperity, and welfare. Conspiracy theories center on blame
attribution and can motivate attitudes and behavior in response to the
attribution. As such, they are particularly problematic for democratic
governance and accountability. To examine the effect of public perception of
conspiracy theories on electoral outcomes in the aftermath of a major natural
disaster, this project surveys a nationally representative sample of 1,000
citizens in a region that has just experienced a major earthquake prior to a
national election and 1,000 citizens shortly after the national election. The
study advances understanding of the assertion that people who perceive
themselves to be on the losing side of politics are more likely to believe
conspiracy theories than their counterparts on the winning side of politics.

The project will survey a nationally representative sample of 1,000 citizens
prior to a national election and a second nationally representative sample of
1,000 citizens shortly after the national election. The surveys will be
comprised of questions aimed at assessing the extent to which respondents
endorse a series of earthquake-related conspiracy theories as well as the
antecedents and consequences of conspiracy theory beliefs. A stratified
probability sampling frame based on the random selection of districts and
neighborhoods/villages as primary sampling units will be used for both the pre-
and post-election surveys. Both samples will be weighted to national demographic
benchmarks. The proposed project advances our understanding of these
consequential beliefs in three ways: (1) it argues that different conspiracy
theories can satisfy different motives, and that, therefore the strength of
association between commonly-studied antecedents and each conspiracy theory will
vary depending on the characteristics of the conspiracy theories themselves, (2)
it explores whether the antecedents and consequences of conspiracy theory
beliefs differ before and after a hotly contested, ideologically-charged
election, (3) the project's pre/post-election design will enable a direct test
the assertion that people who perceive themselves to be on the losing side of
politics are more likely to believe conspiracy theories than their counterparts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.