* 2326701
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 Conference on Computational Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Benjamin Rossman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support student attendance at the 38th Annual Computational
Complexity Conference (CCC), in Warwick U.K., July 17 to 20, 2023. The field of
computational complexity forms the backbone of theoretical computer science. The
conference aims to foster research in all areas of computational complexity
theory, studying the absolute and relative power of computational models under
resource constraints. The search for efficient algorithms has important
ramifications in many areas of business, technology, and science. Complexity
theory has helped with our understanding of fundamental difficulty underlying
algorithmic issues and in turn has been able to motivate algorithm design for
some of the most challenging computational problems.

This award will provide partial support to approximately 12 students to attend
this top conference in the area of complexity theory. Efforts will be made to
support students from under-represented groups and geographic diversity among
students will also be taken into account. The award will encourage and
facilitate student participation in this top-tier computer science conference.
It will contribute towards attracting more under-represented groups to computer
science research, giving students an opportunity to engage in the important
technical, professional, and social exchanges that CCC fosters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.