* 2326944
* Understanding and Controlling Magnetic Two-Dimensional Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Cheng Gong, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2026
* USD 509,725.00

Non-technical Description

Magnetic materials have found widespread applications in communications,
computing, and advanced electronics. Electrons possess have intrinsic magnetism,
due to a quantum property called spin. Magnetism in a bulk materials arises from
the coupling of these spins to be oriented along the same direction. This
research project explores the properties of a new class of ultrathin magnets
based on two-dimensional (2D) materials. For such atomically thin materials, the
orientations of electron spins are very sensitive to the local environment and
external stimulus. This gives rise to new physical phenomena and device
functionality not possible from conventional magnets. This project will study
the effects of adsorbed molecules, adjacent layers, and mechanical strain on the
properties of 2D magnets. The goal is to learn how to control their properties,
potentially leading to the creation of on-demand physical properties and devices
with ultracompact form factors and novel functionality. High school,
undergraduate, and graduate students will be trained with a rich set of
expertise in 2D materials fabrication and characterization. This project will
therefore help to prepare the future workforce for the quantum information
science and technologies in the U.S. The PI will also raise the public literacy
of quantum technologies through local educational activities.

Technical Description

Magnetic 2D materials provide an ideal condensed matter platform for the study
of quantum magnetism, and the control of 2D magnets potentially unlocks
unprecedented opportunities for new quantum phases of matter and ultrathin
magnetoelectric and magneto-optical devices. The breadth of application
prospects of 2D magnets hinges on the diversity of magnetic properties but
remains hindered by the status quo: only a small number of 2D ferromagnets have
been unambiguously discovered, with a limited variety of properties. Through
designing experiments to finely modify the structural, electronic, and chemical
characteristics of 2D magnets, this project seeks to unravel the complex
dependence of 2D magnetism on the basic physical parameters of quantum
materials. Based on these fundamental understandings, vital engineering
approaches can be developed to create “designer” or “on-demand” magnetic quantum
materials properties. The main research approaches include controlling 2D
magnets by subjecting them to practical influencing factors such as contacting
materials, adsorbed chemicals, and strained lattices and probing the altered
properties by a range of microscopies and spectroscopies such as scanning
magnetic circular dichroism and the magneto-reflectance spectroscopy.
Understanding 2D magnetism in relation to these influencing factors and
developing engineering approaches therefrom could prompt unprecedented
manipulation of 2D magnets, thereby transforming the magnetic quantum material
landscape and enabling disruptive spintronic and quantum technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.