* 2326698
* Collaborative Research: First-Principle Control of Novel Resonances in Non-Hermitian Photonic Media
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Li Ge, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 308,145.00

Nontechnical description: This NSF award supports an integrated research,
education, and outreach project that focuses on studying a novel behavior of
light within solid materials. Optical science has long pursued the ability to
manipulate various properties of light and other invisible waves, such as
infrared light and microwaves. Traditional examples include bending light with
mirrors and lenses and generating light with lasers and LEDs. This project
adopts a unique approach by delving into the exploration of how the active
property of optical materials, specifically their suitability for attenuation or
amplification of light, can profoundly transform their interactions with the
environment. This aspect, which has received limited investigation in the past,
presents a compelling avenue for understanding and harnessing the dynamic
behavior of light in novel ways. The outcomes of this investigation are expected
to deliver a new type of light-matter interaction, thereby advancing our
fundamental understanding of optics, physics, materials science, and
optoelectronics. Moreover, by introducing a novel paradigm for how light
perceives its environment, the project aims to significantly enhance the
functionality of photonic devices used in optical communications and computing.
This includes the development of an ultra-broadband tunable laser capable of
achieving a wavelength tuning range surpassing the current state-of-the-art, by
more than one order of magnitude. These advancements have far-reaching
implications across industries and in our daily lives. Leveraging the resources
of the City University of New York, the largest urban university system in the
US, and the University of Pennsylvania, a national leader in education
innovation, the researchers will collaborate with multiple outreach units to
increase awareness and interest in modern optics and photonics among K-12
students in New York City and the greater Philadelphia area. This
interdisciplinary project also provides valuable research opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate, and advanced high-school students, with a focus on
recruiting and mentoring students from underrepresented groups in STEM.

Technical description: Traditionally, the interaction between light and matter
occurs when an oscillating electromagnetic field resonantly engages with charged
particles, such as dipoles in dielectrics. This interaction can be modeled using
coupled oscillators, where the passive photonic modes represent the
electromagnetic environment defined by the real part of the matter's refractive
index. Two types of light-matter interactions are typically defined based on the
coupling strength between matter and photonic modes. However, these definitions
overlook an important aspect of matter: the imaginary part of the matterâ€™s
refractive index, i.e., optical gain and loss, which can significantly impact
their interactions. In this collaborative project, the principal investigators
aim to establish a complex non-Hermitian photonic environment through first-
principle control of the imaginary part of the refractive index. The results
showcase a novel type of light-matter interaction that is exclusively governed
by the system's non-Hermiticity, arising from previously unexplored photonic
active resonances. The project combines integrated theoretical and experimental
research to design photonic active resonators through strategic waveguide mode
engineering on the III-V semiconductor platform to unravel their unique
properties and further leverage them for the development of robust intrinsic
single-mode lasing with an ultra-broadband tunability. These advancements will
lay the groundwork for a new generation of integrated photonic devices for
optical communication and computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.