* 2326020
* Collaborative Research: BoCP-Implementation: Alpine plants as a model system for biodiversity dynamics in a warming world: Integrating genetic, functional, and community approaches
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Isaac Overcast, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,671,007.00

The mountaintops of the northeastern United States support unique ecosystems of
Arctic and alpine plants, which exist as small, isolated patches above the
treeline. It is thought that these plant communities have existed since the
retreat of the glaciers approximately 13,000 years ago, surviving through the
natural climate changes of the past as well as human-caused warming over the
last century. These vulnerable ecosystems are culturally important, drawing
thousands of hikers to these peaks every year. They also pose a challenge for
the management agencies tasked with protecting them from climate change,
trampling, overuse, and other threats. At the same time, they may hold clues
about how small, isolated populations can survive periods of climate change.
Does the answer lie in the plants themselves, in their ability to adapt quickly
to changing environments? Or is the secret to their success in the sheltered
nooks and crannies of bedrock, which provide a cool refuge during the heat? And
to what extent are plants disappearing, and perhaps reappearing, on these
mountaintop “islands” over time? To answer these questions, a team of
researchers from the University of Vermont and the University of Maine will
sample alpine lakes in the Adirondacks, the Green Mountains of Vermont, the
White Mountains of New Hampshire, and Katahdin in Maine, analyzing the DNA of
ancient plants to understand whether species have truly persisted in the
thousands of years since the end of the last ice age. At the same time, they’ll
be investigating the modern-day plants of the northeast alpine region, both in
the field and in experimental gardens. Finally, researchers will share their
results in a podcast showcasing alpine plants and the people who work with them,
as well as in a new AI-powered app (presented during training workshops at the
Northeast Alpine Stewardship Gatherings) that will help managers and others make
informed decisions about how best to steward this vital natural heritage through
the coming century. The overall goal of this work is to help scientists,
volunteers, and managers understand how better to support not only alpine plants
across the northeast, but in other parts of the world where rare or isolated
species are faced with climate change and other threats.

This project will integrate tools from paleoecology, community ecology, trait
ecology, population genomics, and geography to develop an understanding of how
alpine plant communities in the northeast assembled and persisted. Focusing on
the Adirondacks (NY), the Green (VT) and White (NH) Mountains, and Katahdin
(ME), the research team will first characterize the last ~13,000 years of
vegetation dynamics at the species level using ancient DNA from alpine sediment
cores. To characterize changes in response to historic warming, they will then
conduct plant surveys to estimate species turnover over the last century by
comparing modern-day flora with historic survey records. The team will then
combine data from common garden experiments, microclimate sensor arrays,
functional trait analyses, and coalescent modeling from population genomic data
to reveal past and contemporary demographic dynamics and clarify the relative
roles of microrefugia, phenotypic plasticity, and local adaptation in driving
biodiversity turnover across millennial, centennial, and decadal timescales. The
study will focus on six focal taxa that represent key alpine plant functional
types (graminoids, forbs, and dwarf shrubs). The resulting multi-dimensional
biodiversity data will inform predictive models that will be shared with
regional managers after being tested against past known biodiversity dynamics.
Through this novel, integrative approach, the project aims to increase
predictive power in forecasting biodiversity dynamics in fragmented populations
in a warming world by quantifying the relative roles of climate refugia,
metapopulation processes, phenotypic plasticity, and adaptive capacity in an
integrative framework.

This proposal is jointly funded by the Biodiversity on a Changing Planet
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.