* 2326801
* QuSeC-TAQS: Development of Quantum Sensors with Helium-4 using 2D Materials
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Keith Schwab, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,013,618.00

This project combines two exotic materials, superfluid helium and nanoporous
two-dimensional polymers, to develop a sensor device that takes advantage of the
strange macroscopic quantum behavior of liquid helium at temperatures near
absolute zero. A nanoporous membrane will provide a weak link between two
reservoirs of superfluid helium, and enable a quantum coupling known as a
Josephson junction. The resulting transport of superfluid between reservoirs is
predicted to have unusual properties described by quantum mechanics. Quantum
sensors based on this architecture will allow measurement of phenomena that is
undetectable to conventional sensors, from minute fluctuations in the Earth’s
rotation to the fingerprints of dark matter. The technical applications for of
this quantum sensor are widespread. They are found in disciplines spanning
geodesy (GPS and geological exploration), gravitation and general relativity
(dark matter and cosmology), metrology (quantum standards for physical
quantities), and quantum information (quantum computing). Exploring Josephson
junctions for superfluid helium can enable new capabilities that are useful in
several scientific disciplines.

The key hypothesis is that nanoporous two-dimensional crystal polymer membranes
will enable superfluid helium-4 Josephson junction structures. This project is
designed to demonstrate superfluid Josephson junctions and explore how to
control and measure the quantum transport of superfluid through the restricted
geometry of a nanoporous membrane. The fundamental noise properties of the
junctions will be studied in order to understand the ultimate performance of
matter wave interference devices, gyroscopes, quantum limited amplifiers,
quantum standards, and qubit structures based on this effect. As part of these
experiments, this project will examine fundamental issues in condensed matter
physics, quantum materials, materials science, and quantum engineering. This
project will lay a foundation for new quantum devices such as superfluid SQUIDs,
acoustic amplifiers, quantum standards, and qubits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.