* 2326996
* Conference: NSF WORKSHOP ON POST-QUANTUM AI
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Vaneet Aggarwal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Quantum computing has the potential to revolutionize various fields, including
machine learning, cryptography, computing, and communications. The rapid growth
in quantum AI and quantum security research has raised several open questions:
What new capabilities are enabled by quantum AI? What are the security risks of
quantum computing? What are the opportunities and business models of deploying
quantum AI in practice? The workshop’s novelties are bringing together
researchers, experts, industry practitioners, visionary leaders, and relevant
government agencies to identify key challenges and facilitate discussions on the
current state of the art in quantum computing. The workshop’s broader
significance and importance are to provide valuable inputs to relevant
government agencies, enabling new insights and breakthroughs in understanding
quantum mechanics and its practical applications, and illuminating the
challenges and opportunities in the areas of quantum AI and quantum security.

The proposed workshop aims to cover topics such as quantum machine learning
algorithms, security issues of quantum AI, quantum AI for security, quantum-
resistant cryptography, and the development of software tools and platforms for
programming and simulating quantum computers. The workshop will provide
opportunities for new learning, discussions to enable future collaboration and
addressing key problems in the area. The videos of lightning talks, keynotes,
and vision talks will be made publicly available on the website. A report on
post-quantum AI will be prepared and disseminated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.