* 2326489
* FW-HTF-RL: Improving the Mental Well-being and Productivity of the Software Development Workforce of Tomorrow
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Madhu Reddy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,644,486.00

Today, software teams and organizations can create software of a complexity and
scale that is unprecedented. Moreover, they can do so more effectively and more
efficiently than ever before. While there are many contributing factors, the
advances in the capabilities of the tools that software developers use have been
a principal enabler, particularly in terms of collaborating in large teams
across distances and time zones. On the one hand, this represents a major human-
technology partnership success. However, these tools may have negative
consequences for worker well-being when their design focuses on software
engineering outcomes without considering how the tools affect developers' work
practices and interactions with teammates. Badly designed tools can reduce
learning, self-expression, and communication with others; this may in turn
negatively impact developers' mental well-being and the long term success of the
organization. This project creates the foundations for a new kind of human-
technology partnership in highly collaborative, tool-intensive work
environments; a partnership in which workers' mental well-being is considered in
the design of tools and the practices they support. The goal is to demonstrate
that, by making mental well-being a primary design concern next to productivity,
it is possible to improve both worker mental well-being and work performance.

The project consists of three parts. The first part combines observational
studies of developers at work with interviews and surveys to assess the state of
mental well-being among software developers in terms of the nature and
prevalence of mental well-being issues, how these issues impact their own and
their team's work, and the effectiveness of any existing coping strategies they
may use. To address the issues identified in the first part, the second part
involves theory development, industry panels, and research workshops to
articulate principles for tool design and associated best practices that support
productivity while promoting mental well-being. The third part builds on these
principles and practices to design novel tools and assess those tools through
laboratory experiments and field trials at organizational partners. Leveraging
the lens of self-determination theory across all three thrusts, the results from
the project can: (1) contribute to and effect discussions around mental well-
being in software development, especially in terms of raising awareness, setting
corporate policy, and workforce training, (2) shape further software development
tools beyond the ones the project prototypes, and (3) empower instructors to use
online resource the project develops to bring the lessons learned to students
who will form the future software workforce and face challenges to their mental
well-being.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.