* 2326811
* RAPID: Co-Developing a Community-Based Science Education Curriculum Framework for Disaster Justice and Resilience: A Response to the 2022 Buffalo Blizzard
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Noemi Waight, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This RAPID project responds to the Buffalo blizzard of 2022 (Buffalo, NY) by
developing, with and for the community, a science education curriculum framework
focused on disaster justice and resilience. This project will document the
science education human and social impact of the blizzard by capturing the
experiences, reflections, and needs of science teachers, Black and Brown
community leaders, and families who were directly affected. This project is
important for two main reasons. First, this extreme weather event exposed
persistent economic and social injustices, as well as racial and class divides
that place marginalized populations at a greater risk during extreme weather
events. Second, the blizzard exposed glaring gaps in disaster education, and
specifically disaster risk, reduction, and resilience in science education in
the US. To address these gaps, the team will document the experiences,
reflections, and needs of the Buffalo community. Also, the team will work with
the community to develop a science education framework that will inform formal
and informal community-based disaster justice and resilience in Buffalo and
beyond. Findings from this project will be shared in the science education and
climate justice spaces, and via community-designed forums and panels, and
through multimodal media. Overall, this project will inform justice-oriented
science education as well as disaster preparation and resilience that center the
voices and humanity of those who are most vulnerable and impacted by disasters.

This proposed work is framed by understandings of disaster resilience and
disaster justice to promote science education for social justice in response to
the Buffalo blizzard. Understanding the process of recovery after a disaster is
critical to building resilience to future disasters. The role of education in
building disaster resilience is critical, as emphasized by the U.N. Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. This RAPID project has three
main objectives: First, the team will conduct interviews with science teachers,
community leaders, and families to document their experiences and reflections on
the Buffalo blizzard in relation to weather and climate curriculum and
instructional approaches and needs; community approaches to preparedness and
needs, family needs, school support, and resources; cultural and racial impacts
of climate-related disasters (in terms of loss of life and geographical
impacts); and justice/injustice, resilience, and emotions. Second, the team will
convene a coalition of science teachers, community leaders, families, science
education researchers and scientists to discuss key findings from the interviews
and identify overarching themes. Third, the team will develop guidelines for a
science education curriculum framework on disaster justice and resilience for
use in/out of school, co-developed with people who were directly impacted by the
Buffalo blizzard. A social design-based experiment (SDBE) approach will guide
this project. This iterative approach is appropriate for addressing urgent
problems that impact vulnerable students and communities. The core principles of
SDBE relevant to this project focus on history and historicity; the bringing of
the past into the present; the use of a dynamic model of culture; an emphasis on
resilience and change; and an end goal of transformation and sustainability. The
main data sources are individual semi-structured interviews, coalition
discussions, and artifacts (e.g., articles, news reports). This project aims to
broaden the participation of urban science teachers serving approximately 500
K-12 students in schools that were impacted by the blizzard, Black and Brown
community leaders working in youth services, public health, climate justice,
food (in)security, and equitable mobility organizations; and Black and Brown
families living in communities most impacted by the blizzard. This project is
funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) that seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.