* 2326146
* Collaborative Research:  FW-HTF-RL: Understanding the Ethics, Development, Design, and Integration of Interactive Artificial Intelligence Teammates in Future Mental Health Work
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Christopher Wiese, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2027
* USD 801,660.00

This research project is a response to the national shortage of mental health
workers who are skilled in research-supported treatment protocols. The
investigators seek to understand how recent innovations in artificial
intelligence (AI) can effectively and ethically address and mitigate unmet
demands for mental health treatment. Mental health workers include several
related professions including clinical psychologists, social workers, and
counselors. This undersized workforce is in dire need for scalable and effective
upskilling in order to facilitate widespread and routine implementation of
research-supported treatment protocols. Upskilling the workforce has been
constrained because there are insufficient numbers of expert trainers to keep
mental health workers proficient in the best available practices. This workforce
has primarily relied on initial human-to-human training (e.g., graduate school)
followed by relatively minimal follow-up observation and feedback throughout
one’s career. As a result, millions of Americans with mental health conditions
have restricted access to effective, research-supported care. The mental health
workforce will benefit from technology that helps clinicians learn and sustain
their use of research-supported treatment protocols. Important to this need,
modern AI systems have developed to such a point where the technology can be
considered a teammate in highly skilled work contexts, not simply a data
processing tool. Integrating recent advancements in AI, the interdisciplinary
team of investigators will develop an interactive AI system that can quickly
evaluate a mental health worker’s performance with a patient, provide actionable
feedback to the worker, and receive input from the worker so that feedback is
based on what that individual worker needs to learn. This computational system,
called the Trustworthy, Explainable, and Adaptive Monitoring Machine for AI
Teams (TEAMMAIT), will function as an objective, nonjudgmental, and confidential
colleague who can provide individualized feedback over a period of time. This
type of Worker-AI Teaming has potential to transform the upskilling process by
reducing the reliance on cost-prohibitive and scarcely available human-to-human
training. While this project focuses on mental health work due to critical unmet
demands, insights from this project can generalize to other healthcare and
educational contexts.

This project brings together several disciplines including clinical psychology,
industrial-organizational psychology, human-computer interaction, and
information science. The team is structured to achieve multiple convergent
goals. First, the investigators aim to better understand how introducing Worker-
AI Teams will impact the expected competencies of mental health workers
including how to collaborate with AI and respond to risks. Second, the
investigators aim to gain insights regarding how to design AI Teammates in
mental health work that facilitate ethical and effective Worker-AI Teaming. And
third, the investigators aim to learn how to develop and deploy AI Teammates
that can upskill the mental health workforce. A prototype of TEAMMAIT will be
evaluated in diverse settings and with diverse workers and diverse patient
populations. Data collected from prototype users will result in a set of
development guidelines for Worker-AI Teaming in mental health work, as well as a
set of generalizable ethical guidelines for developing and using these systems.
Interviews with users will provide insights into how mental health workplaces
can best prepare for Worker-AI Teaming and optimize its use while maintaining
worker well-being and high-quality clinical care. The research plan will provide
insights that will help make mental health worker upskilling more scalable and
effective in real-world clinics, improving access to best practices for diverse
patient populations across the United States. This project has been funded by
the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to
promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing the design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human workers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.