* 2326054
* FW-HTF-RL: Reimagining Trucking: Forging an Equitable and Driver-Centered System in a Highly Automated World
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,999,973.00

Automated commercial motor vehicles (ACMVs), especially long-haul trucking, will
transform a large segment of the US economy and the millions of workers that
support it. This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier - Research:
Large (FW-HTF-RL) award supports research to investigate whether automation can
be designed to lead to reskilling and new job opportunities rather than
deskilling work and widening inequalities. ACMVs provide improved safety,
enhanced fuel economy, and lower travel times, and most importantly, offer a
potential solution to growing supply chain and trucker shortage problems.
However, ACMVs' relationship to work performed by truckers as we know it is more
uncertain. It is undeniable that the current human-technology partnership will
change as more automated technology is introduced into the truck. This research
project seeks to build new knowledge on the challenges of automation and
reimagine this partnership from a human-centered approach to the future of
trucking. The investigators will do that by informing the dignity of work and
reskilling the development of an interface where truckers will interact in new
and productive ways with the automated truck and the trucking functions; with
these activities being completed from a worker's perspective. Results from this
project could benefit workers in other contexts in which automation and AI-
powered systems transform the future of work.

The research team will focus on the collaboration between the trucker and ACMV.
This project brings together expertise in social sciences, computational
sciences, human factors, and transportation engineering to achieve multiple
convergent goals: (1) an analysis of the technology while promoting human-truck
symbiosis; (2) engaging with workers to gain knowledge of their experiences in
different contexts; and (3) investigating the work to develop policies for more
effective, forward-looking skills, and training. Organizational contexts,
interface designs, and AI technologies that could promote inclusion are
examined, as well as how technology can broaden opportunities within the
trucking workforce. A range of research methods — from qualitative photovoice,
quantitative workforce analysis, and computational decision analysis of AI and
human systems to transportation engineering design assessments — are employed in
this transdisciplinary project. Overall, this research project launches a much-
needed conversation about the future of trucking and contributes to reimagining
the future of the entire trucking ecosystem in more human-centered, equitable
ways. It yields knowledge for translation into new policies, practices, training
programs, and technology. It also engages broad audiences in needed
conversations about career paths for truckers by developing a more dynamic and
adaptable definition of work and workers that appeals to a more diverse pool of
potential truckers.

This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier cross-directorate program to promote a deeper fundamental understanding
of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work contexts by advancing
the design of intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.