* 2326038
* Reverse transcriptase-related genes and their biological significance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Irina Arkhipova, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2026
* USD 840,465.00

Reverse transcription converts RNA into DNA, in contrast to the typical flow of
genetic information from DNA to RNA. Enzymes capable of DNA polymerization on
RNA templates are called reverse transcriptases (RTs). RTs are believed to have
played a major role in the transition from the primordial RNA world to the
modern DNA-based forms of life. Since then, however, RT activity has mostly been
employed by various selfish mobile genetic elements, such as retrotransposons or
retroviruses. Beneficial uses of RT in cells are exceptionally rare, with
eukaryotic telomerases being the only known example. The discovery by the
researcher of single-copy reverse transcriptase-related genes with an intact
active center, representing the only type of RTs present in both bacteria and
eukaryotes, provides a unique opportunity to investigate the evolution of
beneficial RT functions across different domains of Life. The function of these
genes and their products will be studied by molecular, genetic, biochemical, and
physiological methods, focusing on their response to environmental
perturbations. Furthermore, the project involves extensive training for summer
undergraduates by engaging them in individual research projects, providing the
much-needed research experience as they prepare for graduate school applications
and/or explore other career paths.

To gain insights into the process of recruitment of an RNA-dependent polymerase
into the metabolic environment of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, genetic
screens aimed at dissecting regulatory pathways in model filamentous fungi will
be combined with biochemical and functional assays in response to specific
stress conditions, which will also be performed in native and heterologous
systems such as rotifers and bacteria. The proposed research would uncover the
nature of the evolutionary adaptation of RNA-dependent DNA synthesis for
purposes entirely different from those previously examined, with the emergence
of beneficial functions provided by additional domains endowing the host species
with extra layers of flexibility in response to environmental stresses.
Functional comparisons with the telomerase system should help to define the
prerequisites for RT domestication. Finally, comparative analysis of different
RT types would represent an essential step towards closure of the remaining gaps
in the overall picture of RT structure, function, and evolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.