* 2326784
* QuSeC-TAQS: Compact and Robust Quantum Atomic Sensors for Timekeeping and Inertial Sensing
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Daniel Blumenthal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 998,346.00

Cold atoms are the workhorses of precision measurements. They provide universal
standards for time and frequency, and stable platforms for tests of fundamental
physics such as the equivalence principle between gravitational and inertial
mass. Despite the transformative potential for mobile devices based on cold
atoms to revolutionize timing, or navigation without Global Positioning System
(GPS), cold-atom clocks and interferometers have largely remained laboratory-
scale devices. The limited use of cold-atom systems outside of laboratory
environments is due to the size and complexity of most cold-atom instruments, as
well as their sensitivity to physical conditions that are not being directly
measured, such as ambient temperature variation, stray electromagnetic fields,
and subtle deformation of the components. The aim of this project is to overcome
implementation challenges with cold-atom sensors and demonstrate compact and
mobile atomic clocks and accelerometers that maintain state-of-the-art
performance in the field, outside of laboratory conditions.

This project will develop two cold-atom quantum sensing platforms that share a
common technology base and have complementary functionalities. A transportable
cold-rubidium atom interferometer will provide differential acceleration
measurements, and a portable cesium optical lattice clock will support timing in
remote locations. These devices will be useful for applications in navigation,
fundamental physics studies, and spatially resolved measurements of
gravitational fields. To miniaturize and ruggedize these cold-atoms systems, the
project will develop and integrate a set of photonic chip-scale hardware and
algorithms, comprising a “quantum sensor toolkit”, that include lasers and
optics, optimized quantum algorithms for sensor fusion and calibration, and
optimal leveraging of entanglement. These approaches will broaden the utility of
cold-atom sensors in real-world scenarios and enable scientific investigations
outside of the lab, for example, gravity surveys on challenging terrains and
precision measurements at the poles or in space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.