* 2326591
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Bilevel Optimization in Multi-Agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Shiqian Ma, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 249,965.00

Bilevel optimization (BO) is a fast growing research area that finds many
important applications in different fields ranging from machine learning, signal
processing, communication, optimal control, energy to power systems. However,
most existing research on BO has been focusing on algorithms in single-agent
system, while the modern applications in power system, communication and energy
often require the problems to be solved in multi-agent distributed networks.
This project aims to close this gap. Specifically, in this project, we will
design new algorithms for solving BO over multi agent system in decentralized
and federated settings. Convergence of the proposed algorithms will be
established to provide theoretical foundations for them. The algorithms will be
implemented in computer codes with user-friendly interface which will be made
publicly available so that they can be used by researchers from other fields.
The outcomes of this project are expected to provide new tools for solving
challenging distributed BO problems in multi-agent systems arising from power
systems, optimal control and communication networks, which will also benefit
researchers from academia, government labs and industry.

This project consists of three major thrusts: decentralized BO, federated BO,
and distributed BO with consensus constraints. For decentralized BO, we will
study decentralized single-loop first-order algorithms when the lower-level
problem admits unique solution, and decentralized value-function-based methods
when the lower-level problem admits multiple solutions. We will also study
different ways to accelerate algorithms for decentralized BO. For federated BO,
we will design algorithms that can achieve linear speedup for problems with
heterogeneous data. We will also study strategies to improve the resilience of
federated BO to system-level heterogeneity, which is due to different system
capabilities such as varying storage capacities and computing power. In the last
thrust, we study distributed algorithms for BO with explicit consensus
constraints. Since the constraints are linear equalities, we plan to study the
alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) for solving this problem.
Specifically, we will investigate the possibilities of decentralized ADMM and
federated ADMM for distributed stochastic BO in multi-agent systems. Moreover,
we will study new applications of distributed BO in power control and
hyperparameter learning in wireless communication networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.