* 2326736
* QuSeC-TAQS: Quantum Atomic Coherence-based Charged Particle Sensor
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Andrey Matsko, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 742,266.00

This interdisciplinary project will implement and test a new approach for
detecting charged particles beams (e.g., an electron beam) using quantum sensing
schemes based on atomic spectroscopy with lasers and microwaves. The proposed
method will provide information about the beam strength, position, width,
profile, and direction via non-invasive optical observations. This way, a
particle beam can be continuously monitored without interruptions or
disturbances. This approach is particularly useful for high power and high
current particle beams in nuclear accelerators, in which any invasive monitoring
becomes difficult due to the high power absorbed by an in-line detector. The
basic idea of the proposed new quantum sensor is to detect charged particles via
their magnetic or electric field by positioning “detector” atoms in proximity of
the charged particles. Such atoms will experience a shift in their energy levels
due to these fields, which can then be measured using a laser or microwave
probe. The project will use rubidium atoms in two forms as the detection medium:
(1) thermal atoms at room temperature and (2) ultracold atoms at micro-Kelvin
temperatures. Graduate and undergraduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher, will be trained in atomic physics, optics, and quantum science
techniques, as well as particle beam physics, in preparation for the quantum
information science workforce. The project will also conduct outreach activities
in quantum science for the public and secondary school students. This
interdisciplinary project is a collaborative effort between quantum physicists
at the College of William & Mary, nuclear physicists at the Thomas Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility, and researchers at MITRE Corporation. More
broadly, the detection of charged particles has broad applications across many
areas of science and engineering, from accelerator and plasma facilities to
defense and space science.

More specifically, the electron-beam generated magnetic field will primarily
affect the spin quantum state of ground state atoms, while the electric field
will perturb the highly excited Rydberg state of atoms. These perturbations can
be detected via changes in the optical properties (transmission, polarization
direction) of a laser field to reconstruct the properties of the electron beam.
The project will consist of three main tasks. In the first task, this team will
employ near-room temperature thermal rubidium atoms to profile an electron beam
to develop and optimize a practical beam diagnostic device for nuclear physics.
In a second task, this team will construct an ultracold atom apparatus that will
profile an electron beam using microwave Ramsey interference in combination with
Rydberg excitation. This background-free approach is expected to have high
sensitivity and has the potential for detecting single electron tracks. Finally,
in a third task, the project will investigate the use of non-classical optical
probes (such as squeezed light) to further improve the detection sensitivity
beyond the quantum standard limit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.