* 2326188
* FW-HTF-RL/Collaborative Research: The Future of Aviation Inspection:   Artificial Intelligence and Mixed Reality as Agents of Transformation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Carl Washburn, Greenville Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2027
* USD 85,948.00

Globally, economies rely on safe air travel; however, with human error
accounting for 70% of aircraft accidents, an emphasis needs to be placed on
helping those responsible for ensuring the safety and reliability of modern and
future aircrafts. Aviation maintenance technicians routinely struggle to keep
pace with the needs of the aviation industry as they are impacted by a hazardous
work environment, high cognitive load, a complex task, and growing worker
shortages, and this struggle is only poised to grow as the need for them is
slated to increase in the future. This Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier - Research: Large (FW-HTF-RL) award supports a collaborative research
project to address this challenge, led by a group of universities, professional
organizations and industry partners: Clemson University, Purdue University,
Greenville Technical College, SA Technologies, National Center for Autonomous
Technologies, Aviation Technician Education Council, ChooseAerospace, Frontier
Airlines, AAR, Republic Airways, Atlas Air, Stevens Aerospace, Vericor, AMFA,
and Lockheed Martin. The goal of this research project is to merge expertise and
technological advancements in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Extended Reality
(XR) technologies to enhance the cognitive capabilities of aviation maintenance
technicians during inspection tasks. The central idea is that this augmentation
could increase their inspection capabilities, reduce workload, and ultimately
reduce the number of aviation accidents caused by maintenance errors. In the
long term, these efforts will continuously improve the overall health of both
future aviation maintenance technicians and aircraft fleets. Furthermore, while
this work has prioritized the immediate exploration of the aviation maintenance
sector, similar domains that leverage information-rich tasks, visual inspection,
and routine maintenance stand to benefit from the demonstrated technological
integrations.

This project brings together several disciplines, including Human Factors
Engineering, Computer Science, Human-Computer Interaction, Behavioral and Social
Science, Economics, and Aviation Maintenance. The investigator team is
structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. First, this work leverages
human factors, behavioral science, and human-computer interaction disciplines to
understand the impacts that merged AI and XR technologies will have on the
cognitive process of aviation maintenance technicians and the potential risks
associated with the integration of these technologies into this workforce.
Second, this research project leverages computer science and human-computer
interaction to design and develop novel AI models that perform aircraft
inspections and make maintenance recommendations based on information gathered
through XR technologies. The research team will help design communication and
interaction paradigms so future aviation maintenance technicians can understand
and accept these recommendations. Third, the project could provide the
breakthrough integration of AI and XR technology within the aviation maintenance
field to help aviation maintenance technicians in real time. Finally, this
effort continuously synthesizes the results of the other three goals with
society and workforce-derived data to quantify the economic feasibility and
impact that AI and XR technologies will have on the aviation maintenance domain
and adjacent workplace sectors.

This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier cross-directorate program to promote a deeper fundamental understanding
of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work contexts by advancing
the design of intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.