* 2326622
* Collaborative Research: NSF-AoF: CIF: Small:  AI-assisted Waveform and Beamforming Design for Integrated Sensing  and Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Mojtaba Vaezi, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2026
* USD 259,828.00

Communications and sensing have traditionally operated independently, utilizing
separate frequency bands and hardware. The integration of these technologies,
known as integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), aims to enhance spectral,
energy, and cost efficiency. ISAC designs find applications in wireless
communications, localization, autonomous vehicles, area imaging, environmental
monitoring, and more. However, achieving optimal ISAC designs solely through
analytical approaches faces challenges due to performance trade-offs and
complexity. To overcome these hurdles, this project employs artificial
intelligence (AI) to design such solutions and establish theoretical foundations
for ISAC. A unique European collaboration (Finland) unites diverse research
expertise, fostering economic, societal, and research impacts. Knowledge
transfer occurs through dissemination, curriculum development, student
exchanges, and industry collaborations. The project also engages with farmers'
markets to showcase ISAC's potential to benefit local agriculture.

This project aims to explore the optimal integration of sensing and
communications through AI-assisted ISAC designs. The research consists of three
interconnected thrusts. The first thrust involves designing unified waveforms,
constellations, and beamforming techniques for both sensing and communications.
Additionally, AI-based channel learning and generation methods will be
developed. The second thrust focuses on implementing ISAC designs using large
aperture arrays. The project aims to establish the theoretical foundations of
the extended near-field of ISAC channels with electrically large aperture arrays
and leverage the unique channel characteristics to optimize integration gains.
The third thrust is dedicated to real-time implementation and evaluation of the
AI-assisted ISAC designs and algorithms, considering factors such as
performance, robustness, and advancement metrics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.