* 2326034
* NSF/FDA: Towards an active surveillance framework to detect AI/ML-enabled Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) data and performance drift in clinical flow
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Phuong Nguyen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 199,792.00

The increasing use of Clinical Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning
(AI/ML)-enabled Software as a Medical Device (SaMD) for healthcare applications,
including medical imaging, is posing significant challenges for regulatory
bodies in ensuring that these devices are valid, robust, transparent,
explainable, fair, safe, and accurate. One of the major challenges is the
phenomenon of data shift, which refers to a mismatch between the distribution of
the data that was used for model training/testing and the distribution of the
data to which the model was applied. This makes it difficult to generalize
AI/ML-enabled SaMD across different healthcare institutions, different medical
devices, and disease patterns, resulting in AI model performance deterioration,
erroneous outputs, and adverse patient outcomes.

This grant focuses on developing novel methodologies for detecting data shifts
in AI/ML-enabled SaMDs in medical cyber-physical systems for healthcare, using
lung cancer nodule prediction with research and commercially available AI tools
in controlled experimental settings. The project's objective is to create a
framework that allows SaMDs to adapt through real-world learning, enhancing
their safety and effectiveness in detecting lung cancer nodules. The innovative
data shift detection algorithms will advance AI/ML-enabled medical cyber-
physical systems, improving model accuracy and reliability to address real-world
challenges in the adoption of medical AI/ML applications. Moreover, this grant
is committed to promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM fields by
providing opportunities for underrepresented minority groups and female
scholars-in-residence to work as research scholars at the FDA.

This research is supported by the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate's Division of Computer and Network Systems (CISE/CNS)
under the NSF Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.