* 2326787
* QuSeC-TAQS: Quantum Sensor Networks for Metrology, Chemistry and Astrophysics
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Susanne Yelin, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,750,000.00

The emergence of new quantum sensors allows for unprecedented levels of
sensitivity and exploration of the physical world across various scales. Quantum
sensors harness the advantages of quantum coherence and entanglement. By
leveraging non-local correlations distributed among multiple particles, networks
of quantum sensors can enhance sensitivity and reveal the spatial structure of
target signals at both microscopic and macroscopic scales. This project aims to
develop a protocol to showcase the capabilities of quantum sensor networks. It
involves understanding fundamental properties, conducting proof-of-principle
experiments, and adapting approaches to different platforms and scales for
diverse scientific applications. The project will focus on theoretical concepts
to describe and enhance spatially distributed quantum sensing, utilizing
cutting-edge quantum networking technology on multiple platforms: diamond
defect-based nanoscale magnetic-resonance imaging to sense on the molecular
scale; entangled networks of atomic clocks to sense gravitational effects; and
quantum enhanced THz antenna networks to sense on astronomical scales.

To achieve high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging, small clusters of
paramagnetic spins associated with NV centers will be utilized for entanglement-
enhanced magnetometry and optimal control. This approach enables nano-scale
resolution imaging of magnetic fields in materials and biological systems. This
project involves developing an entangled network of clocks, combining
entanglement-based time-reversal quantum metrology with atom transport while
maintaining entanglement. These capabilities will be utilized for sensing
gravity gradients, searching for dark matter, and exploring physics beyond the
standard model. Additionally, a quantum enhanced THz antenna will utilize
collective response of Rydberg atom arrays to electric fields across a broad
frequency range (10GHz - few THz). By optically connecting THz receivers and
conducting a feasibility study, this team aims to establish global-scale quantum
receiver arrays, potentially enabling the detection of faint stellar objects
beyond current technology. The experimental work will be complemented by novel
theoretical methods that incorporate recent advancements in quantum information
and machine learning, including measurement-prepared quantum many-body states,
optimal control, and machine learning-optimized controls. This interdisciplinary
project combines state-of-the-art technologies in quantum information, atomic-
molecular-optical physics, and machine learning, with wide-ranging impact across
disciplines such as astrophysics, particle physics, biology, and chemistry. This
project was co-funded by the Quantum Sensors Challenge for Transformative
Advances in Quantum Systems (QuSeC-TAQS) program, the Special Projects program
in the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Electronic and Photonic Materials
program in the Division of Materials Research, and with co-funding from the
Office of International Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.