* 2326499
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Planning Megafire Research Across Scales and Disciplines
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Craig Clements, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 198,171.00

Wildfires are a growing hazard in the United States and around the world as
population growth, land-use practices, and climate change all contribute to a
heightened level of risk. The most extreme wildfires are known as Megafires.
Megafires devastate a large area and push through the resiliency thresholds of
most ecosystems, communities, and societies. Megafires leave little time for
safe civilian evacuation and expose continental scale areas to hazardous levels
of smoke for days to weeks. This award will bring together individuals
representing research, health, emergency management, and fire professionals in a
series of three workshops to define the highest priority wildfire research that
will result in improvements to public safety, human health, and economic
security.

Three workshops, two to be held in San Jose, California and the other in
Worchester, Massachusetts, will bring together 30-40 interdisciplinary
participants from communities such as meteorology, engineering, fire safety,
community resilience, and human health. A moderator/facilitator with team-
science training will help lead productive and inclusive discussions over the
two-day workshops. The themes of the workshops are:

Workshop 1: Measuring Megafires for extreme fire behavior research. Workshop 2:
Community Scale Resilience to Extreme Fire â€“ New Tools and Needed Data. Workshop
3: Develop the requirements for a National Model Prediction Test Bed.

The initial products from the workshops will include three published whitepapers
on: (1) designing a comprehensive field campaign to monitor and observe Megafire
processes across scales of time, length, and energy; (2) developing a roadmap to
provide tools to support community-scale resilience by leveraging what is known
about differential community needs during a wildfire event as well as the
limitations of data and models from participant expertise, and (3) developing
the requirements for a National Model Prediction Test Bed on Megafires that
includes end-user needs and perspectives.

This award is being co-funded across various programs at NSF, including:
Physical and Dynamic Meteorology in GEO/AGS, Combustion and Fire Systems in
ENG/CBET, Engineering for Civil Infrastructure and Humans, Disasters, and the
Built Environment in ENG/CMMI, and Human-Environment and Geographical Sciences
in SBE/BCS.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.