* 2326096
* INvestigating Home water and Aerosols' Links to opportunistic pathogen Exposure (INHALE): do consumer decisions impact pathogen exposure and virulence?
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sarah Haig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

As people take showers, they are exposed to billions of bacterial cells through
contact with the water and inhalation of produced aerosols. While many of these
organisms are harmless, some drinking water-associated pathogens (DWPIs) are a
leading cause of serious health risks, especially for individuals with weakened
immune systems. Today, the showerhead market in the United States features a
wide range of options which leave consumers to select the type of spray pattern,
material, flow rate, and additives (e.g., bacterial killing chemicals) that they
want to have in their shower systems. However, we have a limited fundamental
understanding of how consumer choices of showerheads directly influence the
presence and amounts of DWPIs in shower water and shower water produced
aerosols. The overarching goal of this project is to address this knowledge gap.
To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) will test showerheads
with different spray patterns, water flow rates, and additives in an
experimental shower lab with the goal of measuring and comparing the
concentrations of DWPIs present in shower water and shower water produced
aerosols. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the generation of new data and fundamental knowledge that could enable consumers
to select showerheads that prioritize their health while enhancing the
fundamental understanding of the aerosolization of DWPIs in shower systems and
the built environment. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student
and one undergraduate student at the University of Pittsburgh.

Pulmonary infections from drinking water-associated pathogens predominantly
causing infections in immunocompromised individuals (DWPI) are a leading cause
of morbidity and mortality in the United States. Although there are many DWPIs,
Legionella pneumophila, nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa are estimated to cost the United States economy $2.39 billion
annually. Although DWPI exposure can occur through a variety of pathways,
inhalation of water associated aerosols are most associated with infection.
Aerosolization, a critical step in the transmission pathway of DWPIs, remains
poorly understood. Specifically, little is known about how consumer showerhead
choices (spray pattern, flow rate, and material additives) influence DWPI
virulence and partitioning from the water to aerosol phase. The long-term goals
of this study are to quantitively assess the DWPI exposure risk posed by
aerosols produced by different showerhead setups and ascertain if different
setups select for greater DWPI exposure and more virulent DWPIs. This goal will
be achieved through two research objectives. Objective 1 will test a range of
different showerhead setups in an experimental shower lab and quantify the
abundance of live L. pneumophila, P. aeruginosa, and NTM in shower water and its
associated aerosols using ddPCR and develop shower water to aerosol partitioning
models for each DWPI and showerhead. Objective 2 will use a combination of
genomic, kinetic, biofilm aggregation, and macrophage infectivity assays to
investigate the role that showerhead setup has on organism fitness and
virulence. The successful completion of this research has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of new data and fundamental
knowledge including mechanistic models of exposure and risk to human health
related to the presence of DWPIs in shower water and shower water produced
aerosols. To implement the education and training goals of the project, the PIs
propose to leverage existing programs at the University of Pittsburgh (U Pitt)
Swanson School of Engineering such as the EXCEL program to recruit and mentor
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the project. In
addition, the PIs plan to integrate the project research findings into relevant
undergraduate and graduate courses at U Pitt.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.