* 2326767
* QuSeC-TAQS: Nanoscale Covariance Magnetometry with Diamond Quantum Sensors
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Shimon Kolkowitz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

This QuSeC-TAQS project aims to promote the progress of science by developing
new quantum sensing tools for studying physical phenomena, structure, and
composition of materials. In a collaborative, multi-institutional effort, this
team will use nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in diamond as a large-scale quantum
sensing platform for studying material systems. Specifically, the team will use
simultaneous measurements of multiple NV centers to measure new quantities that
are inaccessible by other methods. Developing new tools for understanding
condensed matter systems has broad impacts on materials science, and on the
ability to discover new phenomena and devices for quantum information science,
microelectronics, energy harvesting, and other applications. This project will
train a new generation of scientists that can traverse the boundaries between
quantum information science, quantum nanoscale sensing, and condensed matter
physics. The PIs will facilitate student and postdoc mobility across
institutions and host an annual meeting to share techniques, catalyze new
theoretical advances, and establish sensing protocols that can be rapidly
disseminated to the community. At the undergraduate level, the PIs will
collaborate on the design and implementation of an NV confocal microscope for
new undergraduate quantum lab courses to allow students to implement a two-qubit
gate using single NV centers, to demystify quantum technologies and increase the
strength of the quantum workforce pipeline. All three participating institutions
will also develop summer student projects based on this research aimed at
broadening participation and accompanied by interdisciplinary directed readings
to help students get the most out of summer research. This program has the
transformative potential to establish nanoscale quantum sensors as a platform
for studying local correlations in condensed matter systems. Spatially and
temporally correlated phenomena play a central role in condensed matter physics,
but in many cases there are no tools available that allow for measurements of
correlations at the relevant length and time scales. This team aims to use NV
centers in diamond as point sensors for measuring two-point magnetic field
correlators. This novel quantum sensing platform will allow them to measure new
physical quantities that are otherwise inaccessible with current tools. They
will apply NV nanoscale covariance magnetometry, which the PIs have recently
demonstrated in proof-of-principle experiments, to study condensed matter
phenomena in a variety of contexts, and in parallel they will develop
theoretical understanding of covariance magnetometry as well as systems
engineering to realize a robust, large-scale sensing platform with new
capabilities. Their demonstration of this quantum sensing platform will focus on
understanding transport in graphene in the strongly interacting regime. The
specific goals for this project are to apply covariance magnetometry using pairs
of NV centers to study transport in state-of-the-art graphene and twisted
bilayer graphene devices, explore the theoretical framework for covariance
magnetometry and establish fundamental limits for different modes of operation
from an information theoretic standpoint, and to create robust, large scale,
multiplexed quantum sensors that are capable of measuring correlations among
many pairs of NV centers simultaneously using camera-based readout and
integrated devices. This project was co-funded by the Quantum Sensors Challenge
for Transformative Advances in Quantum Systems (QuSeC-TAQS) program, and the
Office of International Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.