* 2326507
* NeTS: Small: Network-centric IoT Security
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Theophilus Benson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 307,303.00

The Internet is going through a new phase in which billions of new of devices
which sense and interact with the physical world are getting connected in homes,
industry, cities, farms, etc. These devices, collectively known as Internet of
Things (IoT), bring unprecedented possibilities for improvements in automation,
healthcare, transportation, water quality monitoring, agriculture, and disaster
response, to name a few. However, this same technology poses serious risks to
users' privacy and security. As examples, recent attacks on IoT infrastructure
have created threats such as the 'baby camera search engine', and also some of
the largest distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks in history, which
brought down the Internet for millions of users for many hours in 2016. In many
cases, there are no external signs that IoT devices are being attacked or are
operating in a malicious way. This, coupled with complex configurations,
insecure default settings, and the difficulty of upgrading devices, makes
depending on users or manufacturers to guarantee the security of IoT
insufficient. This project aims to revisit the role of the network in protecting
infrastructure, home networks and the Internet against these attacks on, and by,
IoT devices. In particular, the project will investigate algorithms and designs
to effectively detect and defend against these attacks. If successful, the
proposed research can have significant impact in society at large by mitigating
many of these risks, and enabling greater, safe, adoption of IoT technologies.
The proposed research may also change the way home networks are managed, by
using smart home routers that understand and mitigate threats, as well as to
create new business models for cloud-based outsourcing of these capabilities.

This proposal focuses on important security challenges brought on by IoT. The
proposed research will advance our understanding of the traffic characteristics
of different classes of IoT devices, and the threats they pose to their users
and to the larger Internet infrastructure. The unique features of the IoT
environment-- no expert administration, many unpatchable devices, and restricted
traffic patterns--justify in-depth exploration of this space. If successful,
this research will develop novel ways to detect and mitigate attacks involving
home IoT infrastructures, including models, algorithms, and an architecture in
which to deploy and test them. In particular, we propose to (i) characterize and
identify traffic patterns of normal and compromised home IoT devices, (ii)
devise new methods of detecting and mitigating attacks that both target and use
IoT devices, leveraging the unique characteristics of IoT devices and their
deployments, and (iii) create and deploy a prototype architecture based on home
routers, both individually and in concert, to test these ideas. The architecture
will run the distributed and centralized components of the models, detect
attacks, and isolate compromised devices. The project will use the comprehensive
characterization of (a variety of) IoT device behavior to derive effective and
dynamic policies, and to design user-friendly mechanisms that directly manage a
heterogeneous data plane and resolve policy conflicts in order to prevent these
attacks from happening and from spreading. These efforts will be able to inform
both manufacturers and users of best practices on how to configure, update, and
use IoT devices, enabling a path in which we attain the potential benefits of
IoT for society at large, without the current risks that threat to hinder its
adoption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.