* 2326749
* Building Equitable University-Community Geoscience Research Collaborations on Chicago’s South Side
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,06/30/2026
* Max Berkelhammer, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 06/30/2026
* USD 299,000.00

The geosciences have long struggled to recruit and retain students and
professionals that reflect the diverse population its research serves. While
traditional approaches to recruitment and retention have made important progress
in recent years, this project seeks to build on new frameworks for equitable-
reciprocal partnerships between geoscience departments and community-based
organization applied within the city of Chicago through open sharing of assets
and knowledge spanning both research and teaching practices. These transparent
sharing practices open pathways for place-based learning and research, actively
engage individuals outside the mainstream geosciences, invest in regenerative
community enterprise and train students for inspiring career pathways in
sustainable geoscience fields. This planning grant will specifically formalize
and accelerate a partnership between the Earth and Environmental Sciences
Department at University of Illinois Chicago (UIC) with the Urban Growers
Collective (UGC), a Black and Women-led 501(c)(3) nonprofit.

The goal is to develop a scalable roadmap to address structural and cultural
barriers that hinder partnership growth. The initial phase of the project will
utilize approaches developed by Partnerships for Antiracist Campus
Transformation (PACT) at University of Illinois Chicago to establish how best to
develop equitable budgets, redress structural barriers, align strategic plans
between institutions, co-create teaching and research plans and identify new
workforce pathways. The project will then pilot both teaching and research
projects that empower students to solve problems on urban land stewardship, food
production and waste upcycling in Chicago. For the teaching case, the
department’s core soil class will work with stewards across the network of urban
agriculture sites in the city to develop actionable ideas for soil renewal in
disinvested and industrially zoned areas of Chicago’s southside. For the
research case, the community researchers and university investigators will
quantify carbon, nutrient, and greenhouse gas benefits associated with upcycling
of urban food waste using composting and UGC’s new anaerobic digester facility.
This aspect of the project will shed light on workforce development avenues
based on upcycling and regenerative practices. A formal project assessment will
be undertaken by consultants of the Urban Growers Collective during each phase
of the project with the goal of developing an implementation project that
incorporates a larger cohort of community groups, confronts institutional
challenges associated with supporting these partnerships and developing a
pathway for sustainable implementation of these approaches with other urban
Community Based Organizations and geoscience departments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.