* 2326270
* FW-HTF-RL: Success via a Human-Assistive Wearable Technology Partnership Fostering Neurodiverse Individuals' Work Success via an Assistive Wearable Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Sarah Wittman, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McAdams
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,871,692.00

People with attention deficit or on the autism spectrum face high unemployment
rates due to rigid workplaces, lack of job coaches, inadequate support, limited
training opportunities, among other factors. Yet, workforce participation and
sustained employment provide these neurodiverse individuals with opportunities
for self-determination and autonomy. Wrist-worn wearable technology such as
smartwatches holds promise for personalized assistance to help individuals with
work activities, thereby reducing potential stigma and concerns by employers,
while providing self-managed accessibility opportunities. This project will
improve employment opportunities for neurodiverse workers, via an assistive
wearable technology that creates personalized work environments designed by and
for these workers. Enhancing neurodiverse individuals’ workplace experience, the
findings will advance research on wearable technology and job support with
personalized task design, with the goal of creating workplaces of the future
that are more inclusive and equitable. The assistive wearable technology in this
project establishes a model and design space to propel the development and use
of future personalized work technologies, seeking to create the most benefit for
neurodiverse workers. Following the neurodiverse community’s aim, “nothing about
us without us,” this project contributes to the inclusion of the neurodiverse
community in research and work: shifting from passive individuals who are
largely acted upon to self-determinant agents and self-advocates. Assistive
wearables will create a space for these workers using specialized interventions
seeking to improve the hiring rate by employers. The technology-enabled
workplace guidelines will empower the collaborative crafting of work times,
tasks, and spaces enabling a successful integration of neurodiverse workers into
different workplaces. Research findings will be shared in scientific and
practitioner forums. The research team will provide training, education, and
research opportunities for students from neurodiverse and other underrepresented
groups.

The goal of this project is to empower neurodiverse individuals in their
workplace experience and accessibility, using a human-assistive technology
partnership to improve subjective and objective work success. This research
project bridges from the present (85% unemployment) to this desired future. The
multidisciplinary research team will study how assistive wearable technology, a
smartwatch application, can improve neurodiverse individuals’ work success. The
application will monitor performance, recognize hand gestures, and intervene
with prompts. To answer fundamental research questions, the study will involve
adults with autism spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactive disorder
(ADHD) (comprising 7.5 and 12.76 million American adults, respectively),
employable within the stockers and order fillers occupation (O*NET; 53-7065.00),
whose hand movements generalize to industries beyond retail (which alone
comprises 28.67 million U.S. workers). Data collected through a series of user
studies will be analyzed to answer this research question: How can assistive
wearable technology improve subjective (self-efficacy, job satisfaction,
independence) and objective (executive function, productivity, accuracy) markers
of work success for neurodiverse workers? First, a controlled laboratory
experiment will result in recognition models built from wearable sensor data
(inertial measurement units) adapted for work tasks. Then, via controlled
experiments (nine 3x3x2 studies), the technology will be tested assessing how it
can effectively improve subjective (self-efficacy, job satisfaction,
independence) and objective (executive function, productivity, accuracy) work
success for neurodiverse individuals considering work time and environment.
Lastly, a 3-week workplace field study will test real-world efficacy and build
guidelines around work times, tasks, and spaces for this technology. The project
outcomes contribute to wearable technology, supporting job tasks with a
personalized design to make future work more inclusive and equitable for the
neurodiverse. Heeding the neurodiverse community’s aim, “nothing about us
without us” in this project, this work advances a paradigm shift for the
neurodiverse in research and work: from passive individuals who are largely
acted upon to self-determinant agentic self-advocates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.