* 2326173
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RM: AI-Assisted Programming: Equipping Social and Natural Scientists for the Future of Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Arjun Guha, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2027
* USD 252,007.00

Computer programming is essential for modern science. Scientists write programs
to control instruments, run simulations, and analyze data. However, the
programming tools and techniques that scientists use often lag behind those in
the software engineering industry. This lag makes scientific discovery slower,
more costly, and can lead to unreproducible results. In the past two years,
artificial intelligence (AI) tools, such as ChatGPT, have revolutionized the
software industry. They have been shown to make software engineers significantly
more productive, but have not had the same impact on the sciences. The goal of
this research project is to develop and test AI programming tools that work for
scientists. The research team is developing AI models and tools that support the
programming languages that scientists use. They are developing benchmarks to
evaluate the effectiveness of AI tools for programming tasks that are unique to
the sciences. They are investigating how AI programming tools can help college
students study science more effectively. By harnessing AI to make programming
easier for scientists, the project is helping to accelerate scientific
discovery, lower its cost, and allow more people to participate in scientific
work.

The project is developing large language models of code and associated tools to
support scientists. To understand scientists' needs, the team is running
qualitative and quantitative studies of how scientists write programs. Based on
these findings, they are developing deep neural network models for programming
languages that are frequently used in the sciences, such as MATLAB and R, but
are less commonly used in the software engineering industry. These models are
particularly helpful for scientists who are not expert programmers; they can
turn descriptions into computer programs, and also generate explanations of
existing programs. The team is developing models that support the programming
paradigms that scientists use, including computational notebooks and programs
whose structure is determined by data formats. The team is developing code
generation models that can be deployed on private, "air gapped" networks, making
them suitable for scientists working in sensitive fields, including energy and
defense.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.