* 2326954
* Cross-scale forecasting of Everglades wading bird dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Morgan Ernest, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2028
* USD 633,443.00

Ecological forecasting is a crucial emerging area of scientific research that
attempts to predict changes in ecosystems over time. Accurately predicting
future change is important for managing natural resources, conserving protected
areas, and improving scientific understanding of the natural world. The behavior
of ecosystems is affected by scale -- the size of the area and amount of time
being studied -- because the importance of different ecological processes often
changes as area or time increases. However, how this impacts ecological
forecasts is currently unknown. This research will use long-term monitoring of
wading birds in the Everglades to advance our understanding of how scale impacts
ecological forecasting. In the Everglades, nature operates at a variety of
distinct scales of space and time that this research will use to advance our
understanding of how scale impacts ecological forecasting. The project will
provide information on which scales allow for the most accurate forecasts, how
this is influenced by changes in the accuracy of weather forecasts with scale,
and whether forecast models developed at one scale can be used to make accurate
predictions at other scales. This will produce improved forecasts to guide
Everglades restoration and a broad understanding of how to incorporate the size
of the area, and amount of time being predicted, into ecological forecasts in
general. The project will also make data and forecasts for Everglades wading
birds broadly available and facilitate their use for science and education.

Leveraging the intensive monitoring of wading birds and hydrology in the
Everglades, the research will address three aspects of the impact and
integration of scale in ecological forecasting: 1) Quantify how forecastability,
drivers, and uncertainty vary across spatial scales by comparing models fit to
the entire Everglades, ecohydrological regions, and individual colonies; 2)
Leverage cross-spatial scale drivers and interactions to understand cross-scale
ecology and improve ecological forecasts by fitting two types of cross-scale
model, comparing them to single scale models, and evaluating how the importance
of cross-scale drivers is related to driver forecasts; and 3) Evaluate
transferability of annual scale models to seasonal forecasting to understand if
annual scale models can be used to improve seasonal forecasting by assessing how
well annual models perform for seasonal forecasts and comparing them to seasonal
models. To facilitate the use of the resulting data and forecasts for research,
education, and management, the project will: 1) Make existing data on Everglades
wading bird dynamics findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR);
2) Develop software for working with this data and associated ecohydrological
drivers and using it to make and evaluate near-term iterative forecasts; 3)
Produce a suite of educational resources designed for both individual use and
incorporation into college and university courses including interactive
forecasting websites, YouTube videos, and lesson material; and 4) Provide
training and research experiences in ecological forecasting in the Everglades
for both graduate students and undergraduates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.