* 2326406
* FW-HTF-RL/Collaborative Research: Future of Digital Facility Management (Future of DFM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Vasant Honavar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McAdams
* 10/31/2027
* USD 775,438.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier - Research: Large (FW-HTF-
RL) award supports research to address the critical shift towards digital
transformation in the facility management industry, a sector grappling with
technological and workforce changes. The industry is on the verge of adopting
advanced Information and Communication Technology, Internet of Things, and Big
Data paradigms, aiming to make traditional operations more data-driven to meet
organizational and national energy reduction goals. These advances target
multiple improvements, including occupant comfort and health, system resilience,
energy performance, and operational cost reductions. The transition necessitates
facility managers to adapt to increased data volumes and new forms of human-
machine interaction, thereby necessitating upskilling and reskilling. The
project also recognizes the skills shortage in the industry, highlighting the
need for efforts from industry leaders, educators, and policymakers to prepare a
workforce for the future of facility management.

The technical goals of this project aim at addressing the digital transformation
challenges within facility management. The first objective is to construct a
digital twin ecosystem for a facility, enhancing the role of facility managers
by providing them with physical and cognitive assistance. The second objective
involves developing a multi-modal user interface to promote effective
interaction within the digital ecosystem, allowing communication between
occupants, FMs, and other stakeholders. Thirdly, the project will gauge facility
managers' readiness to utilize the digital twin technology, intending to refine
the technology continuously and identify any barriers to adoption. The final
objective is to study the impacts of adopting this technology on facility
managers, occupants, and facility owners, incorporating different perspectives
to develop comprehensive solutions to the industry's challenges. Additionally,
project work with industry leaders and facility managers will identify the
necessary training and educational initiatives that can equip the current and
future workforce with the skills required to keep pace with digital
transformation. Such initiatives will involve curating curricula that are
aligned with technological advancements, enhancing existing training programs,
and designing new ones to fill the skills gap. Collaboration activities will
also seek to inspire and attract diverse talents to the industry, thus fostering
a work environment that is ready for the future of digital facility management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.