* 2326060
* Conference: micro Flow and Interfacial Phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Kyoo-Chul Park, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 14,800.00

The 2023 micro-Flow and Interfacial Phenomena (µFIP) conference will be mainly
held at the Norris Center at Northwestern University in Evanston, IL, from June
18 to 21, 2023. The conference is one of the premier annual events for
researchers in fields related to transport phenomena, providing a platform for
researchers to exchange information and identify research needs in this emerging
area encompassing many engineering, basic sciences, and bio-medical disciplines.
The format of the conference places a special emphasis on formal and informal
exchanges between junior researchers (students, postdocs, and junior faculty)
and established researchers.

The scientific objective of µFIP is to bring together the phase change and
single-phase heat transfer, single- and multi-phase flow, and bio-chemical and
bio-medical engineering communities. In addition, a special emphasis lies on
energy applications having components exhibiting microchannel flow or microscale
surface phenomena, such as found in droplets, thin films, or bubbles. This
year’s conference has expanded the range of topics to be more interdisciplinary
and relevant to the most pressing challenges, such as climate change and the
water-energy nexus. Therefore, the presenters are from a broad variety of
disciplines and institutions. One of the most important broader impact
objectives is to advance diversity, equity, and inclusion in the research
communities. For this objective, a student networking event that consists of
student presentation session and panel to allow for easy interactions between
the youngest generation of researchers (graduate and undergraduate students)
will be provided. Additionally graduate students will be selected for an
opportunity to deliver keynotes as part of the student keynote award in addition
to the traditional format of poster sessions. Similarly, faculty at the
assistant and associate level to give keynote presentations will be invited,
whereas plenary talks are given by established top experts in the field.
Furthermore, the goal of gender parity amongst its committee and all invited
speakers will be pursued.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.