* 2326509
* CAREER: Bug Tolerant Networking: Enabling Highly-Available Network Infrastructures through Semantic Transformations.
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Theophilus Benson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 169,150.00

Software-defined networking (SDN) is a key enabling technology facilitating the
transition to a next generation of software defined infrastructure incorporating
virtualized network functions, 5th generation cellular networks and advanced
wireless communication technologies, and edge computing. Despite SDN's crucial
role ahead, the networking research community still needs key techniques and
tools to maintain highly available and resilient networks; SDNs are prone to
software design and implementation errors that can have catastrophic
consequences, e.g., network failures.

This project addresses these needs by introducing a novel paradigm that
advocates overcoming software `bugs-by transforming the bug triggering inputs
into 'safe' inputs. To support this paradigm, the project will develop designs,
abstractions and algorithms to identify, isolate, and transform the triggering
inputs into safe inputs in a systematic and principled manner.

This project will examine several research thrusts to enable practical bug-
tolerant networks including to (1) introduce frameworks and designs that
guarantee bug recovery and forward progress by transforming bug-triggering
inputs into different, but equivalent inputs; (2) design an abstraction and
cross-layer network transactions that provide atomicity and consistency during
and after recovery from triggered events; (3) develop algorithms that maximize
the efficiency of the proposed frameworks by statically analyzing control and
data plane source code, and modeling protocol interactions; and (4) generalize
techniques beyond current SDN paradigms (e.g., OpenFlow) to emerging and future
paradigms with stateful data planes and expressive interfaces (e.g., P4).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.