* 2326716
* Planning grant Increasing geoscience graduate student diversity in Tennessee's flagship state university
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Thomas Byl, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 12/31/2025
* USD 239,992.00

This project aims to increase the diversity and representation of historically
excluded groups in the geosciences, which are among the least diverse of all the
natural sciences in the United States. The project will develop a long-term
collaboration between Tennessee State University (TSU), the major historically
black college and university (HBCU) in Tennessee, and University of Tennessee at
Knoxville (UTK), the flagship research university in Tennessee, to strengthen
their Earth sciences academic and research activities. The project will benefit
both the students and the geoscience community by providing opportunities for
academic and professional development, enhancing the diversity and inclusion of
the geoscience workforce, and advancing the scientific understanding of Earth
and planetary processes.

The project will use a combination of methods to achieve its goals, such as: 1)
campus visits by faculty to lead class lectures or present at department
seminars, 2) UTK and TSU collaborative mentorship of student research projects
during the regular school year, 3) UTK faculty mentorship of TSU student
research as summer interns at UTK, and 4) access of TSU undergraduates to four
introductory geology online courses offered by UTK: 101 (physical geology), 102
(historical geology), 103 (environmental geology), and 104 (planetary geology).
The project will also create paid research internships for undergraduate
students, and proactively advertise them with campus organizations that promote
diversity and inclusion. The project will organize culturally sensitive
mentoring training for all Earth and Planetary Sciences faculty personnel who
have existing undergraduate research funding opportunities. The project will
document the success of these methods via focus-group evaluation by the National
Institute for STEM Evaluation and Research at UTK. Success metrics will include
student research publications, conference presentations, graduate school
admissions, and student feedback.

This project is funded by the Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership in
Diversity Program and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Excellence in Research Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.