* 2326560
* Collaborative Research: Conference: 2023-2025 Kansas Mathematics Graduate Student Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Jeremy Martin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 24,772.00

The Kansas Mathematics Graduate Student Conference (KMGSC) project will run
biannual graduate student mathematics conferences alternating between the
University of Kansas and Kansas State University, to be held in May and December
of each year. Starting in the Fall of 2023, the conferences will expand to
include graduate students from other universities in the region as well. These
conferences will be organized by the graduate students under the guidance of
faculty serving as mentors. This helps train students in project administration.
KMGSC will provide a unique and valuable opportunity for graduate students to
experience the benefits of presenting and taking part in a research conference.

With mostly graduate students and undergraduates in attendance, KMGSC provides a
low-pressure environment in which graduate students can present their research
and improve their presentation abilities. These conferences will help
participants learn the current trends in multiple fields of research and provide
an environment for interdisciplinary collaboration that can help build strong
research groups. The networking possibilities and the experience gained from
giving a research talk will greatly help the attendees mature as mathematicians
and as future faculty members or professionals outside of academia. For more
information, see https://mathematics.ku.edu/conferences

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.