* 2326838
* QuSeC-TAQS: Optically Hyperpolarized Quantum Sensors in Designer Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Ashok Ajoy, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 962,369.00

This project will develop and demonstrate methods which implement quantum
sensing in the organic linker components of metal-organic framework (MOF)
molecular assemblies. This work will serve to promote the progress of science by
producing models which reveal how the synthesis parameters of MOFs determine the
quantum coherence and other properties underpinning their use as sensors.
Through this newfound understanding, researchers will be able to engineer MOF
designs with optimized quantum sensing performance and thereby establish novel
MOF-based quantum sensing tools which are immediately applicable both for
general-purpose chemical sensing and for fundamental research in quantum
information science (QIS), with performance equal or superior to existing tools.
Beyond generic uses, these MOF-based quantum sensors will have further impact as
a new and powerful means to interrogate and characterize the MOFs themselves; as
MOFs have broad potential for transformative applications across catalysis,
carbon capture, energy storage, and ex-vivo biochemical sensing, among other
fields, this novel characterization tool is poised to accelerate research which
applies MOFs for the benefit of society. This project will also help to broaden
participation in science education and the science workforce. This team will
involve undergraduate researchers in all aspects of the project, and extend the
educational impact of research activities by adapting data and designs into
course materials. Further, this team will institute a mentorship project where
they support community college transfer students (largely first generation)
through quantum mechanics courses in UC Berkeley’s College of Chemistry, and the
team will perform outreach to predominantly undergraduate institutions in the
San Francisco Bay Area, drawing upon this project’s outputs in each case.

This project will develop designer quantum sensor platforms based on
“hyperpolarized” nuclear spins in MOFs. This novel bottom-up approach leverages
the ability of MOFs to maintain atomically precise 3D arrays of quantum sensors,
with fine synthetic control of sensor spacing, crystal topology, enrichment, and
inter-sensor coupling. Moreover, the high internal surface area of MOFs and
their resultant ability to imbibe guest molecules will yield “bulk-as-a-surface”
quantum sensors with far greater sensitivity and resolution for chemo-sensing
than conventional approaches. Organic linker elements in MOFs can host optically
polarizable electrons which can be made to transfer spin polarization to
surrounding nuclear spins either in the MOF structure itself or in guest
molecules. The long ~90s spin coherence lifetimes of hyperpolarized nuclear
spins recently demonstrated by PI Ajoy will enable these nuclei to serve as
highly sensitive magnetometers and as quantum chemical sensors by relaying
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectral data. The team will combine bottom-up
synthesis of MOFs across a range of parameters, first principles computational
models of electronic and vibrational phenomena developed in concert with the
Materials Project, and experimental spectroscopic and other characterization
data to determine the impact of synthetic parameters on the physical, chemical,
and quantum coherence properties of the resulting MOF to optimize sensing
platforms. Unique instrumentation recently developed in UC Berkeley will allow
coherence measurements via NMR and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) at
various temperatures and magnetic fields. This project will also investigate 2D
MOFs and intercalation compounds as risk mitigation and to gain deeper insights
into factors impacting coherence and sensor performance. This team's quantum
sensing approach based on MOFs will introduce a paradigmatic advance over
current methods (e.g. NV centers) that rely on electronic spins near surfaces
for sensing: the high porosity and tunable chemical affinity of MOFs will allow
the entire material bulk to usefully perform sensing, while independence from
crystal orientation will allow deployment of sensors to locations of interest.
The ability to array quantum sensors in 3D with atomic precision and control
their topology, enrichment, and inter-sensor coupling through synthesis opens
avenues for “designer” platforms for quantum sensing. The use of nuclear spin
hyperpolarization in MOFs and the long coherence times attainable with nuclear
spins will further aid sensitivity and sensing resolution toward the goal of
transformative applications. The team anticipates these sensors will allow
determination of the physisorption and cooperative binding mechanisms central to
MOF host-guest chemistries, thereby yielding new optimized materials for carbon
capture and energy storage. Applications of these quantum sensors in biology may
include employing hyperpolarized 13CO2 molecules as in-vivo pH chemical sensors,
or oxidative stress sensors ex-vivo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.