* 2326227
* FW-HTF-RL: Improving Disability Inclusion in the Workforce Through Assessment and Augmentation of Individual Abilities and Workflow Redesign in Real-World Contexts
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Hung Jen Kuo, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McAdams
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,999,188.00

Inclusion of individuals with disabilities in the workplace has remained a
significant challenge in the US despite multiple legislative initiatives in
recent decades. This can be attributed to the fact that existing approaches are
task-centric and individuals with disabilities are only employed if they can
meet the job requirements with reasonable accommodations. This Future of Work at
the Human Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) funded research project adopts a human-
centric approach to disability inclusion by enhancing individual abilities
through technology and training. Using the work context of sewing, the research
focuses on the assessment of individual abilities, task and workstation design,
and workflow optimization to facilitate inclusion of individuals with
disabilities. Through industrial partnerships, these solutions will be applied
and evaluated in a real-world apparel production-line environment and scaled to
other work contexts. The overarching goal is to build a dynamic workplace that
is more inclusive, productive, and economically viable; greater inclusion of a
significant but untapped workforce will lead to increased global
competitiveness. In addition to scientific and technological advances, this
research will provide unique, multidisciplinary training opportunities to
graduate students in areas spanning human abilities, engineering technologies,
and workflow management.

The main objective of the research is to address a challenging societal problem,
that of disability inclusion in the workplace. In a paradigm shift from the
traditional approach, the research adopts an abilities-first approach that
focuses on individual abilities rather than disabilities. Through multi-
disciplinary collaboration, this research will create new knowledge frameworks
by (i) assessing individual abilities (sensorimotor, cognitive, and
psychological readiness) and their fit to the task, (ii) augmenting individual
abilities using technology (robotics and augmented-reality) such that
individuals with diverse abilities can have similar levels of performance, and
(iii) analyzing workflow (value stream maps) that takes into account teams of
individuals with diverse abilities to increase participation and team
productivity. An overarching theme is real-world implementation and testing
through collaborations with industry partners to create solutions that are
feasible, effective, economically viable, and scalable. The creation of such
dynamic workplaces that are inclusive of disabled individuals will advance
fundamental understanding of job and work design (Future Work), skill assessment
and training (Future Worker), and creation of human-technology partnerships that
can revolutionize industry (Future Technology).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.