* 2326631
* Collaborative Research: Convective Processes in the Tropics Across Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Samuel Stechmann, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2026
* USD 471,155.00

In the tropics, rainfall events can range in size, from small in size (such as
an individual thunderstorm) to very large in size (such as a monsoon). It is
difficult to observe or simulate the small-sized details and the large-sized
patterns at the same time. As a result, many aspects of clouds, storms, and
rainfall are not fully understood. It is also important to note that tropical
rainfall events have an influence not only within the tropics, but can also
excite weather patterns that move northward out of the tropics and influence the
continental United States. The research projects here will improve our
understanding of the interaction of small-sized details and large-sized
patterns.

The project activities will benefit society in several ways through advancing
discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training, and learning.
Particular benefits include: (i) developing a competitive STEM workforce by
training undergraduate students, a graduate student, and a postdoc; (ii)
outreach to K-12 schools to familiarize students with STEM research and motivate
them to pursue STEM careers; (iii) broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups by mentoring undergraduate students in conducting
research projects; and (iv) improving the well-being of individuals in society
by conducting research that is aimed at cloud and rainfall processes that
influence humanity, since a better understanding of these processes can help to
improve modeling and predictions and benefit society.

Moist convective processes in the tropics involve a vast range of scales. As a
result, difficulties arise in observations due to instrument constraints and in
simulations due to computational cost, and many convective phenomena are not
fully understood. Some examples include the influence of island coastlines and
topography on the diurnal cycle of tropical rainfall, the interaction of
convectively coupled equatorial wave events and tropical islands, and
entrainment and mixing processes. For simulations of these processes to be
viable while modeling precipitating clouds across scales, recent results of the
preliminary studies will be leveraged to use adaptive mesh refinement and non-
column-based grids. These methods allow the investigation of processes that
would be difficult or impossible to simulate with uniformly-spaced Cartesian
grids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.