* 2326998
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: RUI: Drawing from Life in Extended Reality: Advancing and Teaching Cross-Reality User Interfaces for Observational 3D Sketching
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Daniel Keefe, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project advances the science of how people work effectively and creatively
within future computing environments that span the real world, virtual reality
(VR), and mixed digital+physical spaces in between. Since drawing is fundamental
to creative work across many disciplines (e.g., product design, architecture,
engineering, art), the investigators focus on the emerging medium of 3D drawing,
a form of computer-aided drawing where sweeping movements of a 3D-tracked pen
are used to create virtual 3D drawings that appear to float in the air. In the
hands of artists, architects, product designers, engineers, and others, virtual
reality 3D drawing technologies have already led to exciting new design
processes and products. However, despite some early successes and the great
potential, 3D drawing, like so many other early applications of VR, remains
limited when compared to the physical, real-world counterpart of traditional
drawing. Take, for example, the way artists and product designers are taught to
draw; learning to draw in the real world starts with learning to see, i.e.,
making careful observations of a subject. For advanced drawers, real-world
drawing from observation is even a way to study a subject, a mode of inquiry.
Yet, creative work in virtual environments takes the opposite approach, users
have powerful tools and an endless 3D canvas, but no means of connecting these
to their notes, sketches, models, experiments, and other real-world artifacts.
This project presents a new vision for 3D drawing that makes it applicable to
impactful work with real-world subjects (e.g., scientists working in the
laboratory or the field, engineers conducting a design review, artists working
for social change). The key approach is to re-center 3D drawing, and other
creative tasks typically performed in virtual environments, on the foundational
skill of careful observation. Specifically, the project develops new Augmented-
and Mixed-Reality (AR and MR) tools for making observations from multiple
perspectives and using those observations to create 3D drawings. The success of
these foundational tools is assessed in lab-based user studies. The integrated
educational program creates college courses and educational materials to train
students in these new cross-reality modes of working and build capacity among
potential 3D drawing instructors for teaching this new style of observational 3D
drawing in AR. Undergraduate students in both computer science and art/design
disciplines are trained as key members of the interdisciplinary research team.

Prior research on 3D drawing has made 3D pens more controllable and led to many
exciting software tools, but none of them help people to work across realities
to draw what they see. This project creates novel user interface techniques and
viewpoint entropy algorithms for making observations (e.g., judging relative
proportion, angles, and negative space) by identifying, visualizing, and
navigating the most useful viewpoints for observations of a real-world subject.
It also develops spatial user interfaces for translating observations into hand-
drawn 3D forms with hybrid 2D+3D sketching interfaces and computer graphics
sketch-based 3D modeling algorithms. The deep focus on real-world observation
makes the proposed techniques ideal examples of emerging research on cross-
reality user interfaces that support seamless transitions between reality,
virtuality, and mixed spaces in between. The project includes a tightly
integrated educational plan, and the novel systems developed will be deployed in
classrooms at multiple institutions. The success and potential of the new
technologies and educational modules developed will be assessed through a
combination of lab- and classroom-based user studies. This research effort will
open the door to using 3D drawing as a mode of inquiry to leverage drawing's
expressive power for representing the world around us.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.