* 2326720
* Modulating H2O Activity Promotes CO2 Reduction to Multi-Carbon Products
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Anthony Shoji Hall, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Electrochemistry – driven by sustainable or renewable electrical energy
generated by wind or solar energy – offers a path toward a sustainable, circular
carbon economy, thereby reducing our reliance on fossil fuels and mitigating the
impacts of climate change. To that end, the project focuses on transforming
carbon dioxide (CO2), a major greenhouse gas, into value-added chemicals and
fuels. The novelty of the project lies in understanding the role of water in the
electrochemical reactions that convert CO2 efficiently and selectively to multi-
carbon hydrocarbon chemicals for use as building-blocks for a broad range of
products including fuels, plastics, coatings, and construction products. By
varying the concentration of salt in a solution, the chemical activity of water
(H2O) can be altered, potentially enabling greater control over the reaction of
CO2 with H2O to produce the desired multi-carbon products. Beyond the technical
aspects, the project offers educational and training opportunities in STEM
areas, especially focused on socioeconomically disadvantaged students. The
project investigates the role of H2O in modulating the electrocatalytic CO2
reduction reaction (CO2RR) to favor efficient and selective formation of C2+
products. Preliminary data from the investigator’s laboratory has shown that
lowering the water activity favors the generation of multi-carbon products. By
adjusting the salt concentrations within a range of 0.1 to > 10 molal in the
water the investigators have successfully altered the activity of water in the
solution, which, in turn, enhances the production of C2 products over their C1
counterparts. Three specific project thrusts will be pursued to understand the
origin of improved electrochemical reduction of CO2 to C2 or C2+ products with
decreased water activity, namely: 1) optimize solution composition by
simultaneously varying the cation, anion, and water activity for improved
CO2-to-multicarbon fuels on Cu electrodes, 2) interrogate the role of the
electrolyte structure in modulating catalysis with surface-enhanced in-situ
infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS); and 3) explore electrolyte
engineering to boost CO2 reduction to multi-carbon alcohols on Cu-alloy
catalysts. Broader educational and outreach aspects of the project will
introduce socioeconomically disadvantaged students to concepts of renewable
energy research. Specifically, the investigator, along with a post-doctoral
associate and undergraduate student, will participate in the Engineering
Innovation Program (EIP) at Johns Hopkins University. Students will conduct
straightforward hands-on experiments to acquaint them with fundamental renewable
energy concepts, with the goal of piquing their interest in STEM areas as
related to educational and career paths supporting greenhouse gas reduction and
mitigation of environmental impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.