* 2326455
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RL: Collaborative Remote Physical Examination: Transforming Medical and Nursing Practice
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ericka Greene, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2026
* USD 248,310.00

Since the FDA lifted restrictions on telemedicine during and after the COVID-19
pandemic, remote tele-health visits have grown to account for one of every five
patient-physician consultations. Such telemedicine consultation has brought
convenience and access, especially for the elderly and rural communities that
are in the greatest need. Telemedicine consultations, however, are typically
limited to video and voice exchanges, often through the constrained interface of
a smartphone. Physical examinations, critical to early detection and diagnosis
of serious health concerns, are reduced to the physician asking the patient to
do a self-examination. The project will investigate technologies and practices
that enable remote physicians to collaborate with nurses at local sites to
perform medical physical examinations. The nurse wears touch sensing gloves to
do the examination. The physician experiences what the nurse feels through a
touch-enabled medical cockpit at which physician also sees the examination from
the nurse’s perspective. Clinical physician and nursing researchers; mechanical,
industrial, and computer engineers; and psychologists will collaborate on this
research to develop the touch sensing and display technologies, the interaction
methodologies and designs, and the medical/nursing practices and training needed
for such remote physical examinations. The team will study the effectiveness of
the technology and practices, and the degree to which physicians, nurses, and
patients will accept such examinations. The team will also investigate how this
technology may be deployed in remote and rural settings where patients may not
otherwise have access to medical examinations, especially if a specialist is
required. Hence, this research aims at realizing broader impacts on society,
especially for underserved communities, and during infectious disease outbreaks
when physical visits to centralized medical facilities carry risks.

The project seeks to transform the allied work contexts of physicians and nurses
while addressing the societal need of providing inclusive access to healthcare
through telemedicine. The research efforts frame remote physical examination as
a cooperative practice between a nurse/caregiver wearing tactile sensing gloves
proximal to the patient with a distal physician at a multimodal interactive
cockpit. Critical challenges to this framing are that tactile perception is
active (meaning that it is difficult to interpret tactile patterns if one is not
in direct control of the movement of one’s fingers), the paucity in haptic
sensing and display technologies, and the lack of understanding of such
interaction designs and their impacts on the members of the examination triad:
the physician, nurse, and patient. These challenges motivate three research
thrusts in the context of ear, nose, and throat examinations: 1. The interaction
dynamics and design of examination cockpits and methodologies; 2. Touch
technology innovations for haptic sensing and display/actuation; and 3.
Understanding the impacts of the approach from the stand-points of perceptual
and social understanding, cognitive load, technology acceptance, and
medical/nursing practice and training. All thrusts involve interdisciplinary
collaboration among engineers, social/humanities scientists, and
clinical/nursing researchers. The research will take an iterative Design-Build-
Test-Observe/Reflect approach. Thrust 1 will investigate interactive and testbed
configuration issues and develop/maintain a research testbed. Thrust 2 will
develop technologies that will be evaluated separately and integrated in the
testbed. Thrust 3 will evaluate the iterative designs and technologies and
develop new workflows and training for medical professionals. Clinical physician
and nursing researchers will participate in all design and evaluation phases to
ground the research, motivate design trajectories, and formulate new practice
and training approaches for doctors and nurses. These methods will, in turn, be
tested in conjunction with the technology and testbeds. An advisory team will
guide the research and inform investigation of feasibility of the technology in
rural and remote communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.