* 2326484
* NSF-BSF: The Evolution of Hydrodynamics, Mechanics, &amp; Prey Capture in the Feeding of Misfit Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Matthew McHenry, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 09/30/2026
* USD 437,797.00

A major pursuit in biology is understanding how the evolution of an animal’s
anatomy affects how it performs in the natural world. Fish predators are of
particular interest due to their fascinating diversity, including an ability to
capture a wide variety of prey. The goal of the proposed work is to understand
how evolutionary change in the jaws and skull of fish affect how they operate
mechanically and how those mechanical changes affect the ability to capture
prey. Using experiments and mathematical modeling, we will focus our
investigation on a group known as misfit fish, which includes seahorses and
pipefishes. This group includes the fastest predatory strikes known among fish
species and these rapid motions are associated with a relatively high pace of
evolutionary change. This work will offer key insights into how mechanics and
performance shape the evolution of animals. In addition, the proposal will
feature initiatives in graduate training. This includes a pair of online
workshops in how to visualize the flow generated by animals and a seminar series
that features presentations of work by trainees. The work will additionally
support the training of undergraduates from under-represented groups through
institutional partnerships.

This research will be organized around the following aims: (1) identify the
evolutionary patterns of mechanical performance, (2) understand the
musculoskeletal basis of mechanical performance, and (3) test how mechanical
performance affects capture performance. These aims will be addressed through
experimentation that will provide the basis of a mathematical model for the
mechanics of feeding and an agent-based model for the behavior of predator-prey
interactions. These models will serve as the means for analyzing performance
landscapes of mechanical and capture performance. The performance landscapes
will allow for a consideration of how innovation in the morphology of living and
extinct species yields performance benefits, energetic costs, and functional
trade-offs. The proposed research provides an exceptional opportunity to
understand how evolution acts on species across levels of organization. We will
establish a predictive understanding for how morphology generates the motion of
a predatory strike and how that motion affects prey capture in a group of
related species. This understanding will be achieved through mathematical
modeling that is parameterized and verified by experimental results at each
level of organization. This approach offers a novel intellectual framework for
the study of evolutionary biomechanics that could be applied to a wide variety
of biological systems among a diversity of animals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.