* 2326865
* Conference: Leveraging Innovations from Evolution Scoping Session
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Jennifer Wisecaver, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2024
* USD 216,786.00

This award will support an in-person scoping event for a new multi-division
effort at NSF called Leveraging Innovations from Evolution (LIFE), which will
focus on the topics of evolutionary innovation and convergent evolution. Diverse
lineages of organisms have evolved innovative complex traits in response to
myriad environmental challenges. A major goal in modern biology is to identify
the genetic mechanisms that underlie these complex traits as well as to
understand the evolutionary trajectories that result in complex phenotypic
outcomes. The study of convergent processes provides unparalleled opportunities
to explore the origins, mechanisms, and macroevolution of complex adaptive
traits. By studying convergent innovations, scientists can leverage natural
replicated experiments to identify both generalizable and unique solutions to
lifeâ€™s common problems. The LIFE Scoping Session aims to prioritize research and
training in this cross-disciplinary area to speed discovery and understanding of
repeated innovations in response to changing environments in lineages from
across the tree of life. Basic research leveraging the diversity of life to
understand how organisms have adapted and solved repeated challenges has the
potential to provide unprecedented advances for the bioeconomy (e.g.,
create/improve industrial processes, develop new products and services, and
produce new energy). It is therefore important to foster a nascent community of
diverse researchers who are comfortable spanning the fields of systematics and
molecular and cellular biology.

This scoping session will be held in Indianapolis, Indiana, August 14-16, 2023,
and will be facilitated by KnowInnovation. The specific objectives of the LIFE
Scoping Session is to (1) bring together experts working at the forefront of
multiple domains including evolutionary biology, systematics, development,
molecular biology, biochemistry, and genomics to bridge the cultural and
intellectual gaps among these disciplines; (2) engage the BIO and BIO-adjacent
communities to identify specific research challenges and opportunities in the
study of evolutionary innovation and convergent evolution; (3) articulate needs,
strategies, and recommendations to enable transdisciplinary research into
convergently-evolved innovations including research, infrastructure, and
educational priorities; and (4) to jumpstart ideas and collect input from a
large and diverse community to explore potential areas of research in leveraging
evolutionary innovation to support the bioeconomy. The main tangible products
from the session will be a series of short white papers developed by the
participants, and a synthesis report developed by a smaller team selected from
the organizing committee and the participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.