* 2326316
* Atmospheric Science and Chemistry mEasurement NeTwork (ASCENT) Workshop; Atlanta, Georgia; May 25-26, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Nga Lee Ng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 29,557.00

The “Atmospheric Science and Chemistry mEasurement NeTwork (ASCENT) Workshop”
will provide opportunities for participants interested in energy and land use
change, climate change, public health, and/or instrument development to foster
future collaborative studies with the ASCENT network. The NSF-funded ASCENT
network has been established to provide high quality, long-term aerosol
characterization with high temporal resolution. The workshop will allow
researchers to identify studies and utilize the network data to advance process-
level understanding of aerosol sources, chemical evolution, and subsequent
impacts on human health and climate.

The ASCENT workshop will be held at the Georgia Institute of Technology in a
hybrid format from Thursday morning, May 25 through Friday afternoon, May 26,
2023. The workshop will be comprised of presentations, facilitated discussions,
and breakout sessions. The workshop format is chosen to promote open discussions
and informal exchanges that will advance the field and build new collaborations.
Workshop participants will come from academia and government laboratories across
the U.S. as well as from similar networks operating in European countries.

The broader impacts of this workshop include the opening up of new research
directions that will have a positive, synergistic effect on the efficiency and
research progress in the understanding of aerosol sources, chemical evolution,
and subsequent impacts on human health and climate. The workshop will also
facilitate collaborations and transfer of knowledge between academia, industry,
and government, as well as strengthening connections between various measurement
networks within the U.S. and internationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.