* 2326835
* NSF Converence Accelerator Track G: 5G Hidden Operations through Securing Traffic (GHOST) Phase 2
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Eric Keller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,482,830.00

The proliferation of 5G networks around the world presents an attractive
opportunity for U.S. government organizations, nongovernmental humanitarian aid
organizations, and private sector enterprises to eliminate the costs of
installing and maintaining an alternate communications infrastructure by making
use of indigenous 5G networks. However, in many areas of the world, 5G networks
are deployed and operated by organizations that are untrusted and potentially
hostile to the U.S. In these environments, new security technologies are needed
to secure operations. While 5G encrypts data packets and subscriber IDs,
analysis of network activity can reveal detailed information about individuals
and groups. For example, pattern-of-life analysis can be used to identify and
track users. Similarly, traffic analysis can reveal details of an organization’s
structure and operations. The 5G Hidden Operations through Securing Traffic
(GHOST) project provides four additional layers of security to protect against
these threats. First, GHOST protects individuals by swapping subscriber and
device IDs, along with usage patterns, or personas. Second, GHOST prevents
traffic analysis by introducing ghost users and ghost traffic into the network
to obscure real activity. Third, the GHOST project further frustrates traffic
analysis by injecting “false flag” traffic that models real events and
operations. Finally, GHOST secures devices at the hardware level by locating
GHOST software inside Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs). The GHOST
technology will enable organizations to securely operate over foreign 5G
networks, regardless of the politics of the network operators.

GHOST addresses threats that cannot be countered by traditional cyber security
solutions. The GHOST project will demonstrate an integrated solution on a real
5G network and evaluate GHOST effectiveness in multiple operational scenarios.
The GHOST project will yield four major intellectual benefits to the research
and operational communities. • First, the GHOST project will deliver technology
to anonymize or disguise end-user identities and their association with
locations, and communications endpoints. End-user identities will be protected
by dynamically allocating software defined credentials and associated software
defined personas. Association with locations are protected by correlating
movement history with compromising patterns of movement. Communications
connections are protected by peer-to-peer anonymization. • Second, the GHOST
project will deliver technology to overlay normal network activity with ghost
activity to obfuscate traffic analysis and hide regular patterns of activity or
changes in activity. • Third, the GHOST project will deliver technology to
model, generate, and inject “false flag” traffic into the network to make it
appear to a network analyst that a real event is occurring at a particular
location. • Fourth, the GHOST project will deliver technology that will protect
end-user devices and non-indigenous networking equipment from penetration and
compromise through the use of TEEs. The idea behind a TEE is that no software,
privileged or not, should be able to access or modify protected data. TEEs
enable the process of attestation of both the hardware and the software. The
GHOST software will run inside the TEE to be able to attest to the security of
the protocol and protect it in case of capture.

GHOST technology will benefit end-users of any untrusted network, not just
untrusted 5G networks. The primary criteria for success of the GHOST project
will be: • Prevention of identification and tracking of individuals by a network
operator. • Inability of a network analyst to determine regular activity
patterns, or significant changes in activity. • Mis-leading a network analyst by
injection of “false flag” activity. • GHOST software deployment in TEEs with no
observable degradation in device performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.