* 2326724
* Workshop on Musculoskeletal Biology at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Orthopedic Research Society; Midway, Utah; 22-27 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Alexander Robling, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide travel support for junior investigators to attend the
Workshop on Musculoskeletal Biology at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Orthopedic
Research Society (ORS); Midway, Utah; 22-27 July 2023. This workshop promotes
interdisciplinary communication among biologists, engineers, and clinicians in
the area of musculoskeletal biology, biomechanics and mechanobiology; stimulates
interactions among investigators in all levels in their careers; builds for-life
scientific networks; emphasizes active participation of junior faculty and
students; and is unique in that discussion time equals or exceeds time allotted
for presentations. The focus of the workshop is broad and highly
multidisciplinary. Sessions address significant current problems, limitations,
potential solutions, and approaches applicable to both basic science and
clinical. The attendance of this Workshop represents a significant number of
students, young investigators, women, and underrepresented minorities.
Partnership with the ORS provides maximum visibility through broadcast emails
and links on the ORS website, where abstracts will be posted.

The scientific theme of the 2023 workshop is "Musculoskeletal cells: identity,
targeting, stimulation, and manipulation for therapeutic gain." Sessions will
address significant current problems, limitations and potential solutions, and
approaches applicable to both clinical and basic science. The Plenary Lecture
“Remodeling in Bone” (RIB) is entitled “Bone mechanobiology: harnessing the
power of skeletal loads.” Six scientific sessions will cover (1) New insights
into osteoarthritis pathogenesis from single-cell -omic technologies; (2)
Skeletal stem/progenitor cells; (3) Imaging mechanobiology at work; (4)
Osteoclasts: origin and fate; (5) Connective tissue targeting: delivering
molecules to musculoskeletal tissues; and (6) How the molecular pathophysiology
of rare bone and mineral diseases informs treatment and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.