* 2326882
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track: G: The Security-Enhanced Radio Access Network (SE-RAN)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Phillip Porras, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,839.00

SRI International, Ohio State University (OSU), and AccuKnox Inc. will develop
innovative edge-to-core security services for the next generation of the Open
Radio Access Network (O-RAN) compliant 5G+ mobile architecture. This
collaborative project, named Security-Enhanced Radio Access Network (SE-RAN),
will fortify 5G mobile infrastructures against a wide range of attacks that
target vulnerabilities within 5G networks, protocols, and their control-layer
services. The project's centerpiece is a transformative network management
service, offering 5G operators an unprecedented level of threat identification,
policy enforcement, and compliance monitoring throughout their entire 5G network
infrastructures. Project SE-RAN specifically focuses on safeguarding mission-
critical 5G networks, providing a comprehensive protection architecture against
sophisticated mobile-network adversaries.

Project SE-RAN will deliver an O-RAN compliant 5G-Native Application Protection
Platform (5GNAPP) for monitoring and inline policy enforcement across mobile
devices, base stations, RAN operations, and the 5G control plane. It will
substantially enhance the trustworthiness of 5G networks, including security
with respect to mobile device privacy, 5G communications confidentiality and
integrity, resistance to attacks, including attempts at control-plane
infiltration, and live detection of attacks against the mobile infrastructure
and its users. The project involves collaboration with key open-source
stakeholders to integrate security specifications and modules with top-tier 5G
open-source O-RAN projects. The project will also work with 5G integrators
throughout the government to transition modular security services to address
various mission-critical use cases. Finally, the project will foster sustainable
impacts on the U.S. information technology industries by transitioning SE-RAN
technologies through strategic relationships with startups, industry leaders,
and investors actively involved in the development of novel and disruptive 5G
security and privacy technologies.

Project SE-RAN will foster a community that creates modular O-RAN-compliant
security components to enhance the deployment and runtime management of mobile
network infrastructures. These solutions will extend the existing O-RAN
consortium’s open software architecture to tackle at least two fundamental
problems. The first problem is the extensive attack surface that arises from the
migration of the mobile network control plane into a cloud-based operating
environment. While the integration of the RAN Intelligent Controller (RIC) into
a Kubernetes framework dramatically increases the scalability and extensibility
of control logic, it also exposes the control plane to the breadth of
adversarial tactics and open-source supply chain vulnerabilities that plague
existing cloud ecosystems. The second problem is the existing lack of visibility
into core 5G network operations: one cannot secure the mobile network if one
cannot observe its operations with sufficient granularity. Project SE-RAN
represents the first security-focused, base-station-internal telemetry stream
that will facilitate runtime security monitoring within the O-RAN compliant 5G
Open-Source Software (OSS) ecosystem.

SE-RAN is based on four groundbreaking innovations. First, SE-RAN will deliver a
modular base station extension (i.e., an O-RAN service model) that delivers
advanced 5G-protocol layer-3 security auditing designed to transform the ability
of 5G operators to track the security-relevant state of every user equipment
(UE) device and base station in the network. Second, SE-RAN will deliver the
first runtime 5G-IDS (intrusion detection system) control plane application for
malicious radio frequency (RF)-based exploit and anomaly detection. Third, SE-
RAN will introduce 5G-KubeArmor, the first near real-time RAN Intelligent
Controller (nRT-RIC) security policy generation and enforcement engine, enabling
5G administrators to secure the 5G control plane using application-layer least-
permissive security policies. Finally, it will introduce the first 5GNAPP
management service that integrates all three technologies under a unified
security incident and event management (SIEM) system. The overall benefit of
this project will be a transformative security framework that provides 5G
operators with unprecedented threat identification, policy enforcement, and
compliance monitoring that spans the entire 5G network infrastructure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.