* 2326691
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Ecological Context of Modern Human Adaptability
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Brian Stewart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 31,462.00

xThis doctoral dissertation project investigates the ecological context of
modern human evolution during the Late Quaternary. This is important because the
key to understanding the evolution of behaviors characteristic of the human
species, such as enhanced adaptive flexibility and the expansion of social
interaction and exchange networks, among others, lies in tracking their
trajectories through deep time. To date, archaeological evidence for adaptive
flexibility comes mainly from sites dating to the latter half of the Middle
Stone Age (MSA) from ca. 130,000 to 30,000 years ago.. However, the sites under
study has several well-stratified MSA sequences that offer an excellent
opportunity to track longer-term environmental changes and biocultural responses
in a region central to the modern human evolution narrative. This work sets the
context for further site-specific, high-resolution paleoenvironmental
reconstructions and contributes knowledge on whether and how environmental
changes precipitated innovation during the behavioral evolution of humans. It
further assesses the connection between ranging patterns and environmental
changes. The investigators also use the project to train interested students
from local universities in archaeological field and lab methods.

The project addresses questions as to whether site-level environmental
reconstructions in the sites under consideration match local climatic and
paleoenvironmental patterns recorded for the Late Quaternary. They are also
determining if ranging patterns and degree of social connectivity differ during
arid versus humid periods. Lastly, they are investigating whether lithic
technological shifts through deep time suggest increasingly adept responses to
environmental change. To achieve this, four MSA sites were excavated resulting
in thousands of lithic artifacts. Various lithic technological attributes were
recorded, and work is underway to develop a chronostratigraphic history of the
region through chemical fingerprinting of the volcanic ashes and 40Ar/39Ar
dating. This phase of the project is developing a high-resolution
paleoenvironmental reconstruction using plant leaf waxes (δ13Cwax), bulk organic
matter (δ13COM), and carbonate nodules, as well as at sourcing obsidian
artifacts using a portable handheld X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) machine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.