* 2326228
* Developing self-assembly strategies for the fabrication of well-defined and large area 2D coordination polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Feng Liu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 375,801.00

Non-technical Summary

The design of topological materials is attracting enormous research attention
due to the possibility of accessing novel and exotic physical phenomena such as
Mott transitions, high-temperature superconductivity, topological insulators,
colossal magnetoresistance, and giant magneto-electric effects, which can be
used to achieve dissipation-less quantum electronic states. With support from
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Prof. Luisa Whitakker-Brooks and her group at the University of Utah
will investigate and address the challenges associated with the synthesis and
crystallinity of 2D coordination polymers (2DCPs) for their potential
application as topological materials. The aim is to develop synthetic routes and
self-assembly strategies that can lead to defect-free 2DCP thin films with
controlled crystallinity over large areas. As such, by combining computational
simulations and experimental techniques, the research aims to identify the
kinetic bottlenecks that contribute to defect formation during the synthesis of
2DCPs. This integrated approach provides a comprehensive understanding of the
factors influencing the formation and properties of 2DCPs, not only benefiting
the targeted materials but also potentially contributing to the broader family
of 2DCPs. Additionally, the research project aims to create a database of
electronic structures and predicted quantum properties comprising 2DCPs. This
database will contribute to the understanding and characterization of 2DCPs and
can serve as a valuable resource for future studies in quantum electronics. The
broader community is engaged by executing two outreach activities: (1) “De la
Mano de la Ciencia en el Valle” (translation: Science Frontiers in the Valley)
seminar series as a means to promote and share cutting-edge science results with
the Hispanic population in the Utah Valley and (2) Training high-school teachers
and aiding in the development of teaching curricula through participation in the
Master of Science for Secondary School Teacher (MSSST) program at the University
of Utah. The latter allow for training teachers and students on materials
synthesis and device fabrication to strengthen the microelectronic workforce.

Technical Summary

Crystalline 2D coordination polymers (2DCPs) have been predicted to be
topological materials, including quantum spin/anomalous Hall insulators,
topological flat bands and superconductors with a range of electromagnetic
properties essential for the realization of novel quantum information systems.
2DCPs provide a tunable material platform wherein the molecular structure of
building blocks and the geometry of the crystals they form can be designed using
methods of organic chemistry. However, experimental studies of these materials
have so far failed to confirm their predicted quantum properties. The main
reason for the disappointing performance of 2DCPs as topological materials is
their poor crystallinity. If the potential of 2DCPs as topological materials is
to be realized, synthetic routes to thin films with markedly improved
crystallinity need to be found. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the NSF’s Division of Materials Research, seeks
to identify the microscopic kinetic bottlenecks that lead to defect formation in
the synthesis of 2DCPs with an integrated computational and experimental
approach. The generated insight into defect formation processes is applied to
develop new self-assembly strategies that allow the formation of 2DCP thin films
that are defect-free over length scales exceeding tens of microns, thus
unlocking their theoretical potential as topological materials. The benefits and
outcomes of the proposed research efforts include (1) The development of
synthetic protocols that allow for the fabrication of large-area, highly
oriented 2DCP thin films with controlled defect states; (2) The creation of a
database of electronic structures and predicted quantum properties of proposed
2DCPs; (3) Formulation of self-assembly strategies backed by molecular dynamics
simulations and experimental data with potential application to the broader
family of 2DCPs; and (4) Elucidation of electronic, thermal, and optical
properties of proposed 2DCPs with a route to their application in quantum
information science. The synthesis-characterization-device physics protocols
proposed in this research program define the toolbox that allow us to fulfill
the goal of rational materials design towards quantum electronic technologies.
The knowledge gained and tools developed benefit parallel fields investigating
n-type organic materials for light-emitting diodes, thin-film transistors, and
photovoltaics. This research project provides unique cross-disciplinary training
in materials chemistry and device fabrication to graduate and undergraduate
students as well as high-school students and teachers with a closely mentored
professional experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.