* 2326586
* SBIR Phase I:  Brave Virtual Worlds Human Movement Artificial Intelligence (AI) Engine and Biofeedback Loop
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* William Kodama, BRAVE VIRTUAL WORLDS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,915.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a biofeedback system that
combines wearable sensors, real-time data capture, and immersive virtual reality
visualization. This system has the potential to enhance the understanding of
joint angles and movement patterns enabling in-depth analysis of human movement.
The proposed technology targets a significant market opportunity in the athletic
training and physical therapy industry, which is valued at $200 million.

This SBIR Phase I project addresses intellectual merit through a systematic
research approach. The project involves designing and refining the biofeedback
system, conducting extensive data collection, and implementing advanced
algorithms for real-time analysis. The project's goals include developing a
user-friendly interface, optimizing sensor accuracy, and creating a seamless
biofeedback system for improved training and rehabilitation. Anticipated
technical results include the design and development of a machine learning layer
to classify and identify key components of movements in order to create a
contextual database for further analysis to determine movement efficiency and
highlight movement patterns as well as the development of a corrective
exercise/feedback layer using the context from the machine learning layer to
generate further insights into what is causing highlighted movement patterns
This second later will incorporate corrective exercises that are suggested for
improvement. Additionally, a real-time layer incorporating the first two layers
into the real-time portion will be used for immediate feedback to the end-user,
thus providing a closed bio-feedback loop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.