* 2326446
* I-Corps:  AI-Based Decision Support for Management of Bridge Networks
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Hadi Meidani, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of decision support software systems for optimal management of
transportation networks. These systems address risks associated with network
assets as well as the emergent traffic dynamics that would likely ensue in
natural hazards. Planners from various entities, including state agencies and
municipalities may use this system for optimal asset management for
transportation infrastructure, based on the current conditions of the physical
infrastructure and the predicted high priority areas. This decision support
system also may enhance evacuation planning and post-disaster network management
procedures, as it can provide mobility maps that are updated with incoming data
during and after a disaster.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of graph neural network (GNN)
models that may be used to estimate the network response under probabilistic
natural hazards with minimal computational time. These neural network models are
designed to calculate various response measures, such as connectivity, shortest
distance, and travel times. The modular feature of GNNs allows for models that
are developed using data from networks in one city or region to be usable in
another region. These models may be used for extreme events such as earthquakes,
floods, hurricanes, and tornadoes. The proposed technology is building upon
successful numerical experiments on transportation networks in California, New
York, and Florida for seismic and flood hazards. The accuracy, computational
efficiency, and robustness of these GNN models are documented. The decision
support that will be built on these GNN models will feature intelligent tools
that evaluate the current conditions of the physical infrastructure, rank
investment decisions related to network planning to focus on high priority
concerns. It also may facilitate effective emergency response by combining the
same predictive capabilities with real-time network data to effectively update
response plans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.