* 2326933
* CAREER: Wetting and dynamics on soft and swollen polymeric surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Jonathan Pham, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 395,519.00

Soft and swollen polymers are critical for many areas of science and technology,
from biological and synthetic tissues to flexible devices and non-stick
coatings. These materials comprise both a solid portion and a fluid portion,
making it challenging to predict their behavior. However, understanding how
these materials interact with liquids or solids is necessary for the design of
advanced applications for national health and prosperity. This CAREER project
supports fundamental research to investigate how soft and swollen surfaces
interact with liquid drops in a variety of static and dynamic situations.
Insights gained from this work are expected to aid in the development of new
biomaterials for healthcare applications and in the design of non-stick coatings
for improved drag reduction and anti-fouling. In addition, this project will
support a summer program to provide pre-college and underrepresented students an
opportunity to explore and consider STEM-based careers. Moreover, the project
will offer an international educational experience for graduate students in the
UK to enhance the global research enterprise. The project will train students in
the cross-disciplinary area of polymers, surfaces, and mechanics for the future
workforce.

Soft and swollen polymers are critical for a wide range of applications, and
hence it is important to understand how they interact with other media. The
objective of this CAREER project is to provide fundamental knowledge on the
relationships between materials-specific properties and the wetting behavior of
soft, swollen, and crosslinked polymers. Over the last decade, wetting has been
investigated on slippery, lubricant-infused porous surfaces (e.g. SLIPS) and on
soft, crosslinked solids; in both cases, a wetting ridge forms from either the
lubricant or the soft solid. However, wetting is not well understood on soft
swollen networks, which are crosslinked polymers infused with a fluid. More
specifically, it is unclear how the synergy between the swelling fluid and the
polymer network governs wetting ridge formation and wetting dynamics. To
investigate how liquid drops wet soft and swollen networks, confocal microscopy,
fluorescent dyes, and lateral force measurements will be employed. A range of
silicone-based networks combined with a range of swelling fluids will be
implemented, which will allow for systematic control over the mechanical
properties, the swelling ratios, and the fluid-network interactions.
Experimental results will be theoretically considered by merging fundamental
concepts from surface science, mechanics, and polymer science. In addition, soft
materials will continue to play a pivotal role in the science and engineering
landscape. Broad mentorship of graduate students and a focused seminar series
among groups working on soft materials will offer enhanced training for the
future workforce. Moreover, this project will provide graduate students with an
enriching international experience in the UK to better understand the global
research culture. Expanding on drop-surface interactions, students will travel
abroad and explore insect adhesion on soft and swollen surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.