* 2326498
* CIF:Small:A Systems Approach to Statistics for N-of-1 Experimental Trials
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Recht, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,629.00

Randomized experiments are arguably the most important contribution of
twentieth-century statistics, providing a program to establish the value of
interventions to populations of individuals. By randomly assigning individuals
to treatment and control, statistical analysis can determine the magnitude of
intervention effects and eliminate confounding explanations. However, randomized
experiments yield conclusions about only populations, not individuals. When
treatments have heterogeneous effects, a randomized experiment cannot inform an
individual whether a treatment can work for them personally. In contrast, N-of-1
trials attempt to solve this problem by having a single individual apply random
treatments in different time windows. If the effect is immediate and transient,
standard tools from randomized experiments can be used to estimate the magnitude
and significance of the effect. Yet, N-of-1 trials remain highly limited as
there currently exists no general framework to understand effects that
accumulate over long time periods or interventions that have a complex
interaction with the individual. This project aims to devise a methodology of
experiments for individuals, using ideas from engineering systems to build a
sophisticated framework for understanding such complex N-of-1 experimental
trials. It is anticipated that the work may eventually help caregivers find new
treatments for their patients, minimize design time in robotic systems, provide
new tools for those who suffer from addiction, and provide a framework for
improving skills in educational settings or athletics.

The work consists of three main thrusts. The first thrust casts the individual
as a dynamical system and investigates the application of dynamical system-
identification techniques in an experimental framework. The second thrust
applies online-learning and adaptive-control tools to frame experiment designs
as optimal-control problems, devising intervention plans over time to maximize
outcomes. The third thrust studies how educators, coaches, therapists, and
caregivers use their experience with former clients to quickly adapt to the
specialized needs of new clients. The work conducted will draw on mathematical
tools from machine learning, control theory, optimization, and signal
processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.