* 2326341
* Collaborative Research: Data Poisoning Attacks and Infrastructure-Enabled Solutions for Traffic State Estimation and Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Yuan Hong, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 169,924.00

This award will support research to investigate "data poisoning" attacks in
transportation systems and develop new defense methods to enhance transportation
cybersecurity. With ubiquitous data and widely applied data-driven methods in
transportation, data poisoning attacks are becoming a critical cybersecurity
threat to traffic state estimation and prediction (TSEP), as well as to decision
making related to vehicle fleet management and traffic control. This research
will have profound societal benefits and impacts by identifying new data
poisoning attacks and developing novel defense methods on essential
transportation applications. The research will also help raise awareness of data
security and facilitate the development of infrastructure-enabled solutions to
strengthen transportation security. The team will integrate research results
into existing and new courses and will advise both graduate and undergraduate
students, especially students from groups underrepresented in science and
engineering research, to participate in cutting-edge research. The project team
members will participate in multiple outreach programs by providing inputs in
science and engineering from this project to K-12 students, especially high
school students. The team will also convey research findings to transportation
agencies, the academic community, and industry partners. The researchers will
transfer research findings to practice, to make significant impacts in the real
world.

This research will develop a new paradigm in designing transportation data
poisoning attacks and developing innovative defense solutions to ensure
transportation data security. Data poisoning attacks are first formulated as
sensitivity analysis of optimization problems over data perturbations (attacks).
Lipschitz continuity-based analysis methods and semi-derivative based algorithms
will be developed to help design attack models that are more general and
applicable to transportation applications. The team will also develop
approximation schemes of the complex objective functions and/or constraints of
learning models and study the transferability of attack methods on deep learning
models. To defend against the attacks, an infrastructure-enabled defense
framework will be developed by leveraging existing and newly deployed secure
infrastructure data/information to detect and mitigate attacks. This new defense
framework will help develop a secure data network to effectively defend against
different attacks on various applications. The research will also provide useful
insights to study attacks and develop novel defense methods in other engineering
and science fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.