* 2326898
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track G: Combating Vulnerability and Unawareness in 5G Network Security
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Sonia Fahmy, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,936.00

Reliable and high-rate 5G wireless access has become a global necessity;
however, the US has fallen behind in wireless leadership, lacking major radio
access network (RAN) or cellular network manufacturers. Furthermore, cellular
networks have not been designed for mission-critical communications and have
exposed several security vulnerabilities. Consequently, the Department of
Defense (DoD) faces challenges in using commercial off-the-shelf 5G products and
commercial networks for US military operations. The Zero Trust X (ZTX) team, a
consortium of interdisciplinary experts in the field of 5G and security, will
research and develop a family of security solutions to establish a Zero Trust
Chain (ZTC) that enables end-to-end security and protection for reliable use of
5G networks for DoD use cases. The proposed effort will generate knowledge and
research outcomes tailored for use by US industry and DoD. Additionally, the
project will train a diverse team of students in research and provide open-
source software that facilitates portability, reproducibility, and integration
with other Track G solutions of this program.

The project's specific goal is to develop the ZTC software that enables
military squads to securely share situational awareness in their operations
using high-performance, yet often untrusted, 5G networks. The software solution
leverages the flexibility of the 5G standard and implements innovative security
solutions at different network nodes and layers to empower DoD operators to
detect malicious entities in near-real time and establish communication
mechanisms to prevent access to or control over DoD traffic. Specifically,
through minimal cooperation with 5G network operators, part of the ZTC solution
leverages Open-RAN (O-RAN) and 5G core-centric approaches for practical threat
monitoring and mitigation. This is complemented by device-centric security
enhancements to ensure that DoD devices also implement their own layer of
security and do not solely depend on the security protocols of the network
provider. Six key features set ZTC apart from other solutions: (i) it builds on
the Open Artificial Intelligence Cellular (OAIC) platform for developing O-RAN
threat monitoring and mitigation through RAN Intelligent Controllers; (ii) it
offers end-to-end secure slicing across the 5G RAN and Core; (iii) it detects
threats at user devices in near-real time; (iv) it protects communication
through innovation at the application layer rather than modifying existing 5G
physical layer protocols and algorithms; (v) it ensures location privacy and
resiliency to unknown/unanticipated denial of service (DoS) attacks; and (vi) it
does not require modifications to public 5G/O-RAN networks and standards, and
only requires installation of low-overhead software modules on 5G user devices
and cooperative 5G networks. The ZTX team's work is applicable to commercial and
military 5G communication networks and to O-RAN. The ZTX team will implement and
experimentally evaluate the proposed ZTC initially on a laboratory-scale
integrated 5G/O-RAN testbed, and subsequently on other available testbeds to
prepare for commercial transition. The team will apply Convergence Accelerator
fundamentals to foster partnerships and to develop a sustainability model with
an impact extending well beyond Phase 2 of the program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.