* 2326276
* Conference: Young Topologists Meeting 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Arpon Raksit, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This award will fund US participants attending the fifth yearly installment of
the Young Topologists Meeting (YTM) 2023 to be held at the Ecole Polytechnique
Federale Lausanne taking place July 24 - 28, 2023. The YTM consists of mini-
courses by distinguished researchers, and a line-up of 40 short talks and 40
poster presentations, mostly by graduate students. Being one of the largest
conferences in the world dedicated to young researchers in this field, the YTM
provides a unique opportunity for junior topologists to gain experience giving
conference presentations to a wide audience, broaden their horizons by learning
about subfields not represented at their institutions, expose their work to the
international topology community, and develop collaborations with other young
researchers. Furthermore, the YTM seeks to promote diversity by featuring
graduate student speakers from underrepresented groups and from universities
that are less well-represented in topology and by providing a friendly and
welcoming community for students from all backgrounds. By funding US
participants, the NSF is promoting the exchange of scientific ideas between the
US and the international topology community, providing a setting for young
topologists from the US to make research connections and develop relationships
with their future international colleagues, as well as supporting a culture of
diversity and inclusion.

Two mini courses will be run by Katharine Turner (ANU) on Persistent Homology
Transform (PHT), covering the mathematical theory behind these topological
transforms, outlining some statistical methodology and also surveying a variety
of nice applications from disease prognosis from the shapes of brain tumors to
the identification of plants from their leaf contours, and by Marc Hoyois (Uni
Regensberg) on motivic homotopy theory with a view towards the formalism of six
functors. The latter is a general categorical framework for homology and
cohomology devised by Grothendieck, which explains and generalizes many non-
trivial facts like Poincaré duality and the Lefschetz trace formula.
Participant-contributed talks and posters will cover a wide range of topics in
topology, spanning higher algebra, homotopy theory, geometry, and applied
topology. More information can be obtained from the conference website:
https://ytm2023.epfl.ch/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.