* 2326803
* QuSeC-TAQS: Distributed Entangled Quantum-Enhanced  Interferometric Imaging for Telescopy and Metrology
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Paul Kwiat, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,994.00

Improved resolution in astronomical observations at radio frequencies has
enabled scientists to make the first images of black hole event horizons and
detailed images of quasars, as demonstrated by the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT)
collaboration, providing new insights into the structure and dynamics of some of
the most puzzling objects in the universe. However, many features of
astronomical objects can only be observed in the visible range of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Improved resolution in the visible regime would
accelerate the search for exoplanets and the study of their atmospheres, enable
resolved imaging of black hole event horizons in the near-infrared, and
facilitate imaging of planet-forming disks and stellar surfaces beyond the Sun.
The fundamental limit to the resolution of a telescope is set by the ratio of
the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation detected and the diameter of the
collection aperture, thus driving efforts to make large aperture telescopes. By
bringing together the fields collected at distant apertures and interfering
them, one can increase the effective aperture size of a telescope to the
distance between the apertures. The EHT utilized a network of radio telescopes
across the Earth, with separations on the order of thousands of kilometers,
currently infeasible for visible wavelengths. This project aims to develop
extended baseline interferometry in visible wavelengths by performing the first
quantum-enabled imaging of astronomical objects. The goal is to pioneer the
development of practical astronomical interferometers with quantum-enhanced
performance.

Recent theoretical proposals have shown that by interfering collected light from
astronomical sources with entangled states of light distributed between distant
telescopes can enable effective aperture sizes not possible with classical
means. Proof-of-concept experiments in this project will verify the basic
operating principles of a quantum-enabled imaging system that can ultimately be
scaled up to demonstrate a quantum advantage over conventional systems,
providing valuable insights for a larger-scale implementation. Theoretical work
in this project is focused on modeling realistic experiments, developing
benchmarking tools and metrics for comparing quantum and classical sensing
strategies, and extending quantum protocols. Tabletop experiments with simulated
astronomical sources will be used to verify theoretical bounds of quantum and
classical performance, and demonstrate the first quantum-enabled interferometric
imaging of astronomical sources. This project brings together an
interdisciplinary team of experts from astronomy, electrical engineering,
physics and quantum information science who will work convergently to perform
the first quantum-enabled imaging of astronomical objects. The largest payoff in
the long term would be the development of practical astronomical interferometers
with quantum-enhanced performance opening a new window on the observable
universe. Shorter-term outcomes will be a deeper understanding of distributed
quantum optical sensing, which may be applicable in diverse scenarios. Moreover,
the methods developed during the project will be applicable to a broad range of
applications beyond astronomy. For example, distributing entanglement between
the telescope apertures is highly relevant to quantum networking, distributed
quantum computing, and quantum communications. This project supports the
training of students in a multidisciplinary collaboration, the expansion and
development of courses in quantum information science, and public outreach
activities to encourage young people and minorities to explore science and
technology. This project is funded by the NSF Quantum Sensing Challenges for
Transformative Advances in Quantum Systems (QuSeC-TAQS) program, the Division of
Physics, and the Division of Astronomical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.