* 2326378
* FW-HTF-RM: Bridging AI Inequality in Digitally-Mediated Gig Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jay Brockman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2027
* USD 999,980.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier - Research: Medium (FW-HTF-
RM) award supports research to study and mitigate the growing inequality between
platforms and workers in digitally-mediated gig work caused by artificial
intelligence (AI). The project specifically targets app-based ridesharing, a
newly emerging industry with more than 1.5 million drivers in the United States
as of 2023. In ridesharing, concerns of inequality such as income disparities
and workplace discrimination are frequently observed and reported. This emerging
AI inequality is driven by two facets: a technology divide and a data divide.
The technology divide pertains to how gig work platforms use advanced AI systems
to allocate resources, dispatch tasks, and determine worker pay, while workers
lack comparable technological access. The data divide refers to the platforms'
collection and consolidation of vast data from all workers and customers to aid
their operations, while other parties remain without similar data access. The
project will first measure and characterize such AI inequality in rideshare
platforms. Based on the derived insights, the research team will design, create,
and deploy an AI-enabled data-driven decision-making support system for drivers
to help them plan for their work in their best interests, with a long-term goal
of bridging AI inequality in rideshare platforms. Outcomes from this project
will also benefit other domains of on-demand gig work with algorithmic
management, such as online freelancing and data annotation.

This project brings together several disciplines, including human-computer
interaction, machine learning, labor economics, and sociology of labor. The
investigator team is structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. First, the
project seeks to quantitatively measure AI inequality between platforms and
workers using a data-driven approach. Second, the project will characterize AI
inequality and how drivers react to algorithmic management using a mix of
qualitative and quantitative methods from a sociological perspective. Utilizing
the findings, the research team will develop a bottom-up network of intelligent
personal assistants that help drivers plan for their work and make decisions in
their best interests. A network of drivers and their assistants share data,
which enables the predictive modeling of task demand and supply, customer and
worker behaviors, and pricing changes. Lastly, through a field deployment, the
research team will study the adoption of the researched system and measure its
real-world impacts. This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the
Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to promote deeper basic
understanding of the interdependent human- technology partnership in work
contexts by advancing design of intelligent work technologies that operate in
harmony with human workers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.