* 2326879
* Developing novel machine learning approaches to studying cell development
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xiaobo Zhou, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2026
* USD 171,912.00

The overall goal of this research is to develop novel machine learning (ML)
methods to accurately characterize the dynamic process and states of a cell
cycle, to model the lineage commitment along differentiation process, and to
predict the key elements that regulate cell cycle and differentiation processes
with single-cell multi-omics data. This will lead to insights into the
mechanisms coupling between cell cycle differentiation for cell growth and
development. The tools will significantly improve our understanding of stem
cells, germinal cells and tissue development and functions. The ML methods can
be modified and applied to other general problems in biology. Graduate and
undergraduate students will work under this project and gain experience in doing
leading-edge research.

The project will develop two ML approaches: integrated sinusoidal and piecewise
autoencoder (SPAE) for cell cycle estimate and cell development study, and cell
cycle-aware domain separation network (CADSN) to study the dynamic coupling of
cell cycle and differentiation. SPAE employs a distinct sinusoidal autoencoder
to characterize the circular process in the cell cycle and piecewise autoencoder
to capture the inherent nonlinear data structure in high-dimensional space,
formed by single cells sampled from various stages of a periodic process. This
model can also characterize the connections between the cell cycle and cell
development while it effectively unfolds the circular manifold onto a non-linear
space to obtain precise pseudo-time. Secondly, CADSN is proposed for multi-omics
single-cell data integration and label transfer. An autoencoder-based cell-
cycle-aware domain separation network is proposed to predict and remove cell
cycle effects from the integrated multi-omics single-cell data while keeping the
cell type-specific heterogeneity. This is the first computational model to study
the cell-cycle effect in the integrated analysis for multi-omics single-cell
data. Finally, some of the inferred results will be experimentally validated by
using the team’s established models. Software prototypes and the gene biomarkers
regulating cell cycle and differentiation will be made publicly available to the
research community via a project website at https:/ccsm.uth.edu/NSF-SSL.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.