* 2326391
* Collaborative Research [FW-HTF-RM]: The Future of Nurse Training: Robotic Teaching Assistant Systems for Nursing Instructors
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Shannan Hamlin, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 10/31/2027
* USD 171,997.00

As the largest hospital workforce, registered nurses are essential to the
overall stability of hospitals and play a vital role in delivering quality
patient care. Nursing instructors are responsible for training and assessments
of this workforce. The U.S. is experiencing a dire shortage of nurses, leading
to significant turnover of nursing staff and an ever-growing need to train more
nurses. As a result, the supply for nursing instructors too has outstripped
demand. Meeting the nurse workforce training needs is a significant challenge
and motivates development of transformative mechanisms for human-technology
partnership in nurse workforce training. To address this challenge, the
project's overall goal is to help nurse instructors improve training outcomes
while freeing up their time for personalized instruction and enhance efficiency
of nursing workforce training programs. To achieve this goal the project will
design, develop, and evaluate the impacts of Robotic Intelligent Teaching
Assistant Systems (RITAS) on the future of nurse workforce training. Through a
symbiosis of virtual and embodied intelligence components, the teaching
assistance system will assist nursing instructors in training of routine nursing
procedures by assessing trainees' skills, reporting the assessment summaries to
instructors, and delivering instructor-guided tutoring to trainees. Through
mechanisms for participatory design, nursing instructors and nurses of varying
backgrounds will be involved in the technology design from the very beginning,
shaping the use of such tools and informing future efforts on the use of
artificial intelligence and robotics in nursing curriculum and more broadly
healthcare. The core team brings together expertise in nursing, nursing
education, behavioral science, robotics, artificial intelligence, intelligent
tutoring, and human-centered computing to achieve the overarching goals. Project
advisors will contribute technology, nursing, organizational behavior and
management, and learning sciences expertise. The project includes three
concurrent and integrated tracks to realize novel mechanisms for human-
technology partnership in nurse workforce training. The first two tracks focus
on design and development of the virtual and embodied components of the future
technology, respectively, through algorithmic innovations in intelligent
tutoring and robotics. Through these innovations, the project will bring a
transformative leap in intelligent tutoring robots: instead of relying solely on
conversational interaction, RITAS will utilize its sensors and embodiment to
verify and improve trainees' physical skill execution. Together, the two
components will assist with assessment and training of nursing procedures.
Assessment summaries and tutoring will be delivered using both verbal and non-
verbal mechanisms for human-robot communication. The third track will measure
training, productivity, and behavioral metrics that are relevant to deployment
and adoption of the future technology, such as the impact of robotic teaching
assistance on nursing instructors' workload and nurse trainees' learning
outcomes. These measurements will be derived through extensive human subject
experiments conducted within ongoing nurse workforce training activities at a
large hospital, which onboards over thousand nurses per year, and distilled into
a concise nursing theory guiding technology adoption in nursing education. The
project will also develop spatially-grounded models of nursing procedures and
training environments. Through these worker-centered assessments, theories, and
models, the project will inform the work design of future nursing instructors at
the human-technology frontier.

This project is supported by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
program which supports multi-disciplinary research to sustain economic
competitiveness, promote worker well-being, lifelong and pervasive learning, and
quality of life, and illuminate the emerging social and economic context and
drivers of innovations that are shaping the future of jobs and work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.