* 2326495
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Reimagining Communication Bottlenecks in GNN Acceleration through Collaborative Locality Enhancement and Compression Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dingwen Tao, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The digital revolution has generated a vast volume of interconnected data, often
represented as graphs, which is pertinent to numerous critical real-world
applications. This has led to the increasing prevalence of Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), a technique that extends the benefits of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to
graph-based applications. GNNs hold promising potential to significantly impact
society, from accelerating drug discovery and preventing supply chain
disruptions, to averting cascading power grid failures and identifying
misinformation on social media. However, the actualization of such potential is
currently impeded by computational inefficiencies caused by the colossal size
and intricate nature (such as extreme sparsity and irregularity) of graphs,
which pose challenges to the practical deployment of GNNs. This project aims to
bridge the gap between the computational efficiency required for GNNs and their
current performance, primarily due to the uniquely heavy load of communication
required in GNN computation. In addition, the project enriches the educational
experience of undergraduate and graduate students in the US by enhancing the
quality of AI and system-related courses and outreach activities at the
University of Rochester and Indiana University. Successful completion of this
research project can unlock the immense potential of GNNs to solve problems in
fields of medicine, public infrastructure, and economic development, among many
other issues critical to the well-functioning of the republic and the prosperity
of its economy.

This project aims to develop a revolutionary communication reduction method that
organically integrates on-the-fly versatile graph locality enhancement and high-
ratio compression through software-hardware co-design. The research is
structured around three primary thrusts: (1) The development of an on-the-fly
graph locality enhancer via hardware-software co-design, providing significant
versatility and additional reductions in communication demands compared to
current leading methods. (2) The creation of an efficient lossy compressor that
enables high-ratio, error-bounded compression and decompression for graph data,
including both graph embedding and topology information. (3) The investigation
into methods for effectively combining the graph locality enhancer and graph
compressor, allowing them to mutually benefit each other. These strategies
together directly address the persistent communication bottlenecks in GNNs and
unleash their potential for societal benefits. Moreover, this project aims to
resolve the following query: whether a collaborative integration of locality
enhancement and data compression, the two most prevalent communication
optimization approaches, can provide a ground-breaking solution to general graph
problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.