* 2326667
* Travel: NSF-CISE Student Participation Grant for MWSCAS 2023
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Pamela Abshire, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 10/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports student travel for attending the 62nd Midwest Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (MWCAS) to be held in Tucson, AZ in August 2023. The MWCAS
is a premier international conference in the field of circuits and systems.
Other than tutorials, keynote, and plenary lectures by leading experts in the
field, the conference will be attended by academic and industry researchers and
students to present their recent work both in lecture sessions and poster
sessions. The conference will host a student paper competition to encourage the
best students to keep abreast of the most modern technologies. Recipients of
this grant will be selected from the pool of students presenting papers and will
be paid part of their expenses for travel and registration at the conference. US
citizens and permanent residents will be given the highest priority in the
selection process. The experience gained by the students in the process is going
to be an invaluable component of their education. Due to the large number of
industrial participants in the meeting, the experience will also help them to
secure positions in industry, thus contributing to the much-needed technological
workforce of the United States. The selection committee will pay due attention
to supporting women and people from underrepresented groups through this grant.

The technical areas covered by the conference will, in general, be electronic
circuits and systems relevant, among other problems, to modern computing
hardware technologies. More specifically, the broad spectrum of topics to be
covered will include, but will not be limited to: Analog and Mixed Signal
Circuits and Systems; Digital Integrated Circuits and Systems; Power and Energy
Circuits and Systems; Sensory Circuits and Systems; Signal, Image, and
Multimedia Processing; Communications Circuits and Systems; RF and Wireless
Circuits and Systems; Biomedical Circuits and Systems; Neural Networks and
Neuromorphic Engineering; and Beyond CMOS Circuits and Architectures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.