* 2326672
* Characterizing the genetic and epigenetic determinants of multicellularity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Eric Greer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,199,995.00

How did multicellularity arise? This is a fundamental question as life began as
single celled organisms, then branched into various multicellular lineages. When
cells began to cooperate with each other to establish the multicellular state,
several key features co-evolved; cell adherence, intercellular communication,
cellular specialization in adopting unique functions for the survival of the
whole organism, along with altruism (i.e., a state where a cell would not only
care about its own survival but even be willing to sacrifice itself for the
survival of the organism). Understanding these basic features is important for
understanding basic evolution. A suite of genes has been identified that may
provide clues to the origins of multicellularity and this project will
investigate these genes (and their regulation) for their contribution to the
multicellular state. The Broader Impacts of the work include the intrinsic merit
as multicellularity is a feature of much life on the planet (including humans).
Moreover, it is also important as many of these very processes go awry when
specific diseases develop. In cancer, for example, a cell will no longer
localizes to the tissue where it is supposed to grow and no longer functions in
a manner that is beneficial for the overall survival of the organism but will
instead adopt a selfish fate where it only cares about its own survival.
Additional activities include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, along with post-doctoral fellows in a breadth of research
methodologies at two institutions.

To decipher how evolution transitioned from unicellular to multicellular states,
we propose leveraging one of the rare organisms that adopts and regularly
transits both unicellular and multicellular states. Dictyostelium discodeum
undergoes dramatic physiological changes when food is scarce, transforming from
a single celled amoeba to a multicellular fruiting body while maintaining the
same genetic code. We have hypothesized that epigenetic changes help to drive
this transition from unicellular to multicellular fates. We recently published
work identifying genes whose expression and epigenomic signatures were different
between the unicellular and multicellular state suggesting that they might play
important roles in regulating the transition to multicellularity. We found that
by deleting or overexpressing these genes, they are both necessary and
sufficient for multicellularity in Dictyostelium. Here, we propose to extend
these initial findings by using state of the art technologies to characterize at
single-cell resolution the epigenetic and transcriptional alterations that occur
in Dictyostelium as it transitions between unicellular and multicellular states.
In parallel, we will investigate the transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms
underlying cellular altruism, an essential characteristic of multicellular
organisms. These experiments will provide fundamental insight into the genetic
and epigenetic mechanisms underlying the transition from uni to
multicellularity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.