* 2326810
* QuSeC-TAQS: Novel Quantum Algorithms for Optical Atomic Clocks
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Marianna Safronova, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,171,393.00

Optical clocks are the most accurate instruments ever realized by humankind.
They have great potential for fundamental physics discovery as sensors, e.g.,
for low-frequency gravitational wave detection and dark matter searches.
However, thus far optical clocks have generally used the same basic modality
since the first atomic clocks were realized: uniform state preparation and
interrogation of a sample of atoms. In contrast, the quantum information science
(QIS) toolbox has developed to the point where single atoms in large arrays can
be individually controlled, interrogated, and even entangled with other atoms.
This project seeks to leverage QIS advances to develop new algorithms for the
use of optical clocks as sensors. The team will train graduate students,
undergraduate students, and postdocs in interdisciplinary research at the
forefront of quantum metrology. All participants will be trained in advanced
concepts regarding precision measurements, quantum sensing, and quantum
algorithms. Through training in the context of cutting-edge research, this work
will strengthen the quantum workforce.

This project aims to realize new quantum algorithms to advance optical atomic
clocks as quantum sensors for signals of interest including dark matter,
gravitational waves, and as frequency and time references. Established quantum
information science algorithms, such as quantum error correction, will serve as
a jumping off point for the optical clock algorithms that this team will
develop. This team will leverage ensembles of trapped neutral atoms and arrays
of trapped ions, and develop and demonstrate new measurement protocols that
maximize their sensitivity for a given atom number and sensing target, drawing
inspiration from existing quantum computing algorithms. This project will
advance the performance and capabilities of optical lattice clocks with multiple
ensembles of neutral atoms, pioneering a new frontier in precision measurements.
In parallel, this team will realize new ion traps with arrays of trapped clock
ions, providing complementary approaches for algorithm development. Taken
together with the development of novel clock algorithms and theoretical analyses
of the expected signals from sensing targets such as various dark matter
candidates, this effort will advance the sensing reach of optical clocks. The
algorithms developed will also help ease the requirements for transportable
optical clocks, for example by relaxing constraints on the optical clock laser
system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.