* 2326876
* Conference: SICB 2024: Computational and Physical Models in Research and Teaching to Explore Form-Function Relationships
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Shi-Tong Hsieh, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 13,493.00

This conference award supports participants in a symposium and associated
workshop on incorporating computational and physical models in biological
research and teaching at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB) in January 2024. With greater universal access to
computational power as well as the rapid expansion and construction of “maker
spaces” across college campuses, mathematical, physical, and engineering
modeling tools that offer unique opportunities to advance understanding of
organismal form and function relationships are readily available to biologists.
However, broad adoption of physical models and computational modeling approaches
in the biological sciences is often thwarted by the difficulty of forming
appropriate transdisciplinary collaborations as well as gaps in technical
training of biology students. This award supports a transdisciplinary symposium
that will catalyze discussions and ideation among biologists, physicists, and
engineers, and will accelerate the formation of new transdisciplinary
collaborations. The symposium highlights early-career researchers and members of
groups under-represented in the sciences. Outcomes of the symposium include a
collaborative workshop and synthetic paper that will identify innovative
approaches and priorities for applying physical models and computational
modeling to revolutionize biological knowledge, as well as creating a framework
for integration into biology curricula.

Emergent behaviors of a biological system are the result of the precise
coordination of multiple complex and interconnected systems, enabling rapid
signal processing followed by appropriate effector output. A mechanistic
understanding of these processes can be achieved by integrating traditional
biology experiments with physical or computational modeling. The activation
barrier for applying these tools can be high especially for those labs new to
modeling. Likewise, it is imperative to educate future scientists to perpetuate
the use of modeling approaches in their own research and teaching. The award
supports a transdisciplinary symposium that will catalyze discussions and
ideation among biologists, physicists, and engineers, including early-career
scientists, international researchers, and members of groups under-represented
in the sciences, and will accelerate the formation of new research and education
collaborations. By showcasing the potential of cross-disciplinary research and
teaching approaches, the symposium and workshop will inspire scientists to
implement models in their own work and identify pathways for doing so. Summaries
of the symposium presentations will be published in the SICB journal,
Integrative and Comparative Biology. That issue will include a jointly-authored,
forward-looking perspective paper reviewing the state of the field and
highlighting research priorities that will continue pushing the limits of
biological knowledge discovery and transdisciplinary integration of these tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.