* 2326840
* QuSeC-TAQS: Distributed Entanglement Quantum Sensing of Atmospheric and Aerosol Chemistries
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Sergio Carbajo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,000,001.00

This project addresses a pressing challenge for society - how to track and to
respond to a rapidly changing climate. The goal is to develop and demonstrate a
quantum sensing platform that features an in situ distributed sensor network to
measure and understand atmospheric chemistries and climate variables. At its
most fundamental level, an entangled quantum network is capable of sensing
multiple geographically and locally distinct systems with higher precision than
the summation of each system probed individually. Entangled networks can thus
elucidate non-classical correlations between probes over distributed nodes.
Extending the physical limits of sensing to measure and analyze complex datasets
from the environment at the thermodynamic and quantum noise limits can aid with
societal well-being and public health. The convergent expertise of the team
assembled brings together quantum science & engineering, electrical & computer
engineering, atmospheric & geosciences, chemistry & biochemistry, and applied
mathematics. This effort is aligned with the launch of the US CHIPS and Science
Act, and for US competitiveness in quantum technologies. Atmospheric and
geoscientists will leverage new quantum measurement technologies from this
project to address key measurement challenges: varied measured environments,
better time resolution in spectroscopy, higher sensitivity through distributed
entanglement, and/or the ability to measure transient species. A major societal
impact will be in public health decision-making, based on newly enabled
measurements and real-time analyses of atmospheric chemistries with
unprecedented spatial-temporal resolution, providing actionable information on
locality, e.g., to prevent respiratory illness, enabled in real-time by a
comprehensive entangled network of quantum sensors. With UCLA on track to become
an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) by 2025, this effort develops a highly
qualified, diverse workforce, building on a track-record of non-traditional
education programs, including the Cal-Bridge and Physics Bridge, creating
opportunities for historically underrepresented groups at Cal State campuses.
UCLA Women in Engineering WE@UCLA Technical Academies will introduce quantum
sensing with programming around this programâ€™s technologies resulting, in
collaboration with industry, startups, and non-academic stakeholders in
atmospheric chemistry and geosciences.

Quantum sensing is a powerful paradigm that encompasses the use of non-classical
states of light and matter to probe species of interest. Compared to classical
probes, non-classical states of light in metrology, including frequency-
multiplexed high-dimensional entangled photons and squeezed light across
distributed networks, exhibit uncharted sensing capabilities. This project
comprises two interdisciplinary and synergistic Thrusts: 1. quantum-enabled
networked sensor systems, involving sensor data fusion and multimodal learning
on quantum sensors, and distributed entanglement-assisted high-dimensional
precision phase metrology in remote sensing at and beyond the standard quantum
limit (SQL). This effort is complemented with thrust 2. on quantum sensor arrays
for molecular fingerprinting, involving hyperspectral dual-comb spectroscopy and
stabilization beyond the standard quantum limit, and molecular dual-comb
spectroscopy at the Schawlow-Townes limits and a quantum-limited THz
spectrometer. Relevant to the broader quantum sensing community, the program
will demonstrate distributed entanglement for quantum metrology towards below-
SQL biochemical sensitivities, including biphoton and multi-partite time-
frequency entanglement sources, in the presence of noise and channel losses in
each sensing pathway. The team focus will be on chemical species that are
challenging to measure, including reduced and oxidized forms of N, S, and C, as
well as NH3, NOx, and free radical chemistries. Further, the team leverages and
advances the mathematics of real-time analyses and quantum sensor data fusion.
This project was co-funded by the Quantum Sensors Challenge for Transformative
Advances in Quantum Systems (QuSeC-TAQS) program, and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.