* 2327208
* Conference: ICMS: Topological Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Eric Rowell, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 36,000.00

Quantum computation has been a major area of research for several decades now,
with researchers from many scientific fields across academia, industry and
government working together towards the development of quantum technologies. If
a powerful quantum computer can be built it will fundamentally transform the
landscape of information science and technology. While errors due to the
delicate nature of typical quantum states have mitigated progress, topological
quantum computation (TQC) is an approach that could overcome this issue. This is
by utilizing materials in which information can be "knotted," like a quantum
quipu, making them naturally robust against the most common errors. After
several years of the relevant research groups working separately, the time is
right to bring together a diverse group of physicists and mathematicians with
the goal of re-examining the field and exploring new platforms for topological
quantum computation. This grant supports the participation of US-based
researchers in a workshop to be held in the UK to achieve this goal, foster new
collaborations between researchers in the US, the UK, and the rest of the world,
and broaden the participation of junior researchers and members of groups
historically under-represented in this area. This workshop will bring together
researchers in a diversity of fields in and around TQC for the purpose of
broadening and deepening the subject, with an eye towards accelerating the
realization of scalable technology.

The hurdle of scalable fault-tolerance is insurmountable with the current
incremental progress -- while it is possible to engineer systems supporting
hundreds of physical qubits, applications beyond mere proof of principle require
millions of qubits to implement robust error correction. Topological quantum
computation relies upon the preparation of topological phases of matter
supporting non-abelian anyons to perform inherently fault-tolerant operations.
As errors are corrected at the hardware level through the topological nature of
anyons, the problem of scalability is simultaneously overcome. On the other
hand, despite years of effort we still do not have unassailable confirmation
that non-abelian anyons exist. We will explore new directions beyond the
traditional anyon community, embracing relevant topics such as quantum cellular
automata, fractons, categorical symmetries and motion groups in 3-dimensions. A
website for this event is available at:
https://www.icms.org.uk/TopologicalQuantumComputation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.