* 2327558
* The Seventeenth (17th) Graduate Climate Conference (GCC); Woods Hole, Massachusetts; November 2-4, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Susan Solomon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports the 17th Graduate Climate Conference (GCC), planned for 2-4
November 2023 at the Marine Biological Laboratory of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. The conference is held annually and alternates
between Woods Hole the University of Washington.

The GCC is an interdisciplinary climate conference organized entirely by and for
graduate students. It provides a discussion forum for students conducting
research on climate in a variety of disciplines including atmospheric dynamics,
ocean dynamics, ocean biology and chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, climate
dynamics, paleoclimate, and human dimensions of climate variability and change.
The meeting is intended to help students familiarize themselves with the breadth
of climate science, gain exposure to the enormous range of tools available to
address climate-related questions, and understand how their research fits into
the broader landscape of current climate science. The conference seeks to better
prepare graduate students for scientific inquiry in a field that increasingly
demands interdisciplinary approaches. Funds provided here support travel and
subsistence for 120 students chosen through a competitive process which places
emphasis on selecting a cross-section of applicants that reflects the diversity
of the next generation of scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.