* 2327243
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Protein droplets drive membrane bending and cytoskeletal organization
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* David Saintillan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 610,943.00

Diverse classes of proteins within cells have recently been observed to self-
assemble into liquid-like droplets. While they were first discovered in the
cellular interior, or cytosol, it is increasingly clear that protein droplets
frequently become coupled to other cellular structures, including biological
membranes and the cell’s cytoskeleton. Inspired by these findings, in this
project the investigators are seeking an understanding of the biophysical
coupling between protein droplets, membranes, and cytoskeletal filaments. The
project is executed in two parts. In the first part, the project, examines how
protein droplets exert forces on biological membranes, resulting in membrane
curvature. The second part of the project examines how protein droplets exert
forces on cytoskeletal filaments, resulting in the organization of filaments
into bundles and meshes. The project findings benefit society by improving
knowledge on the mechanisms that pathogens use to invade cells, how endocytic
vesicles internalize extracellular material and how cellular motility is
established and regulated. The project also reveals fundamental mechanisms that
organize soft matter, from surfactants and fuels to cosmetics and foods. The
project couples scientific work to the implementation of a multi-level
educational outreach program that benefits diverse students from K-12 classrooms
to undergraduate researchers.

This project sheds light on the role of protein condensates in two critical
cellular functions: organization of cytoskeletal filaments and shaping of
membrane surfaces. Traditional efforts to understand these functions have
focused on specific interactions between structured proteins. In contrast, this
work illustrates how protein condensates, composed largely of intrinsically
disordered proteins, provide previously unknown mechanisms of force generation.
This illustration suggests a new paradigm in which interfacial interactions
among soft materials can be used to understand how cellular architectures arise.
The project approaches are guided by the hypothesis that reducing the spatial
dimensionality of 3D protein droplets, by interfacing either with 2D membranes
or with 1D filaments, generates forces that will alter the morphology of the
reduced-dimension composite. This hypothesis is tested by developing
experimentally constrained, mathematical models of interfacial coupling between
liquid protein droplets, cytoskeletal polymers, and membranes. Model predictions
are tested with experimental systems that directly observe the coupling between
droplets, filaments, and membranes, enabling measurement of the key geometrical
and physical parameters required to validate and refine the models. A
combination of theoretical, computational, and experimental tools is used to
design studies that reveal the unique mechanical functions of protein
condensates. The project enhances understanding of how proteins that are known
to assemble into 3D liquid droplets, through liquid-liquid phase separation, can
exert stresses on the membrane and on the cytoskeleton.

This award is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Division of Mathematical
Biology in the Division of Mathematical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.