* 2327032
* Travel Support for Capacity Building: the Coastal And Ocean STEM Equity Alliance
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Lewis, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 35,493.00

Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute will organize travel for
approximately ten members of the Coastal and Ocean STEM Equity Alliance (COSEA)
community-of-practice to attend the 2023 Aquatic Sciences Meeting of Association
for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography, (ASLO). Participants are from
various institutions and states, including Pennsylvania, Georgia, Oregon,
California, and the District of Columbia. COSEA aims to share information about
issues of broadening participation in geosciences with a wider audience, to
identify synergies, and to plan future projects to ensure that the Coastal and
Ocean Sciences community is welcoming and thriving. ASLO23 will provide COSEA
members with the opportunity to leverage the international community of aquatic
science colleagues to reflect on the common issues and barriers to participation
in coastal and ocean sciences.

The COSEA community-of-practice is providing professional networking, promoting
culture change across sectors, and fostering an accessible and inclusive space
for dialogue and co-creation to shape the future of coastal and ocean sciences.
COSEA supports the creation of a more diverse ocean and coastal workforce and
closer engagement of scientists with all communities, especially coastal
communities. The COSEA community-of-practice is focused on the overarching theme
of equity, including issues of belonging, access, justice, equity, diversity,
and inclusion that are internationally important and that vary in character
regionally for socio-cultural and historical reasons. COSEA can serve as a model
community-of-practice for the aquatic sciences and the geoscience research
enterprise more broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.