* 2327836
* IHBEM: Data-driven integration of behavior change interventions into epidemiological models using equation learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Julie Swann, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 201,626.00

Given the antigenic characteristics of a virus, human behavior is the single
most important determinant of disease transmission. Human behaviors relevant to
disease spread such as social distancing, wearing face coverings, or testing
when asymptomatic depend on a host of factors including risk perceptions,
physical ability as well as the availability of resources and opportunities.
Policy interventions by health agencies or other decision makers can impact
these factors to alter human behaviors. Using decision models to tailor these
interventions by time and sub-population can ensure efficiency (e.g., low cost),
effectiveness (e.g., less hospitalizations), and equity (e.g., fairness in
access to pharmaceuticals). The overall goal of this project is to incorporate
behavior change driven by public health interventions into mathematical
epidemiological models to inform decision making and policy evaluation during
infectious disease outbreaks. The investigators consider respiratory diseases in
general, and use COVID-19 as an example to validate the approach and quantify
impact. The proposed methods can be generalized to other applications where
policy makers target behavior change, such as medication adherence.

In Aim 1, the investigators will trace the impact of policy interventions on
infection-preventive behaviors through mechanisms of action (i.e., capability,
opportunity, and motivation). Nine types of policy interventions will be
considered (education, persuasion, incentives, coercion, restriction, training,
nudging, modeling, and enablement) in relation to two types of preventive
behavior â€“ interpersonal protection (i.e., social distancing, wearing a face
mask) and service utilization (i.e., testing, vaccination). The empirical work
involves a dynamic meta-analysis of interventions to reduce the spread of
COVID-19, supplemented by Delphi methods. The investigators will develop an
online tool that will enable researchers to contribute to the meta-analysis and
use the resultant weighted-average effect sizes as inputs for agent-based
modeling. The results of Aim 1 will be operationalized by integrating adaptive
human behaviors into an agent-based model (ABM). However, realistic ABMs with a
large number of agent types and complex behavioral and social processes are
computationally intensive to simulate, analytically intractable, and may not be
generalizable. These drawbacks may inhibit the comprehensive analysis and
validation of ABMs and thereby prevent their utilization for decision- and
policy-making during a pandemic. Thus, in Aim 2, the investigators propose an
equation learning framework to derive ordinary differential equation (ODE)
models from ABMs. The investigators also introduce novel regularization
techniques that incorporate biophysical constraints to provide interpretable
results for decision-makers. These ODE models and the learned functional forms
approximating the impact of interventions on behavioral and social processes
that drive disease spread will be used in Aim 3 to inform policies through
bilevel optimization models.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.