* 2327635
* Conference: SRCOS Summer Research Conference in Statistics and Biostatistics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Arnold Stromberg, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The 58th Summer Research Conference (SRC) and Statistics Undergraduate Research
Experience (SURE) will be held in Waco, Texas on June 11-14, 2023. The Southern
Regional Council on Statistics (SRCOS) is a consortium of statistics and
biostatistics programs from 45 universities in 16 states in the Southern region.
The SRC is an annual conference sponsored by the SRCOS. The purpose of the SRC
is to encourage the interchange and mutual understanding of current research
ideas in statistics and biostatistics, and to provide motivation and direction
to further research progress. The SRC will give new researchers an opportunity
to participate in the meeting and to interact closely with leaders in the field
in a manner not possible at larger meetings. In addition to the graduate student
participation, the 58th SRC will also include the fourth annual Statistical
Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE), a conference within a conference aimed
to encourage the participation of undergraduate students from under-represented
groups to pursue graduate education and career opportunities in STEM fields.
SURE will include events specifically for undergraduate students and
undergraduate mentors, such as a panel about career opportunities in statistics,
a real data analytics workshop, and a speed-mentoring session with current
statistics and biostatistics graduate students.

The SRC is particularly valuable for graduate students, isolated statisticians,
and faculty from smaller regional schools in the southern region at drivable
distances without the cost of travel to distant venues. Speakers will present
formal research talks with adequate time allowed for clarification,
amplification, and further informal discussions in small groups. Graduate
students will attend and present their research in posters to be reviewed by
more experienced researchers. Participation in SURE will encourage under-
represented students to enter STEM fields, including statistics or
biostatistics, and provide training to support this endeavor. The 58th SRC will
strengthen the research of the statistics and biostatistics community as a whole
and help bridge the gap for under-represented groups to pursue statistics or
biostatistics, particularly in the sixteen states of the Southern Region. The
SRCOS website can be found here: https://www.srcos.org; the 58th SRC website can
be found here: https://www.srcos.org/conference; the SURE website can be found
here: https://www.srcos.org/sure-2023.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.