* 2327977
* Travel: Scholarships for Student Attendance at Co-Located Conferences: Human Computation &amp; Collective Intelligence 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Tricia Ngoon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 26,273.00

The proposal provides travel support for 13 promising graduate and undergraduate
students to attend the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Conference
on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing (HCOMP 2023), co-located with the
Association of Computing Machinery (ACM) Conference on Collective Intelligence
(CI). HCOMP and CI are cross-disciplinary conferences that combine human-
centered methods and traditional computer science to address fundamental
questions in human computation and crowdsourcing systems, which typically
aggregate many small contributions to accomplish larger tasks such as
information extraction from images, labeling data for use by both AI algorithms
and qualitative researchers, and running surveys and experiments with many
participants. The funding will be used to support students who might not
otherwise be able to afford the conference, but who would benefit from
interacting with experts in the field, gaining feedback on their research ideas,
and forming connections with peers. Supported PhD students will also be able to
participate in the Doctoral Consortium to gain expert insights on their
dissertation work.

Both undergraduate and graduate students may apply for conference travel funding
to allow for students at all career stages to share their work, form
professional connections, and engage with current research in HCOMP and CI.
Selection criteria will include studentsâ€™ research interests specific to the
conferences, prior attendance at these conferences, having a paper or poster
accepted at this year's conferences, and the potential for conference attendance
to be a transformative experience. The proposers will also coordinate with the
HCOMP doctoral consortium committee to select for a diversity of institutional,
student, and topical backgrounds, which will provide both a necessary breadth of
research expertise as well as opportunities for building new collaborations and
including students from groups that are historically underrepresented in
computing. Students will be able to attend both conferences, further increasing
their exposure to a wide set of research ideas and approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.