* 2327348
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Increasing geoscience enrollment and engagement by transforming perceptions of geoscience among students and the general public
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Rachel Phillips, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 332,472.00

Enrollment in geoscience departments is currently decreasing, which is projected
to cause a major shortage of geoscientists in the workforce over the next
decade. It is crucial that we reverse this trend as geoscientists are vital for
studying and combating the effects of climate change and other geological
hazards. This project aims to increase geoscience enrollment and overall
engagement by identifying and transforming misperceptions of geoscience among
students and the general public.

To determine the best practices for increasing geoscience enrollment and
engagement, department enrollment statistics and student perceptions of and
motivations for pursuing geoscience will be investigated via publicly available
data and survey responses. This work will follow the Input–Environment–Output
model to evaluate how inputs (e.g., student demographics, backgrounds, and
perceptions) and environment (e.g., departmental factors) influence outputs
(e.g., enrollment trends). Surveys will be disseminated through university
geoscience departments and YouTube to obtain a broad and diverse pool of student
and general public respondents. With this data, the key factors that increase
and decrease interest in geoscience among students and the general public will
be identified and used to develop outreach and recruitment strategies for
geoscience departments to follow to increase student enrollment and public
engagement.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.