* 2327908
* EAGER: Tunable Gas Separation Membrane Fabrication via Paramagnetically-induced Arrangement of 2D Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Ali Alshami, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2025
* USD 259,999.00

Gas separation processes play a crucial role in chemical and fuel manufacturing
and in reducing atmospheric emissions. Nanomaterial-based membranes hold immense
potential to achieve more efficient and sustainable gas separations. These
membranes, composed of atomically thin (2-dimensional or 2D) layers, allow the
desired gas molecules to pass through with minimal resistance and high
selectivity while blocking the passage of others. The arrangement of
interparticle spacing and nanochannel pathways within the membrane layers
determines the movement of molecules across it. Unfortunately, controlling these
interlayer structures using existing large-scale membrane fabrication methods is
difficult, hindering the effective commercialization of the most promising 2D
nanomaterial-based membranes. This research project addresses the challenge of
controlling molecular separations and nanoscale interlayer structures by
developing an innovative approach to membrane fabrication that utilizes variable
magnetic fields to manipulate the formation of nanochannels. The anticipated
outcomes of this project include a functional 2D nanomaterial-based membrane
with superior molecular transport properties and a novel technique for membrane
fabrication, opening up new avenues for novel mixed-matrix-membrane filler
materials. In addition to its technical contributions, this project will support
the growth and development of two Ph.D. students and two undergraduate
researchers. By engaging in this project, these students will acquire valuable
technical and professional skills, positioning themselves for future careers in
STEM fields. Furthermore, the project will actively involve the community
through service and experiential learning activities and collaborations with
K-12 schools. This engagement aims to foster societal well-being by creating
knowledge-sharing opportunities and inspiring the next generation of scientists
and engineers.

This project addresses the need for a scalable two-dimensional (2D) lamellar
membrane fabrication method to control nanochannel formation reliably, imparting
superior selectivity and gas transport properties. The investigator anticipates
that applying a controlled magnetic field to a paramagnetic 2D nanomaterials
assembly during lamellar membrane fabrication will result in membranes with
tunable selective nanochannels, where the applied field strength modulates the
nanochannel formation mechanism. To determine the feasibility of this membrane
fabrication concept, room temperature paramagnetization will be introduced into
2D nanomaterials through ion intercalation. A uniform magnetic field will be
applied to achieve homogenous nanoparticle deposition, and the ability to
control nanochannel size via the applied field strength will be evaluated. The
agglomeration tendency will be assessed while using a magnetic field-induced
assembly at high nanoparticle loading. Finally, the effect of void formation by
in-situ nanoparticle migration during mixed-matrix membrane fabrication will be
considered.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.