* 2327431
* GEOPAths-UP: Recruiting and Retaining Nongeoscience Minority STEM Majors for Geoscience Service Learning and for the Geoscience Workforce II
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Marzi Azarderakhsh, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2026
* USD 491,069.00

There is a preponderance of recent studies that sound the alarm concerning the
nation’s STEM workforce in general and its geoscience workforce in particular.
These studies highlight: 1) the importance of STEM to the nation’s well-being,
security, and global competitiveness; 2) the need for equity, access, increased
enrollment, and diversity in STEM disciplines; and 3) the current and projected
increase in STEM workforce shortage. The sustained capacity of the current and
future STEM workforce to meet the nation’s scientific and technological needs is
threatened by a sharp decline in the number of available STEM professionals.
This project seeks to help in ameliorating the nation’s geoscience plight by
creating a year-round geoscience workforce preparation, geoscience service
learning, and geoscience career mentoring program for non-geoscience STEM
students who come from communities that have been structurally excluded in STEM.
The overall goal of the program is to construct an innovative, viable, and
sustainable pathway to the geoscience workforce by tapping into a non-
traditional and diverse pool of students. The program has added values in that
it not only replenishes the geoscience workforce, but it also supports
geoscience education, promotes diversity and inclusion, and benefits society as
a whole by producing geoscience literate citizens.

The program is designed to achieve the following two primary goals: 1) to
broaden the geoscience workforce pathway for non-geoscience minority STEM
majors; and 2) to create a multi-sector geoscience workforce development
infrastructure. The objectives of the first goal are delineated in the following
EPA–E theme of the geoscience transitional workforce program: EXPOSURE: Expose
undergraduate seniors to the geosciences, PREPARATION: Provide undergraduate
seniors with critical geoscience workforce skills and professional networks,
APPRENTICESHIP: Engage undergraduate seniors in meaningful real-world, service
and experiential learning via geoscience applications, and EXPERIENCE: Culminate
into/with a geoscience internship-workforce experience. The objectives of the
second goal are associated with the Apprenticeship component above: a) Create a
student-faculty-industry paradigm of mentoring for the geoscience workforce; b)
Create a professional workforce development structure among participating
organizations, c) Design peer-to-peer mentoring support structures, and d)
Engage students in geoscience service-learning that provides participants with
relevant, active-learning, neighborhood-scale geoscience activities that engage
and empower the local community by raising awareness to the environment and by
assisting in developing citizen scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.