* 2327204
* CAREER: Hydrodynamic Sensing Mechanism of Seal Whisker
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Qian Xue, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 465,981.00

Seal whisker sensing has recently attracted increasing research interest because
of its extraordinary sensitivity and accuracy. Behavioral studies have
demonstrated that blindfolded seals are able to use their uniquely-shaped
whiskers to track hydrodynamic trails that were generated several minutes ago
and discriminate the size and shape of upstream objects through their wakes.
However, relatively little is known regarding the fundamental mechanisms driving
the extraordinary sensing capabilities. The principal aim of this project is to
advance our understanding of seal whisker sensing that result from its unique
geometry by elucidating the roles of each geometric feature. The acquired
knowledge will be transformative by inspiring innovative passive hydrodynamic
sensing mechanisms associated with seal whisker geometry. The research will be
integrated with a creative, bio-inspired engineering education plan to impact
undergraduate and graduate engineering students, as well as students in grades
3-12, and the general public.

The research will employ numerical fluid-structure interaction simulations to
comprehensively characterize the individual and interactive effects of the
geometric features of seal whisker on three aspects of its sensing, including
(1) self-induced noises in calm waters caused by vortex-induced vibrations, (2)
wake detection through wake-induced vibrations, and (3) whisker array signals.
An in-house immersed-boundary-method based fluid-structure interaction solver
will be used for parametric simulations of vortex-induced vibrations and wake-
induced vibrations of a single whisker and multiple whiskers in wide ranges of
geometric and flow parameters. The simulation results will be validated by
comparing to the previously-obtained experimental measurements using the
particle image velocimetry. The amplitude and frequency responses of the
vibrations of different geometric models will be characterized in the parametric
space. Empirical functions for vibration response characterizations will be
derived. The underlying vortex dynamics and energy transfer mechanisms in terms
of the interactions between the fluid forces and body displacement will be
studied for understanding the vibration responses. The knowledge will not only
inspire innovative hydrodynamic sensing mechanisms based on seal whisker
geometry, but also contribute to the fundamental understanding of flow-induced
vibration properties of bluff and slender bodies, which can have applications
across broad engineering fields. The research will also investigate the signal
patterns in the whisker arrays and their relationships with wake
characteristics, which will have implications regarding the impact of array
architecture in capturing wake information. This project is jointly funded by
the Fluids Dynamics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.