* 2327807
* GEO-CM: Empowering Users as Builders: a Community-Driven Platform for Geochemical Modeling of Critical Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Grayson Boyer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 638,334.00

The list of critical minerals from the USGS gives 50 elements that can be
dissolved in water as ions. Understanding critical minerals in solution is key
to modeling processes related to ore formation, methods of ore treatment,
mineral mobility, remediation of mine drainage, water quality, sustainable use
of water resources, and more. However, existing thermodynamic properties for
critical mineral solutes are woefully incomplete due to the sheer number of ways
that other dissolved molecules can bind to them and produce new more complex
solutes. This project will address this severe gap in thermodynamic data by
developing techniques to estimate properties of these complex solutes and
ultimately enhance quantitative models that facilitate “mining strategies and
technologies to make better use of domestic resources” (Section 10359 of the
CHIPS and Science Act 2022).

This project will develop methods for estimating missing properties for 50
critical minerals and 75 ligands, and the nearly 30,000 possible complexes that
can result. Thermodynamic estimates will be fully compatible with existing
popular software tools for geochemical modeling. In addition, all estimation
methods will be freely shared through an open-source interactive online web app
called the CM-Complicator. This will enable users to make additional estimates
and share their work through open-source, customizable, interactive online
Jupyter notebooks. Users will be trained to make and apply estimates to
geochemical models through a series of free online workshops. Tutorial and
workhorse notebooks powered by the CM-Complicator will be distributed through a
variety of other free online platforms that support Jupyter notebooks, including
the free NSF-funded Water-Organic-Rock-Microbe (WORM) Portal online platform
that has catered to students, teachers, researchers, and interested members of
the general public since 2020.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.