* 2327488
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Understanding instructor and student concepts of race to measure the prevalence of race essentialism in biology education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Paula Adams, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 12/31/2025
* USD 283,448.00

Race essentialism is the incorrect belief that race is an inherent biological
characteristic resulting in distinct race categories. While race essentialism
has been shown to be correlated with increased bias, stereotypes, and prejudice,
improving student understandings of race has been shown to lower these distorted
beliefs. This project is designed to serve the national interest by assessing
beliefs about race of STEM instructors and students, increasing awareness of
intersectionality, and developing recommendations targeting misconceptions about
race in the classroom. These recommendations will ultimately inform improvements
in STEM education which is of significance to teaching race and ethnicity and
could result in more accurate understandings of race in society. This project
measures undergraduate biology instructors’ and students’ concepts of race and
combine this information with existing biology education literature and
recommendations from experts in diversity, equity, and inclusion to create
comprehensive guidelines for teaching race and ancestry in undergraduate biology
through anti-essentialist and culturally relevant lenses. Racial biases directly
harm historically marginalized and excluded communities, but little is known
about how race concepts are perceived by individual faculty and students or
reinforced by curricular materials. While virtually all current research
supports a socially constructed view of race, race essentialism is still
prevalent among the public and within scientific research. STEM educators in
biology are in a unique position to counteract essentialist views of race and
have a positive impact on both our students as well as the broader society. This
project is designed to accomplish the following goals: (1) Explore the
educational practices and beliefs of STEM instructors who teach biology, (2)
Analyze the race concepts of undergraduate biology students and how they respond
to instruction on these topics, (3) Expand upon instructor and student race
concepts (1&2) with in-depth interviews of students and instructors, and (4)
Create and disseminate new guidelines to address these issues by identifying
gaps and missteps in biology education related to race. This project will
improve STEM Education by creating a summary of the ways race and ancestry are
taught in biology courses and by developing guidelines and recommendations that
target specific race misconceptions.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from The Kaleta A. Doolin
Foundation. The STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF)
program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices of
recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines to
advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field. The Kaleta A. Doolin Foundation through a
partnership with the National Science Foundation seeks to promote greater
diversity within the STEM/STEM education research workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.