* 2327684
* Mitochondrial inorganic polyphosphate (polyP) as a key regulator of mammalian mitochondrial physiology
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* Maria Solesio Torregrosa, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2027
* USD 949,958.00

Mitochondria are the part of the cells where the vast majority of cell energy is
produced. This energy is needed for every organismal function, from the movement
of bacteria to the heartbeats of mammals. In mammalian cells, when stress is
present, mitochondria become dysfunctional, the production of energy is
dysregulated and, eventually, cells can die. While this chain of deleterious
effects is well known, the exact mechanisms that drive mitochondria to
dysfunction and, eventually, to fail under stress conditions are not yet fully
understood in mammals. Inorganic polyphosphate (polyP) could play an important
role in these mechanisms. PolyP has a structure which is similar to that of ATP,
the main molecule of cellular energy. Multiple studies have shown that
mitochondria contain large amounts of polyP and that this compound regulates the
main mitochondrial process of producing ATP. This project will carry out
experiments to better understand the regulatory effects of polyP on mitochondria
in normal conditions and under stress, as well as the molecular mechanisms that
underly these effects. These findings will further basic understanding of many
plant and animal conditions where mitochondria health and generation of energy
are impaired. In addition, this project will use multiple methods to increase
training and to expand the research workforce, including providing undergraduate
students from underresourced communities in the area with paid research
opportunities in our laboratory. Stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction,
including dysregulated bioenergetics, has been broadly described in all
eukaryotic organisms where it has been investigated. However, the mechanisms
that drive mammalian mitochondria to dysfunction and eventual failure under
stress conditions are not yet fully understood. Inorganic polyphosphate (polyP)
is an evolutionarily well conserved polymer that is present in every tissue from
every studied organism. It is formed by chains of orthophosphates that are
linked together by highly energetic phosphoanhydride bonds, similar to those
found in ATP. This molecular structure, along with its high concentration in
mammalian mitochondria, makes polyP a perfect candidate to contribute to the
regulation of mammalian bioenergetics. In fact, multiple researchers have
demonstrated a regulatory role for polyP in energy production at both the
mitochondrial and extra-mitochondrial levels. However, the exact molecular
mechanisms that underly this regulatory role of polyP in bioenergetics remain
poorly known. Here, these mechanisms will be explored, using both wild-type
mammalian cells and cells enzymatically depleted of mitochondrial polyP
(MitoPPX). These cells will be used under both control and stress conditions.
Specifically, stress will be induced by dysregulating the antioxidant system.
The long-term goal of this research project is to increase knowledge of
mitochondrial biology, as well as to contribute to broadening participation of
the research workforce. This will be accomplished through inclusion of
undergraduate students from underresourced communities in the area in this
research, as well as by providing these students with the opportunity to co-
author a scientific review before graduation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.