* 2327631
* NSF-BSF: The role of protein phosphorylation in the mitochondrial matrix in determining mitophagic selectivity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Natalie Niemi, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2027
* USD 775,000.00

Mitochondria, commonly known as ‘the powerhouses of the cell,’ are organelles
found in virtually every cell in the human body and in most eukaryotes. Because
of their involvement in the production of high energy compounds, many spurious
side reactions can produce toxic radicals that can damage the organelle. To
mitigate these toxic effects, cells have evolved various strategies to maintain
cellular health. One such strategy is termed mitophagy, which promotes the
turnover of whole mitochondria. As this turnover occurs at the organellar level,
it has been assumed that most mitochondrial proteins undergoing mitophagy would
have similar turnover rates, as they are collectively housed within a single
organelle. However, recent data demonstrate significant deviation between
turnover rates of specific mitochondrial proteins during mitophagy. This leads
to a natural question: how is such selectivity achieved? This project will
address this question by studying a well-known cellular modification, protein
phosphorylation, and its ties to selective mitochondrial protein turnover. The
Broader Impacts of the work include its intrinsic merit because all cells
harboring these organelles likely use similar mechanisms and several diseases
are known to arise when mitophagy is impaired. Additional activities include the
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in science, particularly
women and minorities in the field of biochemistry.

Our preliminary studies suggest that disrupting the expression of enzymes
involved in protein phosphorylation substantially alters the turnover rates of
select mitochondrial proteins. This project seeks to provide a mechanistic
understanding of how this occurs and to identify potential regulators of this
response from yeast to mammalian systems. We will use isotopic labeling and mass
spectrometry to track the turnover rates of mitochondrial proteins to map the
mitophagic selectivity and determine how it is altered by dysregulated
phosphorylation. In parallel, we will test more focused hypotheses to determine
the proteins involved in mitophagic selectivity and the molecular mechanisms by
which this process occurs in yeast, cultured cells, and mice. Understanding
these mechanisms will bolster our ability to address physiological imbalances in
mitochondrial function, which broadly lead to morbidity and disease.

This collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science Foundation

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.