* 2327660
* Collaborative Research: GEO-CM: The occurrences of the rare earth elements in highly weathered sedimentary rocks, Georgia kaolins.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 277,601.00

Collaborative Research: GEO-CM: The occurrences of the rare earth elements in
highly weathered sedimentary rocks, Georgia kaolins

W. Crawford Elliott, Georgia State University Yuanzhi Tang, Georgia Institute of
Technology

The rare earth elements (REE) are a group of critical metals that are widely
used in high-tech industries and in creating a green economy. The growing
demand, high dependence on international supplies, and vulnerability to
potential supply disruption have prompted the US to explore new REE resources,
such as natural unconventional resources of REE located in highly weathered
sedimentary/regolith settings in the US. Novel and sizeable occurrences of REE
has been discovered by the project team in the Georgia Coastal Plain such as the
mined kaolins. The overarching goal of this project is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the geochemical factors controlling the sequestration,
redistribution, and fractionation of REE in clay-dominant weathering
environments, such as the Georgia kaolins as compared to the occurrences of the
REE in other weathering settings such as the Chinese laterites.

This research will take a multi-scale approach and combine laboratory batch
experiments, advanced microscopic and spectroscopic analyses, thermodynamic
modeling, as well as characterization and comparison of natural samples from
Georgia kaolins and Chinese laterites. Understanding the geochemical factors and
processes controlling REE mobility, distribution, and fractionation in these
environments can provide the foundation to identify domestic REE resources, and
for the rational design of mining/extraction technologies. The proposed work
will integrate research with education across multiple levels, both in the
academy, industry, and general scientific community. The project will combine
student training with undergraduate education and research, as well as K-12 and
community outreach. Each activity will emphasize broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in geological sciences. The impacts and effectiveness of
the proposed activities will be assessed by a dedicated evaluator as well as
through existing evaluation structures in campus outreach programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.