* 2327691
* I-Corps: Antifungal Inhibitors
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Gregory Wiedman, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to provide technology to combat
the development of antimicrobial resistance in fungi. There are only three main
classes of antifungal drugs used to treat the most common fungal infections.
Species such as Cryptococcus neoformans have resistance to a large portion of
one or more classes of antifungals. This means that much higher doses of these
drugs are needed than usual. Clinical management of these cases can be
difficult, causing extreme health difficulties as well as economic hardships for
vulnerable populations like people who are elderly or who are immunocompromised
with HIV/AIDS. The issues are further exacerbated by poor antimicrobial
stewardship in agriculture where overuse of these same antifungals is leading to
a rise in drug resistance even outside of the clinic. Technology is needed to
improve the activity of existing antimicrobial drugs and make them safe and
effective for use against even the most challenging drug-resistant strains. This
project seeks to identify the market potential for technology that can lower the
doses of drugs needed to treat resistant fungi. This technology has the
potential to impact a multi-billion-dollar industry and keep the existing
classes of antifungals useful for many years to come.

The project is based on the development of antimicrobial peptides from the outer
loop region of the C. neoformans P4-ATPase enzyme. The enzyme controls the
movement of lipids from the outer surface of the cell to the inside of the cell.
The fungus C. neoformans is resistant to the drug Caspofungin. It was found that
removing cdc50 makes treatment with caspofungin easier. Preventing the movement
of lipids leaves the fungal cells vulnerable to attack from caspofungin and some
of the main classes of antifungal drugs. The antimicrobial peptides block the
movement of the lipids, and they can therefore be used in a combination
treatment with other antifungal drugs. To this end, a patent has been filed to
support the development of the technology. Several papers have been published
and/or are in preparation related to this technology. Work will continue to be
done to improve the peptide activity and make the most effective treatment
possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.