* 2327535
* Collaborative Research: Optimizing KTaO3 Superconductivity for Quantum Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gleb Finkelstein, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 239,998.00

Non-Technical

The project focuses on the development and understanding of a new class of “two-
dimensional superconductors” – ultra thin materials, in which electric current
can flow without resistance. The research addresses technical challenges through
basic materials studies and the development of thin film deposition techniques.
The high-quality films grown in this project impact the theoretical
understanding of two-dimensional superconductors. The fabricated devices allow
the researchers to assess the suitability of the proposed materials as a
platform for quantum information processing. These research activities
contribute to training of undergraduate and graduate students in advanced
quantum and nanotechnological research. The project also includes outreach in
the local community, with a special focus on broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM.

Technical

This project aims to explore the nature of the recently discovered two-
dimensional anisotropic superconductor KTaO3. The researchers grow high quality
heterostructures of KTaO3 and characterizes them with local and global
techniques. They plan to make Josephson junctions and kinetic inductors along
various crystallographic directions to investigate the nature of anisotropic
superconductivity in this system. They also plan to explore the possibility of
controlling these structures using external electric-field gating. These studies
serve as an initial suitability assessment of KTaO3 as an intrinsic and low-
noise platform for quantum information processing. The project also provides
training opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school students in
electronic device fabrication and measurements (Finkelstein lab) and thin film
deposition and materials characterization (Ahadi lab).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.