* 2327682
* Work-Based Biotechnology Education from High School to Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ying-Tsu Loh, BAY AREA BIOSCIENCE EDUCATION COMMUNITY
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,445.00

Biotechnology and related life sciences are among the fastest-growing industries
in the nation, with a high demand for entry-level workers holding two-year or
four-year college degrees. Because of the high density of biotechnology
industries and research laboratories in the San Francisco Bay area, this region
has high demand for biotechnology workers. However, the region has a shortage of
trained entry-level biotechnology workers. Moreover, few individuals from
African American and Hispanic communities pursue careers in biotechnology. Thus,
a compelling need exists for opening new career paths in biotechnology for
students from these communities, which have been disproportionately affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic. To address this need, the project will support the City
College of San Francisco’s Biotechnology program to work with local high schools
to spark the interest of high school students in biotechnology. Students will
have access to hands-on activities, field trips, and real-work experiences that
include paid internships. These actions are designed to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in biotechnology and increase the capacity for
biotechnology workforce development.

The goal of this project is to address the biotechnology workforce shortage and
lack of diversity by strengthening the pipeline of high school students from
communities that are underrepresented in STEM into biotechnology studies at a
community college. To accomplish this goal, the biotechnology faculty at City
College of San Francisco will collaborate with teachers at local high schools
with higher populations of the targeted students. High school students will
visit the college during field trips and participate in carefully planned hands-
on activities. In addition, high school students will gain valuable laboratory
work skills during a paid summer internship. These students will receive
training in leadership and peer mentoring skills and will be given the
opportunity to work as classroom teaching assistants. The students will learn
about careers in biotechnology and educational opportunities at the College.
Lastly, under supervision of the faculty, City College of San Francisco students
will develop outreach and instructional videos to supplement the instructional
material for the College’s biotechnology courses and strengthen the high school
student learning experience. The videos will be disseminated freely to high
school and other educators. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.