* 2327940
* GEO-CM: Prospecting for critical element deposits: an interdisciplinary approach using experimental geochemistry and field-informed modeling of sediment transport
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2026
* USD 615,305.00

Critical minerals like cobalt, niobium, and tin are essential resources needed
for modern technologies. These technologies include smartphones, batteries,
electric vehicles, and satellites. Critical minerals are a key resource needed
to move to a sustainable energy economy. However, the demand for these minerals
could soon exceed the available supply. Additionally, there is a risk of
disruptions in the international supply chain. To lower these risks, which carry
significant economic and national security implications, the goal of this
proposal is to increase geoscientists' abilities to find more of these critical
mineral resources in the Earth. This project will create new tools to analyze
river sediment with two main objectives. First, the work will determine whether
critical minerals might be upstream that have not yet been discovered. Second,
the project aims to locate places upstream where these minerals are
concentrated. This project will provide education and training on critical
mineral research to a PhD student, a postdoc, and multiple undergraduate
students. A critical mineral module will make up approximately 2-3 weeks of
lectures for an undergraduate Earth Materials course. The PIs will also partner
with a local youth leadership and workforce development program in Rochester,
NY. The goal of the partnership is to provide experience in environmental
research and careers for students from underrepresented groups over the summer.

Imagine collecting a scoop of sand from a river; hidden in that single scoop
lies information about the rocks in the entire drainage basin. Analysis of the
sediment grains may reveal the presence of a critical element of interest in a
proxy mineral, indicating a source rock of possible interest somewhere in the
area. This project explores two questions: Does the trace element concentration
within minerals in sediment fingerprint a potentially fertile igneous source
enriched in the critical element of interest? If it does, can the transport
history of the sediment be modeled using physical properties of the grain such
as shape and size to constrain the likely location of the fertile source that
produced it? The goal of this work is to enhance prediction capabilities of
undiscovered critical mineral-rich source rocks by using river sediments for
prospecting by combining 1) high temperature laboratory experiments to
characterize zircon, quartz, and rutile chemistry so that they can be used as
“indicator minerals” for critical mineral deposits and 2) numerical modeling and
field-based sediment tracer studies that will improve predictions of sediment
transport distance and the location of viable critical mineral source rocks. For
the first objective, the team will use experimental geochemistry to synthesize
quartz, zircon, and rutile in the presence of a critical element bearing
mineral. These experiments will allow the researchers to define the threshold
concentrations of different critical elements in target indicator minerals that
would suggest a fertile source. For the second objective, the investigators will
use coupled fluid-granular numerical models to develop new statistical
distributions of sediment transport distance depending on grain shape and size.
The team will also use RFID-tagged rocks to track sediment transport in two
natural rivers to determine how sediment size and shape affect their travel
distances in natural systems. This fundamental work will set the stage for
future development of a comprehensive model that predicts critical mineral
source rock location from river sediment properties alone. Findings from this
proposal will extend beyond mineral prospecting; developing a new view of the
processes that occur during the lifetime of sediments, from birth within a rock
to transport and degradation through a river system, has implications for the
fundamental understanding of Earth materials and the evolution of Earth’s
surface.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.