* 2327946
* RUI: Allosteric Activators of the Sarco/Endoplasmic Reticulum Calcium ATPase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Stefan Paula, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 420,201.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Stefan Paula of Sacramento State University is studying the
development of small molecules capable of stimulating the activity of an enzyme
whose natural function is the transport of calcium ions across cell membranes;
namely the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA). Use of the novel
small molecules to modulate the activity of the SERCA enzyme would allow the
investigator to observe the effects of altered calcium concentrations inside the
cell. The new molecules are designed to enhance enzyme activity and as such
would complement a class of molecules known to reduce SERCA activity. The
research will involve the training of students in a variety of techniques
frequently employed in biomolecular chemistry research. As part of the project,
molecular modeling techniques and the synthesis of specific compounds will be
incorporated in three upper division courses at Sacramento State University.

Intracellular calcium levels are tightly controlled by the action of calcium
transporters such as SERCA because they are critical regulators of many cellular
processes. The major goal of this project is the development of small molecules
that modulate the activity of sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase
(SERCA). Specifically, the Paula research group is aiming to establish the first
tools for chemical biology that unregulate the activity of SERCA to study of the
effects of increased or decreased intracellular calcium levels in living
organisms. Whereas the use of SERCA inhibitors as research tools is well-
established, activators have thus far received very little attention. Using a
synergistic combination of computational and experimental approaches, the
project seeks to close this gap by generating novel SERCA activators,
establishing the molecular determinants for SERCA activation at the molecular
level, and evaluating the new compounds in vivo. Organic synthesis of potential
SERCA activators, activity assays with purified SERCA, molecular modeling, and
cell-based assays are to be used to accomplish these research goals. The planned
study appears to be the first systematic exploration of SERCA activators and is
expected to provide valuable knowledge in SERCA-ligand structure-activity
relationship space and potentially very valuable tools for chemical biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.