* 2327008
* Sunlight and tire wear particles - a toxic combination?  Evaluating mechanisms for mobilization and degradation of tire particle compounds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Natalie Mladenov, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 419,889.00

Tire wear particles (TWP) are released from abrasion of tires on roadways and
are one of the most abundant forms of microplastic pollutants. More than one
million metric tons of TWP are flushed into waterways each year, with
devastating impacts for fish and other aquatic organisms. While sunlight
exposure may break down some of the compounds leached from TWP, some compounds
will persist in the environment, and new compounds and more toxic transformation
products also will form. Many of the TWP compounds that leach into water are not
yet known, and the effects of sunlight on TWP compound leaching, toxicity, and
fate also remain unknown. The goal of this project is to address major gaps in
our knowledge of 1) the many organic compounds that leach from TWP, 2) which
TWP-derived chemicals should be prioritized for further study based on their
toxicity, and 3) how sunlight transforms and degrades different TWP compounds in
water. The research team will identify the diverse compounds leached from tread
particles from different tire types under solar exposure and dark conditions,
describe their toxicity, and evaluate the persistence and decay of TWP compounds
in the presence of simulated sunlight. The successful completion of this project
will benefit society through the generation of fundamental knowledge about the
toxicity of different tire wear particles which could inform future legislation
related to tire manufacture, tire recycling, and green infrastructure for
stormwater quality. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of two graduate students
at San Diego State University.

The accumulation of tire wear particles (TWP) in watersheds has emerged as
major threat for aquatic ecosystems, with TWPs in water being linked directly to
urban runoff mortality syndrome for fish and macroinvertebrates. Given that some
tire formulations contain as little as 20% natural rubber but have a vast array
of synthetic polymers, metals, and additives, many of the TWP-derived compounds
and transformation products that may be leached into the water column are not
yet known and their toxicity has not been established - especially the ones that
form via direct or indirect photolysis. Some leached compounds and
transformation products from TWP will be photo-resistant and persist in the
environment while others will decay rapidly, and determining the kinetics of
leaching and photochemical degradation on a compound-by-compound basis is a
challenge. The overarching goal of the proposed research is to evaluate the
fundamental processes that control the production of toxic TWP-derived compounds
and transformation products. The specific objectives are to 1) probe the effects
of both direct and indirect photolysis on leaching, transformation, and
persistence of toxic micropollutants from TWPs, 2) elucidate the role of
reactive intermediates in these processes, and 3) develop kinetic models for
decay of TWP-derived compounds. Experiments will be performed using a variety of
samples from passenger cars and high-performance tires, which have different
chemical compositions and in different conditions, sunlight and dark. The
successful completion of this research has the potential for transformative
impact through the mechanistic understanding of the role of sunlight in the
formation and destruction of TWP-derived compounds. To implement the education
and training goals of the project, graduate students will lead high impact
experiences and outreach activities in coordination with the Math Engineering
and Science Achievement (MESA) program, including STEM Shadow Day, the
“Stormwater Debris Capture Device Competition” for K-12 students, and mentoring
undergraduates through the MESA Summer Academy. In addition, the PIs plan to
brief California State policymakers on research findings through the CSU COAST
Program network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.