* 2327451
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Exploring the use of mechanistic reasoning in undergraduate physiology education
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2024,04/30/2026
* Keenan Noyes, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2026
* USD 273,807.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring how students
develop and use mechanistic reasoning in their study of physiology. One of the
most fundamental core competencies in science is mechanistic reasoning, a
powerful form of thinking that addresses how and why the underlying components
of a system give rise to phenomena. The project plans specifically to explore
how mechanistic reasoning evolves in the study of physiology, a course taken by
most undergraduate students hoping to pursue careers in healthcare. Mechanistic
reasoning is a form of scientific reasoning that enables learners to generate
powerful predictions and robust explanations for complex phenomena. By
interviewing individuals with differing levels of physiology experience, for
example, undergraduate students, medical students, and physiology or nursing
faculty, the project hopes to uncover how mechanistic reasoning is used at these
various levels of expertise, with the broad goal of enhancing undergraduate
physiology instruction to effectively address mechanistic reasoning. By focusing
instruction on mechanistic reasoning, students may rely less on memorization and
develop the ability to simplify complex problems, helping them to succeed in
their coursework.

Previous work on mechanistic reasoning has focused primarily on simple systems,
but the phenomena in physiology are complex and interrelated. Such phenomena
involve entities at multiple scalar levels and draw on concepts from multiple
disciplines. The proposed project will investigate mechanistic reasoning by
conducting semi-structured interviews with individuals with a range of
physiology expertise. Individuals will be asked to both think aloud through
complex phenomena and explain their general approaches to making sense of the
unknown. These data will be used to identify patterns in the ways undergraduate
physiology students use mechanistic reasoning and to compare undergraduate
students’ reasoning to those more expert, leading to an enhanced understanding
of how mechanistic reasoning develops and how to effectively address the core
idea of mechanistic reason in undergraduate physiology education.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.