* 2327257
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Scholars in the Margins: Historically Excluded Postdoctoral Experiences in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2026
* Evelyn Valdez-Ward, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 328,223.00

There is an urgent need to provide supportive and welcoming environments for
individuals pursuing STEM career pathways to ensure that the United States meets
its full potential in providing world-class educational experiences and an
educated citizenry. Faculty members from marginalized backgrounds can serve
vital roles in increasing the rates of persistence of students in STEM
educational programs and STEM careers. In the United States, postdoctoral
scholars in STEM fields currently have strikingly low representation of
individuals with Black or African American, Hispanic or Latine, Native American,
and Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander identities. For early-career STEM
scholars, postdoctoral experiences can be one of the most important and
immediate considerations when individuals are deciding whether or not to
continue working in academia. Few studies exist that characterize the
postdoctoral experiences of scholars with marginalized identities. This project
aims to study the effects of professional and personal environments of
postdoctoral scholars from minoritized backgrounds on self-efficacy, STEM
identity, sense of belonging, research interests, communication outcomes, and
career goals. This research is designed to inform the development and
implementation of inclusive training spaces. The researcher has developed
partnerships with scientific and professional societies that serve postdoctoral
scholars.

Understanding the unique ways in which science identity relates to
intersectional identities is vitally important to broaden participation, and it
is a critical gap in the literature on postdoctoral scholars. Early studies have
shown that environmental contexts in which postdoctoral scholars feel affirmed
and valued can help counter exclusionary STEM cultural norms and build a sense
of belonging. There is no extant research to suggest the mechanisms by which the
broader scientific community contributes to STEM identity validation in
postdoctoral scholars, nor the extent to which this is a factor. This project
aims to examine the influence of academic institutions and scientific societies
on postdoctoral scholar retention. The research framework integrates the
Communication Theory of Identity, STEM Identity Theory, and Social Cognitive
Career Theory. This study is designed to conduct interviews with postdoctoral
scholars from marginalized backgrounds to examine the relationship between their
professional and personal environments and their self-efficacy, STEM identity
development, sense of belonging, challenges in their fields, general interests,
and science communication outcomes. The study also aims to examine participants’
intended STEM career pathways. Interview findings are intended to inform the
design of a related survey. Findings will also be used to co-create a guide with
partnering organizations and collaborators to inform postdoctoral training
spaces with evidence-based approaches and mentorship that specifically centers
marginalized postdoctoral scholars.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This project is partially funded by The Kaleta A. Doolin Foundation through a
partnership with the National Science Foundation to promote greater diversity
within the STEM/STEM education research workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.