* 2327336
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Refine the Gap: Establishing Safety for Modern Foreign Function Interfaces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2027
* USD 106,073.00

Developers of widely used software infrastructure like the Firefox, Chrome, and
Linux are replacing components written in unsafe but fast languages like C/C++
with components written in Rust. Rust promises to eliminate the security
vulnerabilities endemic to C/C++ codebases without compromising on performance.
Alas, completely rewriting real-world software systems is not practical:
Firefox, Chrome, and Linux are tens of millions of C/C++ code. Instead, Rust
components must continue to interact with existing C/C++ code. In practice, this
requires developers to write code that glues Rust and C/C++. Unfortunately, this
glue code is notoriously difficult to write correctly: code at the language
boundary can both introduce errors in previously safe code and impose new
unchecked requirements, threatening the security of both the Rust code and the
containing C/ C++ ecosystem. This project will address these challenges by
building new abstractions, techniques, and tools that will help developers
securely integrate Rust components within C/C++ applications (and vice versa).
This research will span the spectrum from new theoretical and formal ideas to
the deployment and integration of this technology in real-world software. The
project has the potential to directly improve the security of software
infrastructure used by billions of users, including Firefox, Chrome, and Linux.
The project will also contribute to the graduate, undergraduate, and high school
curriculum, introducing future developers to techniques and tools for building
secure software.

This project takes a principled and practical approach to building secure
systems software by securing the glue layer between C/C++ and Rust and the
foreign function interface (FFI) developers used to write this glue code. To
accomplish these goals, this project will (1) build novel static analysis tools
for the Rust ecosystem, which work in tandem with human auditing to detect,
triage, and classify major weaknesses in existing FFIs; (2) build novel
abstractions for the FFI layer based on refinement types to describe and
automatically check memory safety and type safety properties at the FFI layer,
and eliminate the ad-hoc glue code at the FFI layer; (3) build a lightweight
sandboxing layer for calling C/C++ code from Rust, leveraging prior sandboxing
mechanisms but marrying their abstractions with Rust's ownership type system.
This research will yield new insights into the safety and security gaps in
modern multi-language systems; contribute to the understanding of how refinement
types can integrate with a modern memory-safe type system and mutability
constraints; and develop our understanding of how modern security techniques --
including static analysis, type systems, and sandboxing -- are applicable to the
Rust ecosystem and ownership model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.