* 2327447
* When Teachers "Aren't There": Detecting, Evaluating, and Learning from Rote Teaching Across Development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Ilona Bass, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 338,170.00

This project explores the effects of automated teaching on children’s learning
and development. In contrast to live, engaged teaching, automated teaching
occurs when a teacher is not with the student, such as in cases of asynchronous
learning, pre-recorded lectures, and virtual classrooms. Automated teaching can
also include in-person cases when the teacher is not actively engaged or
thinking about the individual learner’s needs and beliefs. Recently, and
particularly since the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of asynchronous learning, pre-
recorded lectures, and virtual classrooms in education has been on the rise.
Given this, it is crucial to understand how and why automated approaches affect
children’s learning. This project takes a first step in explaining why young
children might learn differently from teachers who are “not really there”. There
are many broader impacts of this work. First, results from this research will
help explain how to continue to leverage technology in education while making
sure children’s learning outcomes do not suffer as a result. Second, through
science communication and dissemination efforts, the project will spread the
word about its findings to a diverse audience of educators, parents, and
researchers. Third, this project will provide research opportunities for
students from backgrounds that are typically underrepresented in STEM fields.
Finally, the project’s research approach will draw from and integrate across
many different disciplines, including early childhood education, cognitive
development, neuroscience, and computational modeling. By using a
multidisciplinary approach, the project will answer questions about children’s
learning from automated teaching from multiple different perspectives and with
implications for multiple different fields.

The increasing use of automated approaches in education makes it imperative to
understand their impact on children’s learning. Past work in education and
developmental psychology raises one cause for concern: Effective teaching
requires engaging with students’ real-time learning goals and individual needs,
which may be difficult in large-scale automatic teaching. Put together, this
leads to a troubling dynamic: Students who detect that a teacher or source of
information is “not really there”, engaging with them in the moment, may be more
likely to disengage from it, ignore it, and generally learn less from it. Very
little is known about how children reason about automaticity in teaching; even
the more basic question of whether children understand that social partners in
general can either be more automatic and scripted, versus reflective and
engaged, is not well understood. In order to design future educational
experiences that effectively utilize automated teaching approaches, how children
reason about automatic behavior when learning from others must first be
understood. Therefore, this project has three specific aims. Aim 1 (three
studies, N = 430), will investigate whether learners notice when teachers are
acting automatically and how this affects evaluations of their teaching. Aim 2
(two studies, N = 60) will ask how learning differs between automatic versus
reflective teaching, leveraging behavioral and neurological methods. Aim 3 (two
studies, N = 180) will test whether differences in learning between automatic
and reflective teaching could be mitigated with minimal intervention. These
questions will be answered using behavioral experiments and neurological
measures, while also drawing influence from research in education and cognitive
science. The project will recruit participants from a broad target age range (5-
to 10-year-olds), in order to understand how these processes change with
development during the formative years in early- to middle-childhood.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.