* 2327937
* Collaborative Research: Research: Developing reflexive engineers through accessing and characterizing   implicit beliefs about the value of diverse perspectives in service-learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emily Dringenberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2026
* USD 318,277.00

Solving society’s biggest problems, will require input from engineers and non-
engineers, who have different backgrounds and ways of thinking. A good engineer
must know how technology works but even more importantly, how technology might
affect people and society. This means that engineering faculty need to prepare
their students for working well with others and to respect their ideas. In order
for engineering faculty to know how to best help their students, this project
will conduct this research study to explore what engineering students believe
about non-engineers when they are working together to solve problems in a
community. This will be accomplished by 1) investigating different ways of
determining what engineering students believe about those who are not engineers,
2) grouping students’ beliefs into categories that allow exploration of trends,
and 3) working together with a team of students, community partners, and
teachers to brainstorm ideas on how students can learn more about themselves.
This will help make future professional engineers better, by showing students
the importance of treating those who are not engineers with respect and valuing
their ideas. The goal of this research study is to make sure that members of
society do not experience negative impacts because of what engineers think or
believe. The intent is to ensure that the work engineers do to help society is
not unintentionally hurting communities or treating people who are different
from them unfairly. This research will help engineering faculty learn more about
what their students believe about non-engineers, which can help them teach in a
way that truly makes engineering work benefit all of society by improving the
way engineers solve problems.

Since the professional socialization of engineering students commonly fosters
the belief that engineers’ scientific approaches to problem solving are superior
to other ways of thinking, it is important that engineering education provides
students with explicit opportunities to reflect on, and learn to be critical of,
such beliefs, a process known as reflexivity. This research will produce new
knowledge on qualitative methods for effectively accessing implicit beliefs in
engineering education. Service-learning in engineering provides an educational
context to investigate this phenomenon as it explicitly positions students to
engage with others in socio-technical contexts. With an overarching goal of
fostering egalitarian beliefs about the value of diverse perspectives in all
engineering students, this project will investigate the context of service-
learning. Within this context, this project will produce knowledge that enables
engineering educators and other researchers, both in and out of service-learning
contexts, to access important constructs of professional formation through the
contribution of a nuanced characterization of the beliefs held by engineering
students. Our analysis will reveal the beliefs for engineering students that are
both 1) commonly held, and 2) varied, enabling the identification of beliefs
that exist at a broad, cultural level in engineering as well as beliefs that can
be understood as implicit outcomes of students’ lived experiences. Lastly, the
collaborative inquiry component of this project will produce recommendations for
how these implicit belief patterns can be used as inputs for enhancing service-
learning. This is a meaningful contribution in that it can inform the
programmatic implementation of service-learning experiences and serve as
evidence for the development of instructional tools that support enhancing
service-learning curricula through promoting reflexivity in engineering
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.