* 2327178
* Collaborative Research: Neurocognitive Experimentation to Enhance STEM Education: Studies on Divergent Thinking in Female and Male Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Gul Kremer, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 84,457.00

Engineers provide creative and novel solutions for a rapidly-changing
technology-oriented world. Creative problem solving, or divergent thinking, is
key to the success of these STEM professionals. Industrial and academic leaders
have long expressed concerns that traditional engineering programs teach
students to solve well-defined analytical problems, but do not adequately
develop creative or divergent thinking skills. However, little is known about
the factors that support divergent thinking. In this project, researchers from
engineering and psychology will work together to understand and nurture
divergent thinking skills in undergraduate engineering students. The project
will involve two phases: an examination of the brain activity that occurs during
creative problem solving, and the development of instructional materials to
encourage divergent thinking in students. This project will increase
understanding of the neurocognitive basis of divergent thinking in a STEM
setting. It will also provide educational resources that enhance divergent
thinking in future engineers and other STEM professionals, which is essential
for the innovation economy of the 21st century.

This interdisciplinary project will integrate strategies and techniques from
engineering, neuroscience, and psychology to examine the neural and cognitive
mechanisms underlying divergent thinking and ideation in engineering students.
In the first phase of the project, electroencephalography (EEG) techniques that
measure changes in brain activity patterns will be used to study engineering
students as they perform design tasks. Specifically, participants will perform
divergent-thinking tasks while fine-grained temporal resolution EEG is recorded
to assess task-related changes in spectral power in the alpha frequency band.
Because engineers often work in teams, the researchers will specifically examine
how divergent thinking performance in female and male engineering students is
affected by group dynamics. Particularly explored will be team members' feedback
that impinges on students' gender, with a specific focus on the impact of gender
stereotype threat or boost and the gender of a high-authority individual giving
feedback on students' divergent thinking performance. In the second phase of the
project, results of the EEG studies will be translated into educational
principles that foster divergent thinking. Based on these principles,
instructional practices will be implemented and tested at two different
universities in undergraduate engineering courses that incorporate divergent
thinking and design ideation skills in sophomore- and senior-level students. The
focus on gender diversity will also contribute essential information for
enhancing the education of diverse engineering student populations. The project
will disseminate outcomes and materials through the project website,
professional development workshops for broad audiences, and publications.