* 2327245
* RAISE: ADAPT : Novel AI/ML methods to derive CMB temperature and polarization power spectra from uncleaned maps
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mustapha Ishak-Boushaki, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 07/31/2026
* USD 622,120.00

Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) radiation is one of the pillars of modern
cosmology – it confirmed the standard theory of the Big Bang and helped reveal
the structure and content of the universe. This project investigates the next
major potential discovery from the CMB, the detection of primordial gravity
waves (PGW). However, the masking of the CMB signal by contaminants is
detrimental to high-precision measurements and in particular to the expected
faint PGW signal. Extracting and analyzing the CMB signal from the overwhelming
amounts of data expected from experiments such as CMB-Stage-4 presents
challenges that require sophisticated new methods. The interdisciplinary team of
computer scientists and astrophysicists at the University of Texas, Dallas, will
develop and apply novel Machine Learning (ML) methods for this endeavor. Their
methodology combines the predictive power of modern Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
with statistical tools to produce powerful and efficient models that incorporate
domain expertise and respect known physical constraints. The team will
complement this research with outreach efforts to promote and increase public
engagement with science and technology within the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) area,
including (1) organizing yearly workshops for cosmology and ML at the high-
school teacher conference Mini-CAST, which is affiliated with the Science
Teachers Association of Texas, and (2) actively participating in science camps
and exchanges in low-socioeconomic communities as well as the broader DFW area
to reach out and recruit students from underrepresented groups in STEM fields.

This ADAPT RAISE project includes an amalgamation of expertise and joint efforts
from astrophysicists and computer scientists that goes beyond a simple
combination of the subjects and aims to transform each of them to provide a fast
and scientifically informed ML model to deal with CMB contaminants and analysis.
The team will first develop a novel method that produces CMB clean temperature
and polarization power spectra directly from uncleaned maps. This comes from the
realization that application of ML to CMB should not try to replicate the
processing steps of traditional methods but rather take full advantage of what
ML is exactly good at – extracting rich patterns from data. Second, the ML
approach builds DNNs that incorporate soft scientific domain knowledge via
statistical models to regularize and inform the model. An immediate consequence
of this approach is that the CMB power spectra harmonic components can be used
in the ML loss function allowing one to take full advantage of their physical
and mathematical properties during the model training. While this investigation
is focused on developing and applying DNN ML methods to the CMB, the tools and
approaches developed here have far-reaching applications in sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.