* 2327889
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2024 ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Daniel Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal is for support of a travel grant to the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS), to be held in San Diego, California, April 27-May 1, 2024.
ASPLOS is a leading forum for multidisciplinary systems research spanning
computer architecture and hardware, programming languages and compilers, and
operating systems. Research papers selected for ASPLOS often target a wide
spectrum of important goals such as performance, energy and thermal efficiency,
reliability, security, and sustainability. The funds requested from NSF will
help support 30 students who currently study in US universities and institutes
to attend the ASPLOS conference, and hence get chances to present their research
ideas and to get advice from leaders in the community. Moreover, part of the
funds will be reserved to support undergraduate student applicants and students
belonging to under-represented groups.

The importance of forums such as ASPLOS continues to grow as we come to the end
of Moore's Law, experiencing the explosion of big data, the wide spectrum of
computing scales from ultra-low power wearable devices to exascale parallel and
cloud computers, and the need for sustainability. ASPLOS embraces systems
research that directly targets these new problems in new ways. Historically, the
conference has attracted top research papers from both academia and industry,
and many innovations published in the proceedings have been influential in the
history of the systems and hardware industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.