* 2327270
* Collaborative Research: Conference: NSF/TIH PI Meeting and Workshop for Indo-US Research Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 15,852.00

The fields of robotics and cyber-physical systems are economically important to
the United States but are expanding all over the world. Nearly every federal
agency has a research program covering these areas as they impact the efficiency
and productivity of American workers and American businesses in diverse fields
from healthcare to manufacturing to agriculture. While American innovation
created much of the core inventions of these industries and historically has
driven the bulk of their expansion, there is a need for increased collaboration
between American scientists and their foreign counterparts to stay abreast of
these important fields. In early 2022 the US National Science Foundation (NSF)
and Indian Department of Science and Technology (DST) with the Indian Technology
Innovation Hubs (TIH) announced an agreement to co-fund collaborative projects
in the broad area of robotics and cyber-physical systems. The goals of this
proposed NSF/TIH PI meeting and workshop is to discuss the scientific results of
these projects and to explore ways to improve foreign collaboration and
technology transfer.

The 2-day workshop on May 22-23, 2023, in Baltimore will discuss and evaluate
the success of the thirty-five individual projects and highlight the potential
benefits of remote international collaboration. An Industry Day will be the part
of the program to spur innovation and dissemination of ideas into other
applications and research fields and to spark commercialization of new
developments. The meeting will explore problems and opportunities that these new
collaborations developed and will disseminate key ingredients for enhanced
success to all participants. The workshop will advise and instruct participants
on leveraging collaborations for mutual benefit and will provide professional
development for participating students, postdoctoral fellows. and junior
faculty. Finally, the workshop will introduce the results of the projects to the
institutions of higher education, global industry observers and federal agencies
and provide a blueprint for moving forward with new initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.