* 2327912
* EAGER: TRTech-PGR: New methods to study gene-specific translation regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jose Alonso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,983.00

Many important characteristics of an organism, including their final size,
resistance to diseases or adverse environmental factors, etc., can be traced
back to the levels of activity of specific sets of genes. Understanding what
determines these levels of gene activity in different individuals is, therefore,
critical to, for example, developing better varieties of crops that can maintain
high yields even under adverse conditions. The first step towards understanding
what affects the activity of a gene is developing methods of monitoring such
activity. Since each individual organism has thousands of genes, it is important
to develop technologies that allow the accurate measurement of the activity of
thousands of genes in parallel. Traditionally, the activity of a gene is
measured by monitoring transcription, i.e. the first step in the multistep
process of converting the genetic instructions contained in the DNA sequence
into protein-based cellular machines. However, because gene activity is also
regulated at later steps in this DNA-to-protein information conversion process,
it is also desirable to measure the activity of these downstream steps, as they
can strongly affect the amount of proteins produced from a particular gene. The
goal of this project is to develop a new biotechnology to quantify the last step
of this process, the translation of the information contained in the messenger
RNA into proteins. This technology will support the bioeconomy by reducing the
cost and time requirements of current technologies and allowing for the
discovery of the gene regulation mechanism behind a wide variety of
agriculturally important traits.

The main objective of this proposal is to develop an efficient, simple, and
scalable RiboPi technology to quantify translation rates at both genome-wide and
single-gene levels. If successful, RiboPi will make translation regulation
information as accessible as RNA-seq did for transcriptomics, reducing the cost
and time requirements, the complexity of the experimental procedures, and the
amount of biological material needed. Not only will this make translation
analysis a routine technique in many labs, but it could also bypass some of the
limitations of the current technologies--such as the difficulty of mapping the
very short ribosome footprints to specific splice variants, alleles, or even
homologs in polyploid species--or enable targeted studies for a group of genes.
To achieve this goal, we propose to develop RiboPi, an experimentally simple
approach to capture the first or last ribosome in each transcript and the
computational methods to compare the distribution of these ribosome positions
between different experimental conditions. The proposed experimental pipeline
involves testing novel combinations of in vivo and in vitro molecular biology
procedures to efficiently and specifically map the first/last ribosome in a
transcript. Some of the unknowns that make this proposal high-risk are (1) the
uncertainty of whether suitable experimental conditions can be found (e.g., that
preserve ribosome binding and promote reverse transcriptase activity but melt
the secondary structure of mRNA) and (2) the ability to infer the efficiency of
translation from the distributions of first/last ribosomes on transcripts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.