* 2327862
* IHBEM: Empirical analysis of a data-driven multiscale metapopulation mobility network modeling infection dynamics and mobility responses in rural States
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Chen Xu, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 339,982.00

Rural epidemiology is a critical subfield of epidemiology seeking to examine how
the characteristics of rural communities influence health. Although less than
one-fifth of the U.S. population lives in rural areas, these areas encompass
about 97% of the total land area in the United States and thus the population
density for rural areas is low. Traditionally, mainstream epidemiological models
focus on settings with high population density, such as major U.S. cities. To
study rural epidemiology, it is necessary to develop epidemiological models and
analyses tailored to the unique demographics and geographic isolation of rural
areas. This grant brings together expertise in mathematical modeling, high-
performance computing, geographic information systems, and medical sociology to
develop a framework for reliable and accurate real-time epidemic forecasts for
mountain-West States, such as Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, and Colorado. The project
involves constructing a data-driven multiscale mobility network, using the
combination of de-biased mobile phone data, American Community Survey (ACS), and
census data in these regions. With a multiscale mobility network, the principal
investigators (PIs) will be able to examine how containment policies during a
pandemic, such as mobility reduction interventions, stay-at-home orders, and
State border lockdowns, impact the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases,
and how such policies may exacerbate the disparities of public health and social
inequalities in rural areas. The study will help government health officials
develop equitable policies and mitigation strategies for rural places in the
future epidemic. Furthermore, the proposed community outreach will raise
awareness of disease prevention in Wyoming. This grant offers solutions to three
research questions in rural epidemiology: Q1. How to construct a metapopulation
mobility network tailored to rural places? Human mobility is one of the factors
driving the spread of infectious diseases across wide geographical ranges. The
project introduces a metapopulation model embedded in a multiscale data-driven
mobility network tailored to the unique structures of rural population density
and human moving patterns for simulating infection dynamics of the front-range
States. For this metapopulation mobility model, the PIs will adapt and improve
the efficiency of Gillespie’s event-driven algorithms and derive a proper time
step for large-scale stochastic simulations. The PIs will also implement an
efficient particle filter algorithm for data assimilations to estimate local
transmission parameters at two scales. Q2. How to detect and correct mobile
phone data bias? If the bias of the mobile phone data used to construct the
mobility networks is not addressed, infection dynamics simulations may
incorrectly estimate the severity and speed of disease transmission. The project
will investigate the bias of mobile phone data used to construct the mobility
network and develop a method to offset the data bias. Q3. What are the impacts
of containment measures on disadvantaged racial and socioeconomic groups? The
PIs will use the proposed unbiased multiscale metapopulation mobility model to
study the impacts of temporary mobility reductions and their lasting behavior-
modifying effects on the disadvantaged racial and socioeconomic groups in the
front-range States.

This project is jointly funded by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences
(DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program, the SBE Division of Social and
Economic Sciences (SES), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.