* 2327468
* IIBR Research Methods: Probing the structure, abundance, dynamics, and function of protein complexes within their cellular environment
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ionel Popa, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 245,148.00

An award is made to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) to develop an
advanced fluorescence-based method and accompanying user-friendly computer
programs for rapidly and accurately determining the size, abundance, stability,
geometry, and functional roles of supramolecular assemblies, or oligomers, of
membrane proteins in living cells. The resulting infrastructure will
significantly impact the large community of researchers interested in
identifying and visualizing complex networks of protein-protein interactions and
understanding the role of oligomerization in important biological processes,
such as cellular signaling, intercellular communication, heart regulation, host-
pathogen interactions, and plant root development. In addition, this research
will create an excellent environment for graduate and undergraduate students to
practice an interdisciplinary approach to science and to become involved in
developing the technology of the future. Elaborate outreach programs will
involve high school and elementary school students in hands-on learning of
science. The research will significantly broaden the range of projects available
to the high-school research interns enrolled in the UWM Research Internship
Program for High School Students, which has already involved 41 students (mostly
under-represented minorities) from two southeast Wisconsin high schools in
three-month-long research internships during its seven years of existence.
Furthermore, this research will significantly expand the opportunities for
learning concepts related to light and spectroscopy as applied to biological
investigations, through the Down-to-Earth Experimental Physics (or DEEP)
Program, which has enrolled to date over 165 elementary school students.

The method to be developed, termed intensity Fluctuation and Resonance Energy
Transfer (iFRET), will integrate in-cell measurements of fluctuations in the
emission intensity of fluorescently labeled proteins, to determine oligomer
sizes, with the measurement of energy transfer occurring between an optically
excited and other unexcited fluorescent tags attached to protomers within an
oligomer, to determine inter-protomeric distances. The implementation of iFRET
will build on strong preliminary results and the teamâ€™s exquisite combination of
expertise in the synthesis and photo-physical characterization of fluorescent
proteins and the development of fluorescence-based methods for studying
oligomerization of various membrane receptors and transporters. This innovation
will significantly improve upon the existing infrastructure by developing new
methodology and dedicated software for data analysis compatible with a variety
of optical microscopes. In its initial stage, the research will rely on the
spectrally resolved two-photon microspectroscopes available in the Biophysical
Microspectroscopy Facility at UW-Milwaukee, developed with NSF Major Research
Instrumentation funds, to implement the new method using a typical membrane
receptor expressed in living cells under various environmental conditions. For
further democratization of this kind of research and broader dissemination of
the technology, the new method will then be implemented on general-purpose two-
photon microscopes and confocal microscopes available in other labs at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and partnering institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.