* 2327516
* Collaborative Research: Shedding Light on The Microbial Ecologyand Ecophysiology of Electroactive Anammox Communities
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Guangbin Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2027
* USD 230,000.00

Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) play a critical role in environmental
protection. In the United States, municipal WWTPs process billions of gallons of
wastewater every day to remove suspended solids, organic matter, and excess
nitrogen nutrients such as ammonium. In most municipal WWTPs, a biological
process, activated sludge (AS), is used to remove nitrogen by coupling an
aerobic nitrification process which oxidizes ammonium into nitrate followed by
an anaerobic denitrification process that reduces the nitrate to benign
dinitrogen gas (N2). However, ammonium nitrification in AS reactors requires the
supply of oxygen using aeration which requires a significant amount of energy
and accounts for 70-80 % of the total energy used in WWTPs. Anaerobic ammonium
oxidation (anammox) has emerged as a promising microbial process for removing
nitrogen from municipal wastewater with lower energy consumption and operating
costs. However, the selection, cultivation, and integration of anammox bacteria
into reactors and the treatment trains of municipal WWTPs has remained a
challenge due to their slow growth rates and competition from other
microorganisms including ammonium oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and nitrite oxidizing
bacteria (NOB). Recent studies show that anammox microbes can generate
electricity. Building upon these promising studies, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) of this project propose to explore the selection of electroactive anammox
bacteria using bioelectrochemical systems with the goal of accelerating their
growth, proliferation, and stability in municipal wastewater. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of
fundamental knowledge in environmental microbiology and biotechnology to advance
the development and deployment of more cost-effective solutions for nitrogen
removal from municipal and industrial wastewater. Additional benefits to society
will be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring
of one graduate student at Temple University and one graduate student at the
University of Maryland.

Anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) bacteria have recently been shown to
perform extracellular electron transfer (EET), but little is known about the
mechanisms through which anammox bacteria transfer electrons extracellularly to
electrodes, and even less is known about how electrons are transported
intracellularly from the anammoxosome to the outer membrane proteins for
downstream EET. The overarching goal of this project is to advance the
fundamental understanding of the microbial ecology and ecophysiology of
electroactive anammox communities in bioelectrochemical systems (BES). The core
and guiding hypothesis of the proposed research is that in BES, EET-dependent
anammox is carried out by a microbial population composed of electroactive
anammox bacteria and their electroactive partners. Together they form a
mutualistic relationship: anammox bacteria fix carbon dioxide and provide
organic matter to electroactive bacteria, whose electron shuttles are scavenged
by anammox bacteria for EET. If the hypothesis holds, EET-dependent anammox
could be electrochemically enhanced through the enrichment of those two
partners. The specific aims of the research are to 1) develop electrochemical
strategies to build electroactive anammox communities; 2) understand the
microbial interactions in electroactive anammox communities; and 3) elucidate
the metabolic pathways involved in EET-dependent anammox. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge on the microbial ecology and
ecophysiology of electroactive anammox microbiomes in BES to guide the design
and implementation of more sustainable technologies and solutions to remove
nitrogen from municipal and industrial wastewater. To implement the education
and training goals of the project, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs
at Temple University (TU) and the University of Maryland (UMD) to recruit and
mentor undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the
project. In addition, the PIs plan to integrate the findings from this research
into existing environmental engineering graduate/undergraduate courses at TU and
UMD.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.