* 2327777
* Characterizing Local Chemical Order in Multi-Principal Element Alloys by Femtosecond Time-Resolved Ultrafast Electron Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mingwei Chen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 159,821.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Alloying is an important approach to improve the mechanical performance of
metallic materials. The recent discovery of multi-principal element alloys in
which equiatomic constituent elements act as both principal and alloying
elements opens a new field to search and develop new metallic materials with
unprecedented properties for applications under extreme conditions of cryogenic
temperatures, shock loading, harsh chemical environments, and ultrahigh
temperatures. The distinctive properties of multi-principal element alloys
originate from complex chemical interactions amongst constituent elements. It is
essential to understand local static arrangements and dynamics (usually termed
as phonons) of constituent atoms in the complex alloys for designing and
modeling the new class of materials. As the scattering signals of the local
static structure and phonons overlap in diffraction spectra, it is challenging
to characterize the structure and dynamics of the complex alloys using
traditional X-ray and electron diffraction methods. This project is developing a
new approach to characterize multi-principal element alloys using femto-second
time-resolved MeV electron diffraction. Electron diffraction at ultrafast time
regimes can effectively decouple the static and dynamic atomic scattering and
unveil the atomic insights of structure and dynamics of multi-principal element
alloys. This project is making substantial progress towards understanding the
structure-property relations of complex alloys and is helping enable the
development of new metallic materials for a wide range of industry applications
to strengthen the U.S. competitiveness in advanced and high-performance
materials.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In multi-principal element alloys (MPEAs) local chemical order plays a crucial
role in determining structural properties and phase stability, but it is
challenging to characterize experimentally due to the entanglement between
static diffuse scattering from local chemical order and dynamic diffuse
scattering from coherent and incoherent phonons. This project will employ MeV
ultrafast electron diffraction (MeV UED) to investigate local chemical order in
single-crystal MPEAs. By utilizing the femto-second time resolution and the high
reciprocal spatial resolution of MeV UED, the entanglement between the static
and dynamic diffuse scatterings is being decoupled. The degree of local chemical
order is being measured via the total scattering analysis of femto-second MeV
electron diffraction. The quantitative characterization method also enables
investigation of the evolution of local chemical order with annealing. The
temperature dependence of local chemical order is being determined for modeling
the underlying physical mechanism of chemical instability in MPEAs and for
optimizing the properties of MPEAs. Moreover, the MeV UED measurements of the
dynamic diffuse scattering from the single-crystal MPEAs with different degrees
of chemical order are unveiling the correlation between local chemical order and
phonon dispersions for developing deep understanding of the relationship between
local chemical order and the mechanical, thermal, and electronic properties of
MPEAs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.