* 2327954
* An Automated High-Content Imaging Platform for Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lei Cao, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 447,157.00

An award is made to the University of Arizona to develop and disseminate an
advanced high-content imaging platform for comprehensive, long-term study of the
roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. C. elegans, a widely used experimental system
in biological research, is favored for its short lifespan, easy and cost-
effective lab cultivation, and the availability of powerful molecular tools.
Even with these advantages, standard methods to assess physiological and
molecular characteristics are often labor intensive and are typically limited to
observing only one or a few traits. This project aims to transform this process,
integrating recent advancements in automated image acquisition, machine
learning, and specialized data analysis to concurrently capture and interpret
numerous physiological and molecular traits, significantly enhancing data
collection efficiency. The platform will further allow for continuous monitoring
of the same animals throughout their lifespan, offering a unique opportunity to
observe dynamic changes in molecular processes over time, as well as stochastic
variation among individuals within a population. The platform will be compatible
with hundreds of existing transgenic fluorescent biomarker strains and made
accessible to the wider scientific community, fostering collaboration and
promoting innovative research across diverse biological fields, including aging,
development, metabolism, stress response, toxicology, inflammation, and
immunity. This project also promotes experiential education by providing
students with real-world training in robotics, imaging technology, machine
learning, database systems, and genetic engineering.

The core of this research project is the development and validation of a robotic
imaging system for primary data collection, supported by a complementary
database and analysis suite for efficient data processing, storage, and
analysis. The project will further generate a panel of validated transgenic C.
elegans strains, each expressing multiple fluorescent biomarkers designed to
report on different key molecular processes optimized for use with the imaging
platform and supporting researchers in various subdisciplines. This platform
will enable researchers to observe dynamic interactions between physiological
outcomes (e.g., survival, body size, activity) and underlying molecular systems
(e.g., activation of core molecular signaling or stress response pathways) by
enhancing experimental efficiency, scope, and throughput while improving
reproducibility by limiting human bias in measurement and analysis. By
collecting data on the same individual animals over time, the project will allow
researchers to delve into dynamic interactions between molecular and
physiological signatures within a population. In summary, this project will
produce an innovative imaging platform that will enhance our ability to study
fundamental biological processes and accelerate discovery across diverse
disciplines of biological sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.