* 2327538
* I-Corps: Housing Recovery Platform
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Joshua Behr, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is found in
addressing disparities in recovery times between vulnerable and less-vulnerable
populations. Disparities in recovery time are associated with disparities in
health and wellbeing. Disparities are justice and equity issues that exist under
‘normal’ blue skies; these equity and justice issues not only persist but are
likely to widen due to the impact of a storm and its aftermath. The Convergence,
Inventory, Matching, and Assignment is a platform that supports the coordinated
management of donated materials and volunteer labor in effort to speed the
repair of damaged homes of displaced vulnerable households. There to be an
appetite among recovery stakeholders for technical solutions that offer better
coordination and tracking of the housing recovery. The solution responds to a
pressing community need and the approach has been validated through community
capacity building and engagement. This lends support to the commercial potential
of this housing recovery platform.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a housing recovery platform
that utilizes an innovative Optimization Scheduling Module. This module contains
algorithms designed to more efficiently coordinate these resources so there is a
global reduction in displacement times among displaced, vulnerable households.
Thus, a reduction in disparities in displacement times and an associated
improvements in population wellbeing. The algorithms in the module provide the
decision calculus used to evaluate the vulnerability of displaced households,
the damage state of impacted structures, and availabilities of materials and
labor, and then schedule a sequencing of work packages. The module includes an
optimization process to queue assigned work packages, update a calendar of
scheduled work packages, and generate daily yard e-tickets. The order of
placement on the calendar is dependent upon the prioritizations score. Using the
prioritization score, the coordinating algorithm is optimizing the scheduling of
the work packages to minimize the displacement times of vulnerable households.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.