* 2327527
* GEO-CM:A systematic investigation of sorption mechanisms of light REEs on iron oxides: roles of mineral morphology, crystallinity, and surface sites
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tingying Xu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2026
* USD 296,901.00

Rare-earth elements (REEs) are critical materials to many leading-edge
technologies that underlie clean energy transportation, energy generation and
storage, communication, and computing. The availability of REEs is of special
concern due to the lack of adequate U.S. domestic production. REEs enrichment in
minerals in highly weathered environments represents a promising opportunity for
future exploration. However, major knowledge gaps exist in our understanding of
the fundamental geochemical controls on REEs accumulation in secondary minerals
like clays and iron/aluminum (hydr)oxides (common products of rock weathering),
especially the mechanisms of how REEs bind to and are mobilized from mineral
surfaces. This project seeks to obtain the foundational scientific knowledge on
REEs interactions with oxide minerals, which is required to accurately predict
the occurrence and formation of REEs deposits via rock weathering and could be
informative in new ways to extract these critical materials. Of equal importance
will be the direct involvement and training of students at multiple levels from
high school to graduate students to attract the potential next generation of
scientists into STEM disciplines.

The effects of oxide mineralogy on the sorption mechanisms of REEs could play
important roles in controlling REE fate in weathering environments but are
poorly understood. This project will reveal these previously unrecognized
factors using iron oxides as the model system. The overall goal is to elucidate
how mineral structure, crystallinity, morphology, and interfacial structure
dynamics could affect REEs sorption reactions at mineral-water interfaces. Light
REEs will be used as the probing elements and an integrated series of laboratory
wet chemistry experiments and synchrotron-based X-ray techniques will be
employed on both iron oxide particles and hematite single crystals to accomplish
the research objectives. The proposed study will obtain insight into fundamental
geochemical processes controlling the formation of these critical element
deposits during rock weathering processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.