* 2327422
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Wind-induced noise in the prospective seismic data measured in the Venusian surface environment
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2025
* Il Sang Ahn, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

During the past 60 years of the nation’s space exploration, landers successfully
touched down on the Moon, Mars, asteroid 433 Eros, and the Churyumov–Gerasimenko
comet to collect data about their environment, structure, and history. In the
future, more landers will be sent to other planetary bodies including Venus and
will find themselves in a more hostile environment. While scientists and
engineers have vigorously developed technologies for the Venus landers that can
survive at a temperature of 450°C, a pressure of 90 bar, and an atmosphere
filled with reactive gases, we still face technical challenges such as noise
contamination in sensor signals. In particular, wind-induced noise (wind blows
on Mars and Venus) in seismic data from seismometers has been a major concern
from early Martian missions, and a similar issue is expected to occur in future
Venus lander missions. We need reliable noise-cancelling techniques to hear
clear seismic signal of Venus, which is a goal of this research.

The research is designed to investigate nonlinear dynamic features in media that
have natural discontinuities (such as cracks and gaps) under combined wind and
seismic vibrations. In the case of nonlinearity in the natural ground of Venus,
it is anticipated that the two vibrations can be coupled. The coupling of wind
and seismic vibrations can generate significant interaction, which will be
observed as wind-induced noises. The primary objective of the research is to
acquire high-quality experiment data that can be used as hard evidence of
nonlinear dynamic features. In the study of nonlinear dynamics where prediction
based on theories usually fails, experimental data that reveal such complex
behavior are critically important. Research activities are organized to collect
seismic signals from a heat-shielded broadband seismometer on the simulated
environment of the Venusian surface in the Venusian atmosphere. The NASA Glenn
Research Center (GRC), the host institution, is equipped with the Glenn Extreme
Environments Rig, where the Venusian atmospheric conditions can be accurately
simulated. GRC is the best place to conduct this research, as it requires high
precision simulation and measurement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.