* 2327711
* Collaborative Research: IHBEM: Data-driven multimodal methods for behavior-based epidemiological modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Simon Levin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

In this project, challenges of behavior-based epidemiological modeling are
addressed by developing a unified modeling framework that incorporates new
methods for incorporating novel data sources, extended epidemiological models,
and evaluations of policy interventions. Capturing human behavior is complex and
challenging, as new and unexpected behavioral patterns emerge constantly. This
is especially evident during epidemics, which are shaped by a wide variety of
behaviors and, in turn, accelerate the speed of behavioral changes. For example,
the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic was greatly shaped by behaviors such as
social distancing, mask-wearing, and vaccination, and these behaviors also
emerged and changed dramatically over the course of the pandemic in response to
changing disease risks, social norms, government decisions, and incentives. The
aim of this project is to develop epidemiological models that can make
predictions based on real-world behaviors and capture feedback loops between
behaviors, epidemics, and government decisions, thus enabling more effective
public health decisions.

The aims of this project are accomplished by improving mathematical and machine
learning methods for dealing with real-world epidemics and introducing novel
approaches to the capture of real-world human behavior and integration of
behavioral responses into epidemiological models. First, novel methods are
proposed to denoise and derive meaning from multimodal, real-world sensors, such
as mobile phones and search engine logs, the data from which is often highly
imperfect but which provide unique opportunities to capture human behavior. This
allows the capture of complex human behaviors in real time. Second, to bridge
epidemiological models and real-world behaviors, agent-based models of disease
dynamics are coupled with models of human behavior that capture how individuals
choose behaviors based on perceived costs and benefits. Such models are
computationally complex and require new methods to calibrate and validate on
real data to enable realistic forecasting of epidemics. Finally, to evaluate the
complex effects of public health decisions on behavior and epidemic outcomes,
new scenario modeling tools and causal inference methods are developed to
estimate effects of such decisions in the presence of confounders and
interference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.