* 2327625
* Collaborative Research: Conference: International Indian Statistical Association annual conference
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Soutir Bandyopadhyay, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

International Indian Statistical Association (IISA) 2023, a four-day
international conference, will take place at Colorado School of Mines (Mines),
Golden, Colorado from June 1 to June 4, 2023. The conference is an important
event for researchers, students, and professionals in statistics, biostatistics,
and data science. The conference provides a platform for emerging young
researchers and students to share their theoretical and methodological research
and applications in various scientific fields. It aims to promote the education,
research, and application of statistics, probability, and data science while
also fostering the exchange of information and scholarly activities among
members. With a focus on diversity and inclusion, the conference provides
numerous opportunities for women, minorities, and early-career researchers to
participate in student paper competitions, speed sessions, short courses,
plenary talks, invited sessions, and poster presentations. The conference also
hosts a vibrant multi-stage student paper competition, highlighting the best
research among early-career scholars.

From a technical perspective, IISA 2023 covers a wide range of topics from the
fundamentals of statistical theory to computationally intensive methods and
scientific application-oriented data modeling. It provides an opportunity for
researchers and students to share their research in a variety of formats such as
plenary talks, special invited talks, invited sessions, student paper
competitions, posters, and panel discussions. The conference is an official
annual meeting of the International Indian Statistical Association, and its main
objective is to promote education, research, and application of statistics,
probability, and data science, while also encouraging cooperation among members.
With Mines and IISA as the primary organizers of the conference, the event
promotes education and research in the Front Range area, fosters the exchange of
information and scholarly activities among scientific institutions in the Front
Range, Midwest, and across institutions in the United States. The conference
website (https://www.intindstat.org/conference2023/index) provides up-to-date
information and announcements regarding the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.