* 2327589
* Conference: Synergies between Nonparametrics, Sequential Analysis and Modern Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Robert Keener, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

The Department of Statistics at the University of Michigan will host the
conference titled “Synergies between Nonparametrics, Sequential Analysis and
Modern Data Science” on the Ann Arbor campus from September 29 to 30, 2023. The
conference will feature non-parallel sessions with talks on current research in
statistics and probability by distinguished speakers. There will also be a
poster session to give PhD students, postdocs, and junior professors an
opportunity to present and receive feedback on their research. Beyond the
educational value from the presentations, the conference should serve to foster
collaboration and discussion among the speakers, faculty, and students
participating in the event. Most of the funds from the NSF award will be used to
support student participation in the conference, especially travel funds for
non-local students.

Planned session topics for the conference include: sequential analysis to
reinforcement learning; shape constraints and beyond; limit theorems for
dependent data; modern data science; nonparametrics and selection biases; and
astrostatistics in the 21st century. For more information or to register to
participate, please see the conference web-page:
https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/woodroofememorial/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.