* 2327030
* LTREB: Integrating real-time open data pipelines and forecasting to quantify ecosystem predictability at day to decadal scales
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Madeline Schreiber, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2028
* USD 281,104.00

Many ecosystems are exhibiting increased variability as a result of human
activities. This environmental variability poses substantial challenges for
managers and decision-makers, who can no longer use historical baselines to
guide predictions of future ecosystem conditions. Consequently, advancing the
capacity to predict the future for a range of physical, chemical, and biological
ecosystem variables that influence water quality is paramount for improving
resource management. In response to this need, this Long Term Research in
Environmental Biology (LTREB) project will support a field monitoring and data-
sharing program at two drinking water supply reservoirs. The ecosystem data that
will be collected (which will include water temperature, clarity, chemistry, and
phytoplankton, among other variables) will be used to generate and evaluate
real-time forecasts (predictions of future ecosystem conditions, and the
uncertainty associated with them) at daily to annual scales. Forecasting is a
powerful approach for quantifying ecological predictability, as it requires
using models that represent our best hypotheses about how ecosystems function to
predict ecological conditions into the future. Iteratively evaluating these
forecasts as new data are collected will reveal which models perform best in
different environmental conditions and identify how far into the future
different variables can be accurately predicted, from one day to one decade in
advance. This project will enable the testing of fundamental hypotheses about
the predictability of ecosystems; develop novel workflows for integrating
environmental observations into real-time forecasting and data publishing; and
broaden the participation of students from underrepresented groups in
environmental data science. Moreover, all forecasts will be disseminated to
water utilities in real time, enabling their immediate use as decision-making
tools for water management. This LTREB project will represent one of the first
systematic analyses of the predictability of ecosystem dynamics, thereby
providing valuable information on the gradients and controls of predictability
between contrasting ecosystems and among ecosystem variables. Importantly,
researchers will be able to compare the performance of different forecast models
with competing representations of ecosystem dynamics (e.g., varying driver
variables, model structures) to test ecological hypotheses about predictability
and examine the controls on ecosystem function. For example, forecast accuracy
will be compared between two reservoirs that are similar in all characteristics
except for oxygen availability to determine how anoxia, which is increasing in
waterbodies globally, alters predictability. In addition, this LTREB project
will develop novel FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) data-
publishing workflows in collaboration with the Environmental Data Initiative
(EDI) that advance reproducibility in ecology, support environmental data
science education, and enable the scaling of ecological forecasting to other
sites. Altogether, this project will result in data products for water reservoir
physical, chemical, and biological ecosystem variables available in real-time
for automated forecasting; a suite of different forecasting models and evaluated
forecasts; forecasting and data-publishing workflows and software; and most
critically, substantial ecosystem knowledge gained about the predictability of
reservoir dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.