* 2327187
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Course-based Undergraduate Research Instruction
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Alexandra Cooper, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 341,260.00

Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) have increased access to
research for all students, influencing student persistence and success in STEM.
Participation in a CURE may be a student’s only experience conducting research,
especially for students from marginalized and minoritized populations. Yet,
little is known about how to teach these courses effectively. Quality CURE
instruction is especially important at the introductory level when CUREs may be
most influential for students and most varied in their implementation given that
STEM lab courses are often taught by graduate student instructors who themselves
have modest teaching and research experience. More work is needed to understand
how instructors effectively support student growth and development in CUREs.
This project intends to define pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) for research
instruction, which is the knowledge an instructor has of science research, their
students, and instructional approaches that are useful for guiding students in
doing research. This project has the potential to inform national conversations
about the knowledge necessary to teach CUREs effectively. This knowledge is
critical given the widespread implementation of CUREs and relatively limited
insights into the nature and types of instruction that make CUREs effective for
diverse groups of students. Additionally, the results of this project have the
potential to be useful for improving professional development programs
nationally in order to better prepare CURE instructors, especially graduate
student instructors who teach thousands of students across the country every
year and are themselves future faculty.

Using an established framework for characterizing the complexity of domain-
specific teaching, this project aims to define and characterize PCK associated
with research instruction. The project will involve developing, pilot testing,
and refining a set of scenarios that reflect common teaching issues faced in
CURE instruction. These scenarios will then be used to conduct think-aloud
interviews with 30+ experienced CURE instructors to elicit the distinctive
knowledge they employ to teach and support students during CURE instruction.
Interviews will be analyzed inductively and deductively using standard
qualitative content analysis procedures to define the core elements of research
teaching PCK. Results from this analysis have the potential to address a
substantive gap in knowledge about the expertise necessary to teach CUREs
effectively by uncovering both pedagogical variation and instructor reasoning
using the PCK framework. The project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (STEM Ed IPRF) program, which aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the field.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.