* 2327982
* The evolutionary dynamics of learned bird song
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Nicole Creanza, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2027
* USD 451,634.00

Learned behaviors are fascinating to study, but it is often difficult to compare
the evolution of these behaviors across many species, primarily because it is
challenging to measure aspects of complex behaviors in a standardized way for
different species. This set of studies proposes to use new computational tools
developed in the investigatorâ€™s lab to analyze bird songs recorded in nature and
extract quantitative features that are comparable across all songbirds, such as
syllable and song duration. The first study will explore whether different
features of song evolve quickly or slowly, or at different rates in different
groups of birds. By producing and analyzing new datasets of song information,
this study will test evolutionary hypotheses about the role of selection
pressures on song evolution. For example, this study will test the hypothesis
that song features that have been linked to female preferences will be the song
features that evolve more quickly. The second study will generate new metrics to
quantify the temporal patterns of birdsong and test the hypothesis that rhythm,
a song trait potentially evolving under natural selection, will show correlated
evolution with other song traits and life-history traits. The third study will
quantify whether closely related birds can be distinguished by their songs to
determine how songs have changed over the course of relatively recent speciation
events. If song evolved at a steady rate over evolutionary time, then song
distinguishability between species would positively correlate with genetic
distance. Alternatively, if song plays a role in reproductive isolation, then
sister species with overlapping geographic ranges will evolve distinguishable
songs more quickly. This finding would suggest that song differentiation
accumulates more quickly when species have the potential to hybridize. The
researchers will have ongoing interactions with local birders and community
scientists and will launch educational modules aimed at educating middle-
schoolers in evolution and conservation using birdsong as a readily observed
example. In addition, the investigators will add to the computational training
of underrepresented students preparing for graduate school by partnering with
the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge program.

Birdsong is unique in how densely sampled it is through community science
efforts, but large-scale analyses have remained challenging due to a lack of
flexible tools for processing these recordings. Using new tools developed to
analyze a broad taxonomic sample of songbirds, this study will quantify song
features from numerous individuals per species and analyze the dynamics of song
evolution over long timescales. With new cross-species metrics, this research
also aims to quantify rhythm and analyze temporal patterns in birdsong across
oscine songbirds. Finally, these studies will assess the potential role of
learned song in reproductive isolation between sister species, thus assessing
whether learning appears to facilitate speciation. Together, these studies will
advance knowledge about the evolution of behavior on multiple timescales,
improving our understanding of the role of learning in evolutionary processes.
The proposed studies will also further develop computational tools to facilitate
the analysis of vocalizations by the broader research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.