* 2327011
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: New Directions and Approaches in Discrepancy Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nikhil Bansal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Discrepancy theory is an interdisciplinary field that acts as a bridge for
cross-fertilization of ideas among various disciplines, including combinatorics,
probability, quantum computing, convex geometry, computer science, statistical
physics, and optimization. Its primary focus is on dividing a set of objects
into two or more parts that are as similar as possible. Over the past two
decades, significant progress has been made in understanding discrepancy theory
in several directions. These include the development of new algorithmic
techniques, the establishment of connections with probability and convex
geometry, and the exploration of applications in theoretical computer science.
This project is motivated by these recent advancements and aims to investigate
emerging directions in discrepancy theory. It involves identifying key open
problems in these areas and proposing promising approaches to address them. The
outcomes of this research could have immediate implications for applications
such as resource allocation, randomized controlled trials, differential privacy,
scheduling, and machine learning. The project will also train graduate students.

Although discrepancy theory originated in mathematics, several intriguing
connections with theoretical computer science have emerged, including
computational geometry, pseudo-randomness, approximation algorithms, numerical
integration, machine learning, and integer programming. This project
specifically focuses on three emerging directions for discrepancy research: (i)
online/dynamic discrepancy, which deals with situations where the objects change
over time; (ii) prefix discrepancy, which requires balancing every prefix of the
objects; and (iii) beyond worst-case discrepancy, which involves objects chosen
from a distribution or perturbed by small random noise. The ideas explored in
this project will lead to the development of new rounding techniques for
approximation algorithms, novel algorithms for fair division and bin packing,
and faster numerical integration methods. Furthermore, they will necessitate the
creation of new mathematical tools that span across several of the
aforementioned areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.