* 2327142
* I-Corps: Surface-wave-based sensing of strength and stiffness of soft materials
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Melih Eriten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a robust and easily installed sensor module that delivers
mechanical properties of soft materials in industrial processing lines.
Materials that can deform visibly under small forces are classified as soft.
Natural and synthetic soft materials such as rubber, foams, gels and biological
tissues are ubiquitous in food production, structures, robots, 3D-printing,
agriculture, pharmaceutical processing, and biomedical applications. Hence, the
mechanical properties of soft materials are of primary interest to many
industries. The development and deployment of the proposed sensor is immediately
feasible for the soft food processing industry. When integrated to food
processing lines, this sensor will provide high throughput real-time data to the
production line managers and operators about strength, stiffness, texture, and
consistency of the food being processed. This feedback will enable optimization
of the processing settings and environment and thus will facilitate reduction of
trim losses and online quality control of the processed food. Therefore, the
proposed technology will help food waste reduction efforts of the food
processors and manufacturers. Natural expansion to biomedical, agricultural and
polymer processing industries is possible as the innovation is scalable and
adaptable to various soft materials and processing lines.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a surface-wave-based sensing
method that delivers elastic and failure properties of soft materials. The
sensing method is based on correlations between surface wave and mechanical
properties: surface waves emitted during processing of soft materials are
measured and analyzed, and estimated wave amplitude, energy and frequencies are
correlated to the elastic and failure properties of soft materials. Measured
properties (strength, stiffness, and toughness) deliver essential information on
microstructure, texture, and consistency of soft materials. Therefore, this
innovative sensing technique is broadly applicable to soft material processing
industries. Initially, the sensing module will be adapted to the food processing
industry. In this module, surface-waves emitted during cutting, slicing,
peeling, and shredding of fruits, vegetables, cheese, meat, and meat substitutes
will be monitored by non-contact optical sensors, and the elasticity and
fracture properties of the products will be extracted from the surface-wave
analyses. Those properties will provide online monitoring of product quality,
processing conditions and operations. Such a monitoring system is currently
missing in the food processing industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.