* 2327107
* Conference: EnviBayes Workshop on Complex Environmental Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Andrea Kaplan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This workshop titled "EnviBayes Workshop on Complex Environmental Data" will be
held in Fort Collins, Colorado on September 18-20, 2023. Environmental and
ecological data are often complex and diverse. This complexity may arise from
intricate data-generating mechanisms, such as the presence of many interacting
species in an ecological study, or from structural dependence, such as
correlation in space and time of air pollution measurements. As such, analysis
of environmental and ecological datasets may require specialized statistical and
computational tools to appropriately capture and account for the complexity.
While the ecological and environmental statistics community is not large, it is
easy to become siloed in each of the respective sub-communities. However, the
advances in modeling approaches and tools for one type of dependence (and data)
can often be usefully extended to another type of dependence and have a large
impact on multiple application areas. It can therefore benefit statisticians
working with different facets of environmental and ecological data to interact
with each other to propagate knowledge among our sub-communities for the
increased advancement of all disciplines. The workshop will have the following
major aims: i) to provide sub-communities within environmental and ecological
statistics with a venue to share cutting-edge advancements within their own
networks to further spark deeper knowledge gains; ii) to transfer knowledge
between sub-communities and foster collaboration.

The program of the EnviBayes Workshop on Complex Environmental Data includes: i)
Environmental Health and Epidemiology; ii) Data from Remote Sensing; iii) Models
for Spatial and Temporal Dependence; iv) Multivariate and Spatial Extremes; v)
Using Climate Models to Project Future Extremes; vi) Models for Animal Movement
and Abundance; vii) Statistical Inference Related to Complex Computer Models.
This project will encourage the participation of graduate students, early-career
researchers, and members of groups under-represented in statistics. More details
about the workshop can be found at: https://statistics.colostate.edu/envibayes-
workshop/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.