* 2327252
* RII Track-4: @NASA: Investigation of Erosive Wear Resistance of Ceramic Parts Produced by Additive Manufacturing
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Getu Hailu, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,984.00

Additive Manufacturing (AM) is a computer-controlled technique that builds
three-dimensional objects by depositing materials, typically in layers. AM has
been recognized to have several advantages, including the ability to manufacture
a component with high complexity in a single manufacturing process, and it finds
application in many sectors, such as aerospace and the biomedical industries.
The ability to manufacture parts using AM even in space has made this technology
extremely attractive and is considered a key technology for enhancing space
vehicle designs and enabling affordable missions. Before successfully
integrating additively manufactured components into space missions, their
structural integrity under various environmental conditions must be examined.
Erosive wear, one of the processes through which the integrity of a component
can be compromised, is a dynamic process in which material is removed from a
target surface because of mechanical interaction between impinging particles and
the target surface. This project will: 1) study erosive wear of additively
manufactured components experimentally; 2) develop predictive erosive wear
models that determine the damage caused by erosive wear. Therefore, by advancing
the additive manufacturing process, the project ensures US leadership in space
programs and other sectors in which AM has found applications.

Additive Manufacturing (AM) is crucial for fabricating customized, complex,
neat-shape geometries in a single manufacturing step. The ability to manufacture
parts using AM, even in space, has made this manufacturing technology extremely
attractive. The structural integrity of these additively manufactured components
under various environmental conditions is one of NASA’s research priorities. One
of the processes through which the integrity of a component can be compromised
is erosive wear, which is a dynamic process in which material is removed from a
target surface because of mechanical interaction between impinging particles and
the target surface. The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of
the response of additively manufactured ceramic parts to erosive wear. Since
erosive wear is a complex process influenced by process conditions (particle
size, shape, velocity, impact angle, and environmental conditions), impact
conditions (impact angle), and material mechanical properties, experimental data
will be used to develop correlative predictive erosive wear models. Insights
into the erosive wear mechanisms will enable the improvement of process
conditions of the AM process, i.e., the data generated will help improve the
microstructure and texture of components by controlling manufacturing process
conditions that significantly impact material mechanical properties. Hence, the
project's outcome is the generation of essential data that will be used to
improve AM process; and the development of predictive erosive wear models that
will be used to assess the erosive wear performance of AM fabricated ceramic
components. This project would provide a faculty fellowship and support for an
undergraduate research experience at the University of Alaska Anchorage. The
faculty and student research team will collaborate with researchers at the NASA
Marshall Space Flight Center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.