* 2327144
* Molecular signaling in mechanobiology regulation by single-cell analyses using bioinformatics approach
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jun Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2026
* USD 299,392.00

Homeostasis in living animals and in plants is a self-regulating process by
which an organism can maintain internal stability while adjusting to changing
external conditions. Numerous molecular mechanisms are involved in these
regulatory processes, including cell sensing and communication, intracellular
and membrane excitation, and extracellular connections. Mechanobiology enhances
cellular sensing genes and channels controlling cell-cell communication,
intracellular and membrane excitation, and extracellular connections. The
project will develop a single-cell multiplex in situ tagging (scMIST) system
combined with advanced machine leaning algorithms through successive rounds of
labeling and imaging to effectively achieve a multiplexity of thousands of data
points using a common fluorescence microscope and a simple procedure in a
typical biological laboratory setting, which has the potential to revolutionize
the field of mechanical biology. The project will be committed to outreach and
recruitment efforts targeting minority students and those interested in STEM
fields.

Enhancing cellular viability and motility induced by dynamic physical
stimulation is one of the vital components and factors in the biological
systemâ€™s response to mechano-transduction and regeneration. The project will
focus on 1) generating an integrated database of cellular differentiation and
adaptation through Ca^(2+) release, Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling, and T-cell
immuno-pathway with and without Piezo1 mitigation, and inter- and intra-cellular
communication, and cell differentiation; 2) evaluating dynamic loading on
single-cell DNA-encoded sequencing by quantifying signaling proteins and surface
markers from various cell and proteins; 3) developing machine learning and deep
learning algorithms, using R-Studio and bioinformatics platforms; and 4)
developing an AI-based framework for bioinformatics analysis to visualize high-
dimensional data, classify cell subtypes by both functions and phenotypes, and
determine the signaling networks of each subtypes. This study will further
enhance our understanding of the impact of the external environment on the
living system and its adaptation at the cellular, molecular, and protein levels.
The results of the project will be made to public through the lab website,
https://you.stonybrook.edu/qinlab/home/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.