* 2327168
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Automating Character Extraction for Taxonomic Species Descriptions Using Neural Networks, Transformer, and Computer Vision Signal Processing Architectures
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2025
* Alex Van Dam, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 188,138.00

This project would provide a fellowship to an Associate professor and training
for a graduate student at the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez. Arthropoda, a
group that includes insects, spiders, and millipedes, is Earth's most diverse
phylum with over 1.01 million known species. With an estimated 7 million species
yet to be discovered, and a discovery rate of just 7,000 species per year, it
would take around 850 years to identify them all, a process currently taking an
average of 21 years per species. This project aims to expedite this through
"Descriptron", a groundbreaking artificial intelligence tool leveraging machine
learning and computer vision to accelerate species descriptions and taxonomic
key generation. In collaboration with NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, the
project will utilize advanced imaging technology to automate the capture and
description of arthropod morphological features, reducing human error and
ensuring reproducible results. The implications extend across ecology,
evolutionary biology, and developmental biology. Emphasizing the role of citizen
science, the project involves the wider community in data annotation via
iNaturalist, fostering public participation in scientific discovery. This
endeavor advances our understanding of biodiversity in our own backyards and
accelerates the identification of undiscovered life on Earth.

Panarthropoda, encompassing Onychophora, Tardigrada, Chelicerata, Myriapoda, and
Pancrustacea, is Earth's largest and most diverse clade, with an estimated 7
million species yet to be discovered. Through "Descriptron", an artificial
intelligence (AI) pipeline, this project will significantly accelerate taxonomic
species descriptions and key generation through the utilization of state-of-the-
art transformers, convolutional neural networks, and computer vision techniques.
Key to this endeavor is a strategic collaboration with NASA's Marshall Space
Flight Center, providing advanced imaging technology for Descriptron's
development. Advanced imaging techniques will greatly speed up the development
of novel training data needed for the automation of instance segmentation and
text description process of arthropod morphological features, reducing human
error and ensuring highly reproducible, objective results. By creating a library
of models for sclerites and descriptive terms including color, texture, and
shape, Descriptron will automate the process of producing a skeletonized
taxonomic species description. This project leverages citizen science by
engaging the broader community in the data annotation process via the
iNaturalist platform. This approach not only facilitates public understanding
and appreciation of biodiversity but also contributes essential data to the
project. The use of Descriptron promises wide-reaching impacts across various
fields such as ecology, evolutionary biology, and developmental biology that
depend upon accurate morphological data. By effectively involving citizen
scientists and accelerating taxonomic discovery, this project holds substantial
potential to advance our understanding of Earth's biodiversity and expedite the
biodiscovery process.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.