* 2327935
* Conference: Stem Cells, Cell Therapy and Bioengineering in Lung Biology and Diseases 2023
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Amy Ryan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2024
* USD 13,831.00

The 10th Stem Cells, Cell Therapy and Bioengineering in Lung Biology and
Diseases Conference will be held 17-20 July 2023, at the University of Vermont
in Burlington, which has been the venue of all of the conferences since the
biannual series began in 2005. The conference fills an important niche in the
rapidly moving fields of stem cells, cell therapies, lung biology, and
bioengineering. In addition to stimulating extensive discussion and debate by
international leaders and up and coming investigators and trainees, an important
deliverable is a set of guidelines for basic and translational research to be
utilized by both investigators and funding agencies. As in previous years,
junior investigators, trainees, and investigators from underrepresented groups
will be prioritized for inclusion in conference organization, oral
presentations, chairing activities, discussions, and poster sessions. In 2023,
an exciting new High School STEM Experience will be introduced to foster the
next generation of scientists by providing on opportunity for participants to
engage with scientific faculty and trainees from around the world and further
gain experience with state-of-the-art scientific techniques.

Repair and regeneration of a diseased lung with stem cells or bioengineered
tissues are exciting potential therapeutic approaches for a variety of lung
diseases and critical illnesses. Over the past decade, increasing evidence in
preclinical models suggests that cells which are not normally resident in the
lung, notably mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) can be utilized to modulate
immune responses after injury, but there have been challenges in translating
these promising findings to the clinic. In parallel, there has been a surge in
bioengineering studies investigating use of artificial and acellular lung
matrices as scaffolds for three-dimensional lung or airway regeneration, with
some recent attempts of transplantation in large animal models. The combination
of these studies with those utilizing stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cell
derivatives, and/or cell therapies is a promising and rapidly developing
research area. These studies have been further paralleled by significant
increases in understanding the molecular and cellular events by which endogenous
lung stem and/or progenitor cells arise and differentiate during lung
development and in normal and pathologic repair and remodeling after lung
injury. For the 2023 conference, scientific symposia have been chosen to reflect
the most cutting-edge advances in the field and will include sessions focusing
on the integration of omics with function, the role of the extracellular matrix,
and the influence of immune cells on lung repair and regeneration. These cutting
edge basic and translational science studies are rapidly enhancing fundamental
understanding of lung repair and regeneration and the planned conference will
continue to help shape further progress.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.