* 2327102
* An Implantable Biosensor Platform Enabled by Novel Porous Oxide Protection of Electrochemical Aptamer Working Electrodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jason Heikenfeld, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 449,999.00

Managing chronic diseases in the United States is the biggest cost to the health
care system and is poised to worsen as the population ages. Not patients, not
doctors, and certainly not insurance companies are satisfied with the complexity
of care and patient outcomes for chronic diseases. However, improved care in
chronic disease has without question been achieved with the wide-spread use of
wearable monitoring of glucose for diabetics. The impact of continuous wearable
monitoring has been so substantial for heart disease and for diabetes that there
is already a commercial emergence of long-lasting implantable monitors for
glucose and heart function. However, only a small number of measures are
possible with implantable sensors due to the ultra-difficult requirement of the
sensors having to last a year or more of continuous operation. This is
unfortunate, because implanted monitors can in theory reduce costs (less trips
to the doctor’s office for tests), improve patient outcomes by more timely and
actionable data, and by virtue of their simplicity (almost no user effort) have
greater impact on patient lifestyle choices. A need therefore exists for a new
technology that can not only measure many types of molecules in the body, but do
so with reliable operation for a year or more such that implantable use becomes
practical and desirable.

The specific objective of this project is to demonstrate the fundamental
building blocks needed for molecular sensors to monitor inside the body for
multiple years, and therefore enable the first ever implantable monitoring
platform that is generalizable to multiple chronic diseases. The project work
plan focuses on aptamer sensors, which place strands of DNA on an electrode, and
the DNA captures and allows electronic measurement of molecules circulating
throughout the body. These aptamer sensors essentially provide the same type of
information achieved with a blood test at the doctor’s office, but instead will
be measuring all the time inside the body. Making these sensors last long enough
for implanted operation is a major challenge and is the specific scientific
focus of this project. To enable more than one year of operation this project
will stabilize the sensor surface with robust porous oxides with a goal of 1
month of reliable operation, then develop a device design with 12 sensors that
are sequentially exposed at one-month intervals inside the body such that at
least 12 months of operation is achieved. Achieving 12-month operation then
opens the possibility for an implanted sensor, where patients and doctors have
continuous access to health status and a simpler and more impactful way to
manage a patient’s chronic disease.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.