* 2327571
* Collaborative Research: Supercritical Fluids and Heat Transfer - Delineation of Anomalous Region, Ultra-long Distance Gas Transport without Recompression, and Thermal Management
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Vishwanath Prasad, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 370,657.00

Fluids under supercritical (SC) conditions, where distinct liquid and gas phases
no longer exist, are found in nature and technological systems that can take
advantage of the extreme changes that take place near the critical temperature
and pressure. The increases in heat transfer, reductions in fluid friction, and
high solubility of SC fluids have current and potential applications in pipeline
transport of natural gas, delivery of carbon dioxide as part of carbon capture
and storage processes, working fluids for thermal and nuclear power plants,
solar and geothermal energy conversion systems, and enhanced cooling of
electronic devices and data centers. Despite the advantages offered by the
unique properties of SC fluids, their wide-spread use has been curtailed because
of inadequate understanding of anomalous behaviors, characterized by large-scale
variations in thermophysical properties in the critical region, resulting in
thermal and flow oscillations and other detrimental phenomena. Additionally, the
critical temperature and pressure range, specific to each substance, may not fit
a particular technological need. This research will address the anomalous
behavior knowledge gaps of an important set of SC fluids, which will open the
door to new technologies for high-capacity, energy-efficient, and
environmentally responsible fluid flow and thermal management systems. For
example, natural gas under SC conditions (SNG) can be transported via overland,
underground, and undersea pipelines for distances greater than 2,000 km. SNG
transport is power-efficient and can reduce the number of enroute recompression
stations or eliminate them altogether, enabling new trans-oceanic routes that
are currently impossible, serving the US national interest as well as providing
energy security elsewhere in the world. In comparison with liquified natural gas
(LNG), SNG transport can be less expensive, have reduced environmental impact,
and be more secure and safe. Knowledge generated in the study of SNG transport
will be useful in determining the thermodynamic states of carbon dioxide when it
is transported from shorelines to the ocean floor for sequestration. Likewise,
development of methods to transport SC oxygen, nitrogen, and other important
industrial/medical gases will benefit from this work. The broader impacts of
this research include educational opportunities in SC transport phenomena and
outreach to underrepresented groups using the wide range of current and
potential SC technologies to motivate interest in thermodynamics.

Previous research has shown that anomalous fluid transport behavior near the
critical point starts in the subcritical state above the triple point and
continues deep into the SC state. In this research program, a thermodynamic
model based on Gibbs free energy will be developed to delineate the temperature-
pressure boundaries of the anomalous states and characterize the higher-order
phase transitions. It will be applied to a set of naturally/industrially
important SC fluids including water, carbon dioxide, methane, argon, and
nitrogen. This analysis will lead to the identification of safe conditions at
which SC fluids, including supercritical natural gas (SNG), can be transported
over long distances without recompression. The full potential for SNG transport
will be quantified by developing a one-dimensional computational model for SC
thermal transport, accounting for transport property variations and
compressibility, environmental thermal conditions, Joule-Thomson phenomena, and
thermal resistance of the pipeline. A three-dimensional model will be developed
to examine the flow and thermal behavior in the inlet and outlet regions as well
as the impact of temperature variations in the surrounding environment. The
thermodynamic models also will be employed to design customized mixtures of SC
fluids for effective thermal management. The proposed research includes plans to
fabricate an experimental apparatus for SC fluid flow and thermal analysis to
generate data relevant to SC fluid properties, examine parametric effects for
model validation, and explore methods to enhance heat transfer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.