* 2327667
* Synthesis of and New Functionality in Heteroepitaxial Gallate / Ferrite Core@Shell Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Dario Arena, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical summary:

Epitaxy in crystalline materials is the regular growth of one material on top of
another, like the growth of a layer of yellow Lego bricks on top of several
layers of red bricks. Strain occurs when the length of the two bricks is
slightly different, so that the yellow layer grows with a slightly larger
spacing (tensile strain) or slightly smaller (compressive). In two-dimensional
thin films, epitaxial strain can produce dramatic variations in physical
properties, but this type of epitaxial strain has been under-exploited in
spherical nanoparticles and other nanostructures. Growing nanoparticles in a
core / shell structure results in the combination of different physical
properties, similar to how a candy comprised of a peanut covered with chocolate
and hard sugar shell has a different flavor (a physical property) than a candy
that is a solid piece of chocolate covered with the sugar shell. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, Prof. Dario Arena and his team at the University of South
Florida will explore core and shell materials with the same type of lattice
structure, but very different physical properties. The core will be a type of
oxide (zinc gallate) that has optical properties which are useful for biomedical
imaging. The shell will be an iron oxide called magnetite and certain magnetic
signatures of this material can be used to confirm epitaxial growth of the
magnetite on the zinc gallate core. Realizing this combination of epitaxial
optically-active cores and magnetically-sensitive shells opens up new
possibilities for high-frequency electronics, gas sensing, environmental
remediation, and biomedical applications that combine diagnostic + therapeutic
capabilities in a single nanoparticle.

Technical summary:

Many minerals and other chemical compounds adopt the spinel structure in their
atomic lattice. In this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the NSF’s Division of Materials Research, core / shell
nanoparticles that combine two different types of oxide spinels will be
chemically synthesized. Zinc gallate (ZnGa2O4) will form the core and magnetite
(Fe3O4) will be the shell material. Zinc gallate and magnetite share the same
spinel crystal structure which will enable the epitaxial growth of magnetite
shell on the zinc gallate core. The zinc gallate will impart a compressive
strain of 0.7% on the magnetite shell, which is still relatively weak. A high
degree of epitaxy in the magnetite shell will be verified with temperature
dependent magnetometry by identifying the Verwey transition (an abrupt drop in
the sample magnetic moment) at ~105 K. Only samples with excellent crystallinity
and which have the proper iron to oxygen ratio will exhibit the Verwey
transition, and the magnetometry provides an efficient method of screening
promising synthesis strategies. In samples that exhibit a sharp Verwey
transition, the epitaxy will be verified with advanced electron microscopy,
x-ray spectroscopy and scattering, and neutron scattering techniques. These
combinations of spinel ferrites and gallates have not been grown before and the
combination opens up new possibilities for high-frequency electronics, gas
sensing, environmental remediation, and biomedical / theranostic (diagnostic +
therapeutic) applications. The project will also support the PhD study of two
graduate students and will help foster collaboration with the graduate program
of a one or more Minority Serving Institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.