* 2327962
* A Synthetic Biology Toolbox for Studying Bacterial Transporters
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Brian Pfleger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This collaborative project between the University of Wisconsin-Madison and
members of the Department of Energy’s Agile BioFoundry (Oak Ridge and Lawrence
Berkeley National labs) investigates bacterial transporters and engineers them
to have superior properties for use in biomanufacturing strategies.
Biomanufacturing is a means to convert renewable resources into a wide range of
chemical products at ambient temperature and pressure with the use of living
catalysts. In biomanufacturing, microbial cells operate like processing
factories and it is important to have knowledge and control of what enters and
exits the cells via transporters. The current transporter knowledgebase contains
many gaps including how to export desirable chemical products that are otherwise
toxic to cells in high concentrations. Closing these basic science knowledge
gaps facilitates the development of superior biomanufacturing microbial hosts
and supports the translational research needed to fulfill the scientific mission
of the US. Department of Energy. The project contributes to workforce
development by providing synthetic biology training to graduate and
undergraduate students studying at the intersection of microbiology and
engineering. The project includes a partnership with established Research
Experience for Undergraduates programs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison to
recruit talented underrepresented researchers and mentor them from their summer
residence until the end of the bachelor’s career.

Through the course of this project, a suite of tools that are broadly useful to
the metabolic engineering and biomanufacturing communities, are developed. The
goal is to develop and use tools to close knowledgebase gaps surrounding
transporters in Gram negative bacteria. The project involves the use of genome
wide fitness association assays to perform loss of function studies and to
identify putative transporters linked to selectable phenotypes (e.g., uptake of
a limiting nutrient, removal of a toxic product). Strains of bacteria for use in
complementary gain of function experiments that validate putative transport
functions are being developed. Related tools are used to facilitate protein
engineering studies that enhance transport function. The research also involves
engineering of active exporters and passive permeases with deep saturation
mutagenesis techniques and the use of structure-guided and AI-tools to round out
a design-build-test-learn campaign. Tools are deposited in public repositories
so that the community can easily explore the transporter function of their
interest. The research contributes new data to systems biology models such as
metabolism reconstructions used for flux balance analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.