* 2327826
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Manipulating Magnetism and Spin Dynamics in Intercalated van der Waals Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Shixiong Zhang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2026
* USD 181,543.00

Non-technical Abstract: Magnets play an essential role in modern technologies
such as information storage, energy harvesting, high-speed transportation, water
purification, and biomedicine. Commercial devices typically utilize three-
dimensional magnets, in the form of bulk crystals or nanostructures, to realize
the desired applications. This project focuses on atomically thin layers of two-
dimensional magnetic materials, which have remarkable advantages over
conventional three-dimensional magnets because of their exotic low-dimensional
properties and high sensitivity to external stimuli. The goal of the project is
to understand and manipulate the magnetic properties of a novel class of two-
dimensional magnets through a highly integrated collaborative effort of two
principal investigators with complementary expertise. The fundamental
understanding and dynamic control of two-dimensional magnetism is anticipated to
pave the way towards the realization of novel ultra-compact devices for modern
information technology and beyond. Through the research project, the principal
investigators will further their ongoing effort of training students, especially
underrepresented minorities, to enhance diversity in STEM research. Meanwhile,
interactive outreach activities are planned to promote STEM education in
disadvantaged rural or suburban schools and to attract high school students to
quantum materials research.

Technical Abstract: Two-dimensional magnets offer a unique platform for both the
fundamental study of exotic magnetism and the innovation of ultra-compact
devices for advanced technologies. The overarching goal of this collaborative
research project is to accurately map the magnetic phase diagram and manipulate
spin dynamics in a family of self-intercalated van der Waals magnets, chromium
tellurides. The experimental activities include: 1) establish precisely
controlled intercalation-magnetism relations and create a phase diagram; 2)
tuning and determining the relative influence of charge carriers, magnetic
moments of intercalants, and atomic lattice spacing on the magnetic properties;
3) probing and manipulating the magnetization and coherent spin dynamics with
ultrafast demagnetization, ferromagnetic resonance, and terahertz phonon
excitation. The project will create systematic and comprehensive knowledge about
magnetism and spin dynamics in this intriguing family of two-dimensional
magnets. As such, the research project will offer a new scientific paradigm to
understand and engineer two-dimensional intercalated magnetic materials.
Correlated with the research components are interactive outreach programs that
aim to foster STEM education in disadvantaged rural or suburban schools and
inspire high school students by connecting them to quantum research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.