* 2327065
* Collaborative Research: Development of a precision closed loop BCI for socially fearful teens with depression and anxiety
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Mary Woody, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 10/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This project aims to develop innovative technology that can assist therapists in
assessing and rehabilitating social fears during talk therapy with teens
suffering from anxiety or depression. According to the World Health
Organization, depression and anxiety are leading causes of disability worldwide,
affecting approximately 25% of the population and costing the global economy $1
trillion per year. The standard approach to treating teen anxiety or depression
involves many weekly sessions of one-on-one exposure therapy with a therapist.
Exposure therapy gradually exposes teens to real-life social situations that
trigger their fears while providing them with tools to manage and tolerate their
distress. Up to 50% of teens do not respond to this treatment approach, placing
them at high risk for chronic symptoms, suicidality, disability, and a
significantly shorter life expectancy. Treatment failure occurs partially
because it is hard to recreate real-life social challenges within therapy
sessions, so teens are not able to practice facing their fears under the direct
supervision of their therapists. There is currently no commercially available
product specifically designed to assess, recreate, and rehabilitate social fears
during exposure therapy. This project, led by a multidisciplinary team, aims to
address these challenges by developing augmented reality (AR) technology that
creates simulated real-life situations that evoke social fears within the
therapy environment, and markers of social fear that will be used to provide
objective and actionable feedback to teens and their therapists as they practice
techniques during therapy sessions. To achieve these goals, the project will
include partnerships with community experts and offer multidisciplinary training
opportunities for K-12 to graduate level, with an emphasis on inclusion of
trainees from marginalized communities.

The research objective of this project is to introduce a prototype for clinical
application of an AR-guided, electroencephalogram (EEG)-based exposure
technology for socially fearful teens. The proposed technology will: (i) use
novel hardware integration and software development to seamlessly synchronize
EEG data acquisition with AR presentation of social fear scenarios during real-
life interpersonal situations; (ii) accurately and continuously detect whether
the teen is exhibiting fearful vs. not fearful responses through EEG feature
selection and Bayesian inference methods (considering both individualized
responses and generalized responses across population); (iii) design novel
machine learning methods to identify individualized EEG-based fear indices; (iv)
monitor EEG-based fear indices in real time and adjust the AR social fear
scenarios to increase the level of fear when necessary; and (v) identify
individualized thresholds to detect when the user is in the “exposure zone” and
provide visual feedback to prompt the teen when to apply specific exposure
techniques as prescribed by the therapist. The proposed system has the potential
to provide a technology-driven paradigm for exposure therapy that meaningfully
reflects the social challenges experienced by depressed and anxious teens.
Bayesian optimal statistical inference will support the technology, providing
mathematically-driven frameworks that enhance the accuracy of EEG recordings
coupled with AR-based headtracking. Outcomes will be openly disseminated in
peer-reviewed articles, outreach programs, and code/data repositories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.