* 2327184
* Collaborative Research: The dual effect of ephaptic coupling on arrhythmogenesis in the heart
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ning Wei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 172,000.00

The heart is a muscular organ at the center of the circulation system. It
carries out the vital function of pumping oxygenated blood around the body. This
process is preceded by the electrical communication between cardiac cells. It is
widely accepted that gap junctional coupling is the primary mechanism for the
electrical conduction. Nevertheless, recent experimental observation raised the
concern of whether conduction can be sustained in the absence of gap junctions.
Ephpatic coupling (EpC) is an electric field effect developed at the
intercalated disc (ID) between adjacent cells, which has been suggested as an
alternative way in mediating intercellular electrical communication when gap
junctions are impaired. However, the direct experimental evidence demonstrating
the existence of EpC is still absent. Therefore, attempts were made to
indirectly demonstrate the existence of EpC by revealing its physiological role
in the heart. This collaborative proposal aims for developing the very first
multiscale model to incorporate the heterogeneous nanoscale ID structure into a
two-dimensional discrete model with multidomain electrodiffusion of multiple
ions. This framework seamlessly bridges biophysical responses of different space
and time scales, which helps understand the potential impact of EpC on
arrhythmogenesis in the heart. Therefore, the proposed research is highly inter-
disciplinary and provides a bridge between mathematical modeling and cardiac
electrophysiology. Moreover, this study is of high clinical significance, which
lays a solid ground for developing anti-arrhythmic strategies and therapies for
patients with structurally abnormal hearts, heart failure, and cardiomyopathy.
The project is a collaboration between Purdue University and the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities and offers valuable educational, training, and outreach
opportunities. Graduate and undergraduate students are trained and will
collaborate in multidisciplinary environment via joint meetings.

This project will develop the very first multiscale discrete model of EpC
through integration of the nanoscale structure of ID into the healthy and is-
chemic heart. In particular, the following novel features will be incorporated
to the model at different levels: (1) subcellular level: homogeneously and/or
heterogeneously distributed EpC developed using a multi-compartment ID; (2)
cellular level: electrodiffusion of multiple ions between multiple domains; (3)
tissue level: complex anatomical structure of ischemic region incorporated in
the heart. This framework is a system of ordinary algebraic differential
equations with a significantly large number of nonlinear terms at different
spatial and time scales. Therefore, an effective numerical scheme is required to
reduce the computational cost at the tissue level. This proposal thus aims for
developing an adaptive time stepping algorithm and designing a preconditioner
for generalized minimal residual method to efficiently solve the system. This
model will evaluate the impact of nanoscale structure of ID, various
distributions of EpC, ionic electrodiffusion and complex structure of ischemic
regions on initiation, termination and dynamics of cardiac arrhythmias. In order
to validate the numerical findings and indirectly demonstrate the presence of
EpC as an alternative mechanism of cell-to-cell communication in the heart,
whole-heart animal experiments using high resolution optical mapping technique
will be performed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.