* 2327747
* I-Corps: Determination of syrup adulterants and geographical and floral origin of honey using chemometrics
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Gerard Dumancas, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the area
of honey adulteration detection. Honey adulteration which is the process of
deliberately adding adulterants such as corn, cane, beet, and rice syrups in
honey can have significant economic and organoleptic consequences. The proposed
technology will allow honey importers, packers, and retailers, as well as food
authentication agencies to quickly track the authenticity of their honey
products at each step of the supply chain by quantifying the abovementioned
adulterant syrups in a facile and convenient manner. This will significantly
improve the product’s authenticity and traceability. Further, in situ testing
for the presence of honey adulterants as well as floral and geographic
fingerprinting will allow various honey market segments to demand the
appropriate price for their pure honey products in the global market. With food
fraud continuing to escalate globally, the food authenticity market is expected
to grow to $8.3 billion (USD) by 2023. Adulterated honey constitutes 7% of food
fraud cases, amounting to $581 million (USD) by 2023 in total market size
disruption.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a portable mid-infrared
spectrometric device and a smartphone application system that can simultaneously
quantify the presence of various syrups (i.e., corn, cane, beet, and rice) as
well as sugar content (i.e., glucose, fructose, and sucrose) in honey in less
than 2 minutes. Current methods for detecting these adulterants in honey are
considered expensive, time consuming, archaic, and cumbersome. Most of these
tests are being conducted via third-party laboratories using expensive and
complex analytical equipment. The smartphone application system will contain the
research group’s proprietary developed multivariate calibration system that can
simultaneously quantify the presence of the aforementioned adulterants in honey
in a facile, convenient, and affordable manner using the mid-infrared
spectrometric device. Further, the multivariate calibration algorithmic system
will also feature aspects related to determining the floral and geographical
origin of honey.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.