* 2327203
* Collaborative Research: Microbes need frenemies: unveiling microbial relationships with protists and viruses that support deep-sea hydrothermal vent food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Sarah Hu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 273,145.00

Non-technical abstract

Ecological interactions among microbes (bacteria and archaea), viruses, and
eukaryotic microorganisms are critical junctions in marine food webs. These
interactions range from mutually beneficial relationships to sources of
microbial mortality. Interactions between viruses-microbes and eukaryotes-
microbes at deep-sea hydrothermal vents impact local carbon cycling. This
project aims to identify these microbial interactions, specifically those
related to cell death by protistan grazing or viral lysis, and explore how they
vary across different hydrothermal vent habitats. By providing a better
understanding of the composition and nature of these relationships, the
investigators aim to build a better food web model of deep-sea hydrothermal
vents and improve our understanding of how climate change and other human
activities impact the ecosystem. Outcomes from this project include the
generation of new microbiology, oceanography, and computer science curricula
targeted at community college students. In addition, it involves research with
undergraduate students at all stages of the research process and provides
opportunities for professional development and peer-to-peer mentoring.

Technical abstract This project examines trophic interactions among microbial
eukaryotes, viruses, bacteria, and archaea at deep-sea hydrothermal vents using
metagenomics and metatranscriptomics and characterizes these ecologically-
significant interactions, such as mutualism, predator-prey, or virus-host. The
investigators are sequencing samples collected to target archaea/bacteria,
viruses, and eukaryotic grazers during a 2020 expedition to the Mid-Cayman Rise
hydrothermal vent field to accomplish these goals. Specific aims of this project
are to 1) Investigate the microbial, viral, and protistan assemblages and
determine how lifestyle, community composition, and metabolism vary across
venting fluids of the Mid-Cayman Rise; and 2) Identify ecologically-significant
interactions among protists, viruses, bacteria, and archaea and incorporate
these interactions into a model for turnover and exchange of carbon in the vent-
associated food web. By modeling how trophic interactions influence microbial
mortality, the proposed project substantially contributes to our understanding
of the fate of carbon in one of the most productive ecosystems of the deep sea

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.