* 2327939
* Total Eclipses in the Heart of Texas
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Christopher Packham, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2024
* USD 42,356.00

The South and Central parts of Texas, including San Antonio, are in the unique
position to experience two solar eclipses within the next year. On October 14,
2023 Texas will be in the path of annularity for a partial eclipse, and on April
8, 2024 will be in the path of totality for a total solar eclipse. The
University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) campus is in the path of both, and a
research and education team at UTSA will take advantage of this extraordinary
circumstance to promote STEM education within the community. In this program,
the team will expand other planned outreach efforts to purchase materials and
fund travel for teachers and students to attend a two-week summer workshop
called the San Antonio Teacher Training Astronomy Academy (SATTAA) and to
experience the eclipse.

These activities and collaborations will increase community engagement and
elevate STEM careers across central and south Texas, directly impacting students
and engaging educators. This SATTAA workshop aims to help educators introduce
STEM into the classrooms through astronomy. Not only is the science from eclipse
learning connected to Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills (TEKS), but astronomy
in general can connect to the Texas learning standards. One local community on
which the team will concentrate its efforts is Uvalde, TX, which is directly in
the path of both eclipses. The program will deliver materials to the Uvalde and
Eagle Pass School Districts and to Sul Ross State University, which will be used
in a large area in central/south Texas. In that way, the program will connect
the unique Texas eclipses to a lasting legacy within the state.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.