* 2327139
* RAPID: Elucidating the fate of VOCs and SVOCs in drinking water wells and household water plumbing systems following the East Palestine chemical accident
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Youngblood, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

On February 3rd, 2023, a freight train derailment occurred in East Palestine in
the State of Ohio. Following the train derailment, various hazardous chemicals,
including volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-volatile organic compounds
(SVOCs) such as vinyl chloride (VC) and butyl acrylate (BA), and combustion by-
products (e.g., polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons) from a ‘controlled burn’ of
the remaining VC and BA in the train cars, were released into nearby soils,
sediments, groundwater aquifer, and waterways including the Ohio River which
serves as a source of drinking water for more than 5 million people. Preliminary
onsite chemical analyses by the investigators of this project (Purdue Team)
showed that a variety of chemicals not tested for potential contamination by the
responders were also found in heavily contaminated creeks, which are bordered by
about 100 private drinking water wells located within a 2-mile radius of the
East Palestine train derailment site. During their onsite inspection of selected
East Palestine private wells and household drinking water systems, the Purdue
Team also documented the use of well casings and building plumbing systems
consisting of high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and crosslinked polyethylene
(PEX), which are known to permeate and/or accumulate VOCs and/or SVOCs. This
RAPID project will collect and analyze ephemeral water samples from surface
water, groundwater, and household drinking water systems with the goal of
characterizing and understanding the fate of the released VOCs/SVOCs within the
plumbing systems and biofilms that form at the surfaces of HDPE/PEX pipes of
household water systems in the East Palestine train derailment site and nearby
communities. The successful completion of this project has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of new data and fundamental
knowledge to guide and inform the design and implementation of effective
remediation solutions for household water systems in the East Palestine train
derailment site and nearby communities. Additional benefits to society will be
achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of two
graduate students at Purdue University.

The formation and growth of biofilms on the surfaces of plastic plumbing
materials have a major impact on water quality and safety in drinking water
distribution systems. The release of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and semi-
volatile organic compounds (SVOCs) during the East Palestine train derailment in
Ohio provides a unique and time-sensitive opportunity to carry out fundamental
investigations of the fate of these contaminants in plastic plumbing materials
and the biofilms that form at their surfaces. This RAPID project will test the
hypotheses that 1) that biofilms formed at the surfaces of polyethylene (PE)
plumbing pipes in household water systems will sorb (accumulate) SVOCs in
contaminated well water while the VOCs will permeate (diffuse) through the
biofilms into the underlying PE polymer substrates, 2) contaminant desorption
(release) from these biofilms will be slower than that from pristine PE
surfaces, and 3) biofilm sloughing could cause acute incidences of high
contaminant exposure. The specific objectives of the research are to 1)
characterize heavily contaminated samples of creek water at the East Palestine
chemical accident site using gas chromatography (GC)-mass spectrometry (MS) and
proton transfer resonance (PTR)-time of flight (TOF)-MS to identify and select
target VOCs/SVOCs for subsequent testing, 2) measure the diffusion (D) and
solubility (K) coefficients of the selected VOCs/SVOCs in new/pristine high-
density polyethylene (HDPE) resin pellets and pipes, and 3) measure the
diffusion (D) and solubility (K) coefficients of the selected VOCs/SVOCs in
biofilm-coated HDPE resin pellets and pipes using water from different impacted
wells. The successful completion of this research has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of new data and fundamental
knowledge on the fate of VOCs/SVOCs that accumulate in the HDPE plumbing systems
and biofilms of household water systems that have been impacted by the East
Palestine chemical spill accident. The new data and knowledge generated from
this RAPID project could enable affected households to understand the extent of
contamination of their water systems and design/implement effective remediation
solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.