* 2327899
* Adhesion and Self-Assembly of Flexible Nanofilaments on Biological Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Samaneh Farokhirad, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 451,093.00

Flexible nanofilaments are essential components in synthetic materials,
biological cells, and viruses such as Ebola. The goal of this award is to
understand the interactions between flexible nanofilaments and biological cells
using a combination of theory and simulations. The project will investigate the
mechanisms by which flexible nanofilaments adhere to human and animal cells and
subsequently induce their deformation, a process that can lead to the
organization of these nanofilaments and shape transformation of the membrane.
Biological membranes can be polarized not just by an external electric field,
but also by bending deformations alone. Such deformations can generate local
electric fields, potentially influencing the adhesion and self-assembly of
nanofilaments. The research outcomes will advance foundational understanding and
provide guidance for applications in nano-biotechnologies, virology, and
therapeutics. The findings may facilitate the rational design for effective drug
delivery and novel strategies to interfere with the attachment and subsequent
self-assembly of viruses. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will
enhance engineering education and outreach activities at New Jersey Institute of
Technology. The educational programs will provide graduate student training, as
well as research experience and educational modules for high school and
undergraduate students, emphasizing underrepresented groups.

This award will investigate the interaction of flexible nanofilaments with cell
membranes, establishing a first ever mechanistic link between nanofilament
flexibility and shape, membrane mechanics and electromechanics, nanofilament
crowding, and the resulting configuration and self-assembly of nanofilaments.
Specific objectives include (1) examining how the shape and mechanics of
nanofilaments influence their interaction with membranes; (2) understanding how
the mechanics and electromechanics of cell membranes modulate these
interactions; and (3) characterizing emergent behaviors of nanofilaments under
increasing their density. The study will leverage a recently developed
multiscale modeling platform that couples a coarse-grained molecular-scale model
for nanofilaments with a continuum mechanics model for cell membranes using
hybrid Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulation methods. These
computational models will be complemented by a theoretical approach, integrating
continuum mechanics, electrostatics, and statistical physics of membranes and
nanofilaments to characterize the entropic features of adhesion and self-
assembly of nanofilaments on biological membrane. This contemporary multiscale
platform would be extendable to other biomechanical problems, including
endocytosis of nanoparticles, cell packaging and budding of viruses, and
electroporation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.