* 2327914
* Collaborative Research: Observations and Modeling of Primary and Secondary Gravity Waves at all Altitudes over the Andes
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Wenjun Dong, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 11/30/2026
* USD 716,747.00

Atmospheric Gravity waves (GWs) are generated when air parcels get disturbed and
overshoot their equilibrium position causing oscillatory motions. These are
often triggered by the topography, or thunderstorms. GWs are essential for
transporting and distributing energy and momentum throughout the atmosphere,
influencing various processes. Among the different types of GWs, secondary
gravity waves (SGW) (caused by upper-altitude wind readjustments and turbulence)
are particularly important. However, their generation is the least understood
aspect of this phenomenon. This project plans to integrate observations
(satellite as well as ground-based) and state-of-the-art numerical models to
improve the understanding of gravity waves. The effort aims to advance the
understanding of (a) both primary and secondary gravity waves dynamics, (b)
turbulence and instability processes that occur in the atmosphere and other
geophysical fluids. This knowledge can be applied to improve weather and climate
models, resulting in more accurate predictions that are beneficial for
commercial aviation. This project will contribute to STEM education providing
support to a graduate student, two postdoctoral researchers and an early career
scientist. This work is jointly funded by Aeronomy, Physical & Dynamical
Meteorology programs and Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences to
support projects that increase research capabilities, capacity and
infrastructure at a wide variety of institution types, as outlined in the GEO
EMBRACE DCL

The project aims to address compelling science questions related to GW dynamics
by using novel observations and machine learning methods. Multi-instrument data
planned to be used in this investigation include: 1) the Atmospheric Infrared
Sounder aboard NASA's Aqua satellite for the stratosphere, 2) the Na lidar,
Mesosphere Temperature Mapper, Aerospace nightglow imager, and meteor radar at
the Andes Lidar Observatory, and 3) comparable instruments on Tierra del Fuego.
A new machine learning approach along with conventional weather models are
planned to be used for this investigation. This project will provide a
quantitative understanding of the (a) roles and importance of GW breaking in SGW
generation, (b) instability and turbulence dynamics, and (c) GW and SGW forcing
of the MLT. These studies will also advance the understanding of SGW sources and
their characteristics. Finally, the machine learning efforts may open a new
window for improved parameterizations of primary and secondary GWs in global
atmospheric models where the bulk of GW effects cannot be resolved directly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.