* 2327708
* EAGER: Co-Designing a Cognitive Teaching Assistant  to Support Evidence-Based Instruction in Open-Ended Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Collaboration is a key ingredient of STEM professions and integrating computing
is also crucial to science learning today. Thus, developing educational support
technology that helps build a STEM-ready workforce that is equipped to
collaborate productively and use computational models and tools effectively has
broad ramifications for the future of a STEM workforce in the US. At a time when
we are witnessing exponential growth in applications of AI and machine learning,
this proposal leverages those advances to develop a novel AI technology-enhanced
virtual teacher assistant that acts as a partner to teachers. In collaboration
with Metro Nashville Public Schools, the team will work with five middle school
science teachers and 200 students to co-design and deploy the virtual teaching
assistant. This system provides on-demand feedback to teachers as they engage
with their students in an integrated science, computing, and engineering
curriculum that focuses on redesigning their schoolyard to minimize water runoff
and cost while maximizing accessibility for all. The project will investigate
key factors that promote student learning, including teachers’ instructional
practices and curricular adaptations, and their interactions with the virtual
teaching assistant. Our research will establish the impact of the AI-based
teacher assistant on student outcomes and demonstrate how we can leverage
today’s technology-enhanced classrooms for more successful, equitable, and
sustainable introduction of real-world, problem-based STEM learning.

This project will adopt a design-based research approach to develop a novel AI
technology-enhanced cognitive teacher assistant that aids teachers in noticing,
reflecting, and developing of evidence-based pedagogical responses, enriches
classroom interactivity, and helps students progress in their learning and
problem-solving tasks. We will study how well our technology identifies key
classroom interactions, engages teachers in students’ learning and problem
solving in a computational modeling-based science curriculum, and establishes
its impact on key student outcomes. We will investigate key factors that promote
these outcomes, including teachers’ instructional practices and curricular
adaptations, and their interactions with the cognitive teaching assistant to
support technology-enhanced noticing, reflection, and response practices.
Results will be analyzed using traditional quantitative and qualitative methods
as well as multi-modal learning analytics to understand how a diverse set of
middle school teachers leverage the cognitive teacher assistant technology to
orchestrate an open-ended, problem-based learning curriculum in their science
classrooms. This work will 1) contribute to our understanding of how virtual
teacher support agents can augment STEM+C teacher noticing, reflection, and
response practices, and 2) produce guidelines to help the design of innovative
teacher + AI agent partnerships that facilitate STEM+C integration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.