* 2327114
* Conference: Broadening Participation (BPart) and NSF Network Breakfast Events at ASME-IDETC-CIE 2023; Boston, Massachusetts; 20-23 August 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Sachin Goyal, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 33,894.00

This award will broaden the participation of students and those from
underrepresented groups and enhance the exchange of ideas during the 2023 ASME
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and
Information in Engineering Conference (IDETC-CIE 2023). IDETC-CIE is the second
largest conference organized annually by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME) and typically brings 500-1000 participants from academia,
industry, national laboratories, funding agencies, and policymaking bodies. The
conference enables collaboration, knowledge sharing, and skill development
across all engineering disciplines, while promoting the vital role of engineers
in society. The objective of broadening participation in this conference will be
fulfilled by adding a series of NSF-sponsored events to the conference program
that will actively bring together and engage students and underrepresented
groups in a dedicated creative thinking environment. These events will be
supplemented by a networking breakfast, in which attendees will come together
with NSF program officers to discuss topics related to engineering faculty
careers, industry jobs for students, increasing diversity, promoting industry-
academia partnerships, enhanced pedagogy, and promoting emerging areas of
research in science and engineering, among other topics. The proposed series of
events will open new doors of research and creativity for students, faculty, and
industry participants.

The first objective of this award is to support the mission of the 2023 ASME
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and
Information in Engineering Conference (ASME-IDETC-CIE 2023) for broadening
participation of underrepresented groups by offering a kick-off dinner event for
30 participants and a student networking event for 150 students. These two
events will bring students and other attendees from diverse backgrounds together
to brainstorm research ideas in a conducive and inclusive environment. This
cross-fertilization of ideas will have the potential to inspire new
interdisciplinary research directions and to provide potential breakthroughs for
current barriers in the participantsâ€™ research. The second objective of this
award is to facilitate the collaboration and professional development of 250
participants through a networking breakfast at this conference. This breakfast
event will complement the kick-off dinner and student networking events, which
will be held early in the conference, to help students and underrepresented
participants feel more comfortable intermingling and subsequently learning and
sharing ideas throughout the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.