* 2327186
* REAL Field Trip Model for the 2024 Total Solar Eclipses
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Robert Baer, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,000.00

Approximately 7 million school-age children live inside the path of totality for
the 2024 total solar eclipse. This means that most school-age children in the
United States will not be in the path of totality. A project run through
Southern Illinois University will develop and assess a Remote Engagement and
Access to Learning (REAL) Field Trip model that would allow any school,
regardless of location, funding, or other barriers, to have its students
actively participate in large-scale, localized scientific events such as a solar
eclipse. The model will be tested, developed and activated for the April 8, 2024
total solar eclipse. The impact of this type of active scientific participation
for students will be measured amongst various populations to determine the
model’s effectiveness in overcoming inequalities in science-education
opportunities. The REAL Field Trip model, if shown to be successful, could be
used for a vast array of future scientific events and phenomena, allowing school
kids from across the country to interactively participate in distant, real-time,
scientific events. This will increase science literacy and numbers of children
who become interested in science and STEM careers.

Three middle schools located in the path of totality for the 2024 solar eclipse
and three middle schools located out of the path of totality will participate in
the REAL Field Trip. Student interaction with the REAL Field Trip will occur
both prior to and during the eclipse via various online streaming opportunities.
Prior to the eclipse, teacher-led instruction will be supplemented by pre-
recorded downloadable discussions of eclipses from a diverse group of experts,
providing scientific as well as artistic, economic, and historical discussions
of current and past eclipses. Students will also have the opportunity to create
their own eclipse videos that can be submitted for inclusion in the live eclipse
broadcast. During the eclipse, students, both in and out of the path of
totality, will be able to actively participate in the eclipse experience through
a variety of streaming interactions including a question and answer chat
session, where experts will be on hand to answer student questions in real time.
Data will be collected prior to and after the eclipse to assess the efficacy of
the REAL Field Trip model. In addition, the April 2024 total solar eclipse
experience will be expanded beyond the partner schools through a professionally
produced live TV broadcast simulcast with the REAL Field Trip over the national
PBS feed. This broadcast format will reach a much larger national audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.