* 2327697
* IHBEM: Modeling the Impact of Behavioral Feedback on the Transmission of Acute Infectious Diseases
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Benjamin Lopman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,995.00

In this project, the estimation of epidemic quantities and the assessment of
intervention impacts are improved by incorporating realistic behavioral feedback
into mechanistic models. Mechanistic mathematical models are powerful tools to
understand the epidemiology of infectious diseases, evaluate the impact of
various control measures, and forecast the trajectory of cases and deaths. Lack
of empirical data on social contact patterns and their temporal variation,
however, has hindered progress and application of these models. Specifically,
there is a dearth of social contact data from individuals with acute infections
and their close contacts, such as household members, as behavior data have
traditionally been collected from healthy individuals. Consequently,
transmission models for acute infections often rely on simplistic assumptions
that infected individuals perfectly isolate themselves or that contact patterns
remain unchanged throughout the infectious period. These unrealistic assumptions
in model structure and parameterization can introduce bias into the results. To
address this issue, in this project the temporal changes in contact patterns
among individuals with acute infection and their close contacts is measured.
Long-term benefits of the project include the building of capacity in infectious
disease modeling, thus providing decision makers and public health officials
with more informed decision-making tools to develop interventions.

To achieve research objectives, clinic-based approaches are employed to recruit
U.S. cases with acute respiratory infections and acute gastroenteritis and
household members of these cases. Daily changes in their contact patterns are
captured over a two-week period using an online contact diary and how these
patterns vary by disease severity is assessed. Household members of these cases
are recruited to evaluate how close contacts modify their behaviors following
exposure. This enables development of transmission dynamic models (susceptible-
infectious-recovered models and appropriate elaborations), which are structured
and parameterized based on the behavioral realism investigated in this study.
SARS-CoV-2 is used as an example of acute respiratory infection and rotavirus is
used as an example of acute gastroenteritis. How the estimation of key model
parameters as well as the impact of interventions differ (i.e., improve) after
incorporating behavioral feedback into these mechanistic models is quantified.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.