* 2327420
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Advancing Engineering Education in Universities on Labor and Unions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Joseph Valle, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 328,427.00

Labor unions are designed to function as mechanisms for workers to come together
to alter structures in ways designed to improve living and working conditions,
including in STEM fields. In an era in which there is increasing attention given
to factors at the organizational or structural levels that contribute to
attrition in STEM fields, labor unions have been underrepresented in research.
The proposed project is focused on the field of Engineering. It is designed to
conduct research that is important because it has the potential to further
enable engineering instructors to prepare an engineering workforce capable of
co-creating solutions to persistent challenges. This project aims to gather and
synthesize information about labor unions, labor organization, and education
related to engineering work.

The proposed project has two research goals including a systematized review of
extant literature and semi-structured interviews. The literature review is
designed to focus on the intersections between engineering and labor, which is
anticipated to exist primarily outside of the engineering fields. Two sets of
interviews would be conducted with 1) undergraduate engineering students about
ways they learn about labor unions and labor organizing, and 2) labor organizers
who organize engineering workers about labor education they see as beneficial
for engineers. The interviews would be analyzed through a multi-stage coding
process. The analyses will be published in engineering education research
journals, conference papers, and leveraged in talks in engineering education and
academic labor venues.

The project responds to the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.