* 2327153
* Conference: 81st Device Research Conference (DRC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Shaloo Rakheja, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This project will use NSF support to increase student
participation and enhance technical training at the 81st Device Research
Conference (DRC), which brings together researchers from around the world to
share their latest findings in the areas of electronic, opto-electronic, and
quantum-based semiconductor devices. The 2023 DRC will be held from June 25-28
at the University of California, Santa Barbara, CA. The DRC offers unique
training and networking opportunities particularly to its student and young
investigator attendees, helping them advance their careers in materials science,
semiconductor technology, and device engineering. The DRC is committed to
fostering greater diversity and equity for all attendees and at all levels. By
stimulating an open and frank discussion of recent breakthroughs and advances in
electronic and photonic devices, the DRC will remove barriers for
underrepresented minority groups and support the NSF’s Diversity Mission related
to “preparing a diverse, globally engaged science, technology, engineering and
mathematics workforce.”

Technical Description: The 2023 DRC will feature three plenary talks from world-
renowned researchers in electronic-photonic integration, printed and flexible
electronics, and quantum transport theory. The conference will include
presentations on devices for extreme conditions, 2D devices, spintronic devices,
memory devices, RF and terahertz devices, thin-film devices, power devices, and
heterogeneous integration. In addition to plenary talks and oral presentations,
the 2023 DRC will offer a half-day technical short course in the area of “Two
dimensional materials for the semiconductor industry” taught by prominent
experts in the field. The 2023 DRC will also feature a rump session titled “What
makes a good device paper and how do you measure its impact?” to engage the
audience in a vigorous and open discussion on these important topics. To
encourage student engagement, the DRC gives awards every year for the Best
Student Paper Award and the Best Student Poster Award. The conference program,
including the rump session and the short course, will greatly enhance the
usefulness of the conference to all attendees. The information will be
disseminated through conference proceedings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.