* 2327057
* RI: Small: The Surprising Power of Sequential Fair Allocation Mechanisms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Yair Zick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,785.00

The research team will analyze algorithms for resource allocation in markets
without money, that is, finding mechanisms for investing in domains where the
use of money is not allowed for legal or ethical reasons. For example,
universities do not sell course seats to the highest bidder, nor do academic
peer review systems assign reviewers based on pricing mechanisms. In such cases,
centralized allocation mechanisms are used to distribute resources. To be
practical, these mechanisms need to be fast and adaptable. In addition, they
must guarantee that resources are distributed effectively (items go to those who
will benefit most from them) and fairly (individuals and groups do not receive a
disproportionately small share of benefits or take on an unfair number of
chores). The research team will investigate a simple and appealing paradigm:
sequential allocation mechanisms. In a sequential allocation mechanism, users
take actions in turns (for example, taking an unassigned item, or stealing an
item from someone else), until some desired condition is met (for example, all
items have been assigned). The research team will show that despite their simple
structure, sequential allocation mechanisms can be practically used in many
real-world problems, while offering fairness and efficiency guarantees. The
research team will investigate the types of guarantees that sequential
mechanisms offer, and the types of domains we can apply them to. The research
team will collaborate with OpenReview, an academic peer reviewing platform,
academic conference organizers, and with university administration, to test and
implement its findings.

Large-scale allocation of resources is a key problem in the design of multi-
agent systems. Researchers have developed increasingly complex algorithmic
frameworks to guarantee that the algorithms produce outcomes that are both fair
and efficient. However, the complexity of these algorithms often precludes their
practical implementation and makes them difficult to adapt to the needs of
specific problem domains. To address this shortcoming, instead of complex
algorithmic frameworks, the proposal advocates for sequential algorithmic
techniques that are easy to both implement and understand. The proposal examines
the theoretical foundations of sequential allocation mechanisms, as well as
their applications. The research team will show that the sequential approach
offers a significant computational speedup, and via careful analysis, guarantees
both fairness and efficiency. For general agent preferences, it is well-known
that achieving both fair and efficient allocations is computationally
intractable; therefore, the researcher team will focus on specific agent
preference classes, with a particular focus on submodular valuations. Submodular
functions naturally arise in a variety of economic domains; however, their
structural properties allow us to rely on fundamental combinatorial techniques,
such as matroid optimization and graph theory. The proposal will investigate
picking sequences, with a recent implementation in the OpenReview platform. The
proposal will also study sequential item transfer mechanisms (termed Yankee Swap
mechanisms), with strong fairness and efficiency guarantees in practical
domains, such as course allocation. Finally, the proposal will study a broad
sequential framework that handles more complex submodular valuation classes,
including the fair allocation of chores (such as work shifts). The techniques
developed through this proposal have broad applications in a variety of resource
allocation domains, for example, conference paper reviewer assignment, work
shift allocation, and course assignment systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.