* 2327505
* EAGER: Mechanistic and Stability Studies over Dual-Function Materials for CO2 Capture and Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Ana Alba-Rubio, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 260,000.00

The project investigates the chemical reaction of carbon dioxide (CO2), a
greenhouse gas, with hydrogen (H2) to produce methanol for either energy
generation (via methanol fuel cells) or use as a platform chemical for the
synthesis of a wide range of fuel and chemical products. Novel features
associated with this Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project include 1) exploring a reaction engineering approach involving cyclic
CO2 capture-conversion enabled by dual reactors and 2) incorporating new
experimental capabilities allowing research at high pressures characteristic of
commercial reactors. More broadly, the project investigates a strategy to close
the carbon cycle by in-situ capture of produced CO2 and its conversion with H2
(obtained from water using sustainable energy) to methanol.

The EAGER project is a spinoff from the investigator's CAREER project. The
CAREER project is focused on the synthesis and evaluation of dual-function
materials (DFMs) capable of both capturing and converting CO2, with
corresponding benefits of avoiding energy demands, corrosion, and transportation
issues associated with CO2 capture and sequestration. The project fulfills the
EAGER criteria in that the transformative potential is weighed against the
inherent risk associated with kinetic and thermodynamic challenges in converting
waste CO2 to methanol and other high-value molecules. The project thus provides
an entry point to circularity in low- or net-zero greenhouse gas production of
chemicals and fuels. For example, in the fuel case, the combustion of methanol
(or derivative fuel products) will generate CO2 that can be cycled back to
methanol via the starting reaction. The project will develop methods to conduct
CO2 capture-conversion cyclic studies in such a way that the CO2 capture takes
place in the first reactor while the conversion occurs in the second one, with
switching every few minutes. From an energetic point of view, the system
benefits from operation under isothermal and isobaric conditions. The project is
enhanced by technical expertise brought by an experienced post-doctoral
associate, who will be mentored by the PI in developing leadership and project
management skills needed for a successful independent research career.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.