* 2327975
* Conference: Metals in Biology Gordon Research Conference and Bioinorganic Chemistry Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Rebeca Fernandez, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 7,500.00

Bioinorganic Chemistry Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) “Metals in Biology Gordon
Research Conference and Bioinorganic Chemistry Gordon Research Seminar” will be
held on January 19-22, 2024, Ventura, CA. This seminar is associated with the
Metals in Biology Gordon Research Conference (MIB GRC), programmed for January
21-26, 2024. GRCs are organized to facilitate the presentation, sharing, and
discussion of the most recent and exciting scientific advances in a field. The
long-term goals of this seminar are to foster interactions and collaborations
among the graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who share common
research interests. To accomplish this, these meetings are relatively small
(usually less than 200 participants) and have built-in unstructured time for
conferees to meet for further discussion. Furthermore, ample discussion time is
scheduled after each talk, and knowledgeable and dynamic leaders are carefully
chosen to lead and facilitate discussions. The meeting agenda includes ample
time for discussion at oral and poster presentations and flexible time for
informal discussions among attendees. The presentation of new, unpublished
results is emphasized to ensure that forefront science is highlighted. The
Metals in Biology community is committed to equity and inclusion and will
advance these goals in the meeting organization and process. The meeting will
include a Power Hour for the discussion of promoting underrepresented minorities
advancement in science, and early-career speakers will be included in the
program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.