* 2327627
* CAS-SC: Thermally Switchable Organic Solvents for Targeted Harvesting of Lithium Ions from Alkali Metal Cations Mixtures in Hypersaline Brines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ngai Yin Yip, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 175,000.00

Developing new technologies to extract lithium from unconventional sources more
efficiently and sustainably will enable the production and reuse of domestic
lithium resources. Lithium can be found in geothermal brines and other
unconventional sources such as oil and gas production waste streams. However,
the lithium-ion concentration in these brines is much lower than other ions like
sodium, potassium, and magnesium. Separating lithium from these brines is
challenging because lithium is chemically similar to other alkali metal cations,
including sodium and potassium. This project aims to advance a sustainable
chemistry-based approach for extracting lithium ions from aqueous brines. The
project will have several beneficial outcomes, including developing energy-
efficient processes to recover and recycle critical minerals from waste,
improving the efficiency of at-scale separation methods, using renewable energy
more efficiently to drive separation processes, and finding sustainable
alternatives to processes that rely on expensive and toxic chemicals. These
advancements in lithium separation will have a transformative effect on energy
security by increasing lithium production from conventional sources, unlocking
lithium resources from unconventional sources, and making the recycling and
reuse of existing lithium more economically viable. Additionally, the project
includes educational and research components to train and prepare high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in STEM subjects.

This project aims to understand the fundamental governing phenomena in
switchable solvent extraction for ion-selective brine mining. The research
integrates physical chemistry thermodynamic principles with bulk-phase
experimental characterizations to improve selective ion separations. The
specific project objectives are to: 1) establish the principal ion properties
governing competitive partitioning behavior in biphasic mixtures of switchable
solvents and hypersaline brines, 2) determine the intrinsic solvent structure-
property relationship and ion-specific selectivity performance, and 3) formulate
a thermodynamically-rigorous physical chemistry framework for a priori
determination of ion activity coefficients in multicomponent biphasic systems.
The research plan will systematically elucidate the underlying mechanisms of
preferential ion partitioning in biphasic systems of oleo-solvents and multi-
electrolyte aqueous brines. These mechanistic insights will inform future direct
lithium extraction technology advancements. The project’s educational activities
include (i) developing modules for K–12 education and public outreach, (ii)
enhancing undergraduate and graduate courses, (iii) providing undergraduate
research opportunities, and (iv) actively recruiting, mentoring, and advocating
for underrepresented groups in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.