* 2327427
* SaTC: CORE: Small: An evaluation framework and methodology to streamline Hardware Performance Counters as the next-generation malware detection system
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Marcus Botacin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2026
* USD 175,062.00

Most Internet users use Antivirus software (AVs) to protect themselves against
Malicious Software (malware). However, current AVs still present limitations,
such as slowing down the system's regular operation to search for malware. This
slowdown often causes users to turn AVs off, thus exposing themselves to risk.
To reduce the performance impact, some AVs opt to only partially scan the
system. Although it mitigates performance penalties, it exposes users to risks.
In this scenario, it is key to develop faster AVs. A promising avenue to develop
faster AVs is to move them from software to hardware, such that the AV becomes
an integral part of the computer and it scans the system in parallel with its
execution. This project investigates what is the best way to design a hardware-
based AV. The project’s novelties are (i) a formal methodology to evaluate which
parts of the system better indicate the presence of malware; and (ii) the
release of a simulation tool to prototype hardware-based AVs in an easy manner.
The project's broader significance and importance are (i) to provide scientists
with a formal methodology to evaluate hardware AVs; (ii) to provide industry and
developers with a prototyping solution to create their AV products; and (iii) to
create conditions to protect the society against malware attacks via the next-
generation AVs.

This project investigates the application of Hardware Performance Counters
(HPCs) in the design of AVs. HPC application is investigated from three
different aspects: (i) the hypothesis of architectures with an unlimited number
of HPCs to attest HPC viability for malware detection and the determination of
the minimum number of HPCs required for an actual CPU design; (ii) the
investigation on HPC susceptibility to Mimicry attacks via the development of
compiler extensions to automatically create code diversity; and (iii) the
development of explainable artificial intelligence models to teach humans how
attacks are detected at HPC level. The source code for all tools developed in
this project is open-source.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.