* 2327457
* Conference: Strong Coupling with Organic Molecules (SCOM-23)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Wei Xiong, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2024
* USD 5,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

This award is to support the 2023 Strong Coupling with Organic Molecules 2023
Conference, to be held June 20 through 22, 2023, in San Diego, California. The
conference will provide an important platform within the U.S. for the efficient
exchange of ideas in the burgeoning field of molecular polaritonics. Polaritons
are unique electronic state arising from strong coupling of electromagnetic
waves with a material with an electric or magnetic dipole when optically
excited. This will be the first time that the conference will be held in the
United States, providing an opportunity to the leadership of the U.S. in the
scientific discourse of the field. The event will showcase recent progress and
challenges in the field, generate a cohesive community of researchers, and
promote the exploitation of strong light-matter interactions to control the
physicochemical properties of molecular materials. This award will provide
support for early career scientists to attend the meeting and benefit from
discussions and presentation of their work.

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

This conference will serve as an important platform for the efficient exchange
of ideas in the burgeoning field of molecular polaritonics. The event will
showcase recent progress and challenges in the field, contribute to generating a
cohesive community of researchers, and promote the exploitation of strong light-
matter interactions to control the electronic and photonic properties of
molecular materials. Molecular polaritonics have already demonstrated control of
energy transduction and novel macroscopic quantum coherent phenomena such as
room-temperature Bose-Einstein condensates. Many of the mechanisms that underlie
these phenomena remain unknown, and significant advances are needed on both the
theoretical and experimental sides to develop robust technologies based on
molecular polaritons. In particular, the processes of controlling energy
transduction by polaritonics and quantum logic operations by polariton
condensates hold great. Overall, this conference aims to address the challenges
and prospects of the field of polaritonics and foster development of next
generation optoelectronic and photonic materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.