* 2327738
* SHF: SMALL:Dependency Tracking and Dependent Types
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Stephanie Weirich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 11/30/2026
* USD 540,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to improve the expressiveness of
dependently-typed programming language. The project's novelties are the use of
dependency tracking as a mechanism for extending existing type systems with new
capabilities. These new type systems will form the basis for the extensions of
existing programming languages and the designs of future ones. The project's
impact will be to increase the expressiveness of the development time checking
performed by programming environments during software construction. Dependent
type systems offer significant promise as a component of software developer's
toolbox. However, their integration into the programming process is not without
difficulties. This project addresses several issues that arise in the context of
this design, including efficient compilation, expressiveness, and amenability to
automation. Broader impacts of the project include lectures at the NSF-supported
Oregon Programming Languages Summer School; collaborations with type system
designers in industry; and talks at industrial venues and developer conferences.
Contributions to Broadening Participation in Computing are achieved through
training a diverse cohort of undergraduate students in a departmental Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites project.

The project will investigate the integration of dependency tracking with
dependent type systems. In particular, it will explore how this mechanism can be
applied to the design of dependently-typed programming languages and study how
the features of dependently-typed programming languages can enable more
expressive forms of type-based dependency analysis. In particular, this project
targets applications of dependency analysis designed to track relevance,
termination, decidability, and data structure layout. The results of each of
these analyses benefit the development of dependently- typed programs, making
them faster, safer, more automatic and easier to compile. The type systems
developed during the course of this project will be rigorously evaluated through
the creation of mechanical proofs of correctness and through experiments with an
implementation of the novel type system. All proofs and software produced in the
course of the project will be made publicly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.