* 2327863
* Computer Science Teacher Professional Development Passport Alliance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Monica McGill, COMPUTER SCIENCE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,388,786.00

The Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) in collaboration with
CSEdResearch.org and the American Institutes for Research (AIR) will develop an
alliance to track participation in PreK-12 Computer Science (CS) teacher
Professional Development (PD) experiences. To prepare students to learn CS
skills and competencies needed to thrive in modern society, it is critical to
support PK-12 CS teachers with PD experiences. There has been a lack of
consistent tracking of participation and outcomes for individual CS teachers
across CS education research projects. An alliance of three leading CS education
organizations will develop a CS PD Passport system to address this major
infrastructure challenge, allowing us to more accurately answer questions like
“How many unique PK-12 teachers have engaged in NSF-funded computer science PD
opportunities?” and “What are the demographics of PK-12 teachers who have
engaged in computer science NSF-funded PD opportunities?” Teachers will benefit
from having a common place for record for validated participation in CS PD,
which can be used to prove completion of PD for continuing education credits,
highlight skills for future employers, and unlock access to more advance PD
opportunities. PD providers will benefit from simplified reporting and better
target recruitment of participants, especially when seeking to work with
teachers who teach historically marginalized in CS. Ultimately, the Alliance
aims for a world where widespread adoption of the PD Passport leads to state
departments of education and school districts using this platform to implement
new teacher certification pathways and continuing professional development
credit requirements.

Over three years, the project will fulfill three primary goals: (1) develop and
pilot a system for NSF-funded CS education research projects to report their PD
characteristics, participating teacher demographics, and other data identified
through research and evaluation; (2) create a PD passport system that PK-12 CS
teachers can use as part of their professional portfolio; and (3) identify and
support the conditions necessary for sustaining the PD Passport beyond the life
of the grant. The Alliance aims to develop a system that teachers, PD providers,
and NSF find useful, usable, findable, valuable, accessible, and credible.
Research will utilize a user design framework to define user considerations and
functional requirements, challenges and implications related to data privacy,
and building trust with users. Formative and summative evaluation will involve
semi-structured focus groups and usability testing with both teachers and CS PD
providers from NSF-funded projects, extant data analyses, and an advisory board
of CS education and research evaluation methodology experts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.