* 2327509
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Maximizing Coding Gain in Coded Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Emina Soljanin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2026
* USD 375,000.00

Artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms rely on parallel,
distributed computing systems to efficiently carry out intricate, data-heavy
tasks. A significant challenge in designing large-scale distributed computing
systems is addressing the unpredictable variations in service times across
multiple servers. Computing redundancy, such as task replication, is a promising
powerful tool to curtail the overall variability in service time. This project
focuses on the intelligent management of redundancy in distributed computing
that will affect the execution efficiency of data-intensive algorithms in large-
scale systems. The project will quantify redundancy benefits, pivotal to
developing and ultimately deploying efficient redundancy schemes for executing
artificial intelligence and machine learning workloads. The educational goal of
the project includes stimulating students' interest in applied probability and
mathematical modeling and developing hands-on labs on cloud computing
infrastructure. The project will contribute to the Research Experiences for
Undergraduate and High School students and will recruit and mentor women and
members of underrepresented groups.

This project considers distributed computing systems that use replication and
erasure coding to reduce job execution times. The project aims to maximize the
gain of using computing redundancy (coding gain) in practical scenarios. It
complements recent work on redundancy in distributed systems, focusing primarily
on designing redundancy schemes using erasure codes. The project will use
statistical analysis and queueing and coding theories to make the following
contributions: (i) characterization of the crucial effects of using redundancy
in distributed computing, including analysis of the benefits and costs of
redundancy; (ii) new mathematical models that capture the performance of
distributed computing systems with stragglers; (iii) new analysis tools for
computing coding gain in coded computing systems; (iv) development of redundancy
management algorithms; (v) characterization of the diversity vs. parallelism
trade-off; and (vi) addressing other critical issues in coded computing that do
not exist in the better-understood replication solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.