* 2327867
* Transitions: Adopting a Protein Biochemistry Approach to Mechanistic Understanding of RNA Buffering
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Leslie Sieburth, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 749,978.00

This project will investigate a novel regulatory mechanism called RNA buffering
that maintains messenger RNAs (mRNA) at stable abundances despite changes in
their rates of synthesis and decay. Traditionally, mRNA abundances are thought
to depend primarily on the strength of synthesis (transcription) with a minor
influence of decay, but the mechanism and impact of dynamic RNA buffering on
gene expression is unclear. RNA buffering was discovered in yeast and has only
recently been demonstrated in multicellular organisms. This project will
investigate RNA buffering in the plant model Arabidopsis thaliana. Studying this
phenomenon is important because it challenges conventional views of how gene
expression is regulated, and because its prevalence is not known. The resulting
knowledge could help advance biotechnology (e.g., RNA buffering might interfere
with strategies to manipulate gene expression, such as engineering crop
resistance or production of pharmaceuticals). This project will also offer
training opportunities to undergraduates, and yield new educational materials on
RNA biology for students at the University of Utah and Salt Lake Community
college, and for an online platform (learn.genetics).

To discover how mRNAs are selected for RNA buffering, and how cells coordinate
changes in transcription and decay rates that involve communication between the
nucleus and cytoplasm, this project will explore the protein-protein and
protein-RNA interactions involved. Genetic and biochemical experiments will be
performed to identify and characterize proteins that interact with mRNA decay
components implicated in RNA buffering (e.g., VARICOSE protein), and candidates
will be tested and validated for their roles in RNA buffering through loss-of-
function mutational studies. In addition to research outcomes, the project will
also develop instructional materials on RNA biology for the learn.genetics
platform that is a widely used resource for education by schools and the broader
community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.