* 2327374
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Methane Dynamics Described Through the Fusion of Site and Satellite Data in Bottomland Hardwood Forested and Non-forested Wetlands
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Bassil El-Masri, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 291,335.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project will provide a fellowship to an Associate Professor and
training for a graduate student at Murray State University. This work will be
conducted in collaboration with researchers at NASA Ames Research Center.
Through the fellowship, the PI aims to study the effects of changing climate on
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in wetland ecosystems. The main goal of this
fellowship is to better understand the dynamics of GHGs within wetland
ecosystems by measuring GHG fluxes in mineral soil forested wetlands that are
not well studied. The project will aim to improve the detection of GHG emissions
from wetlands using satellites, reduce uncertainties in the GHG fluxes across
larger spatial extents, and validate satellite-based GHG emission data. The
project design allows for the quantification of GHG fluxes from all major pools
(i.e., soils, stems, knees), and for the investigation of soil-vegetation
interactions. The fellowship will strengthen the principal investigatorâ€™s
ability to attract diverse students (women, first-generation, and minority
students) to the field and provide them with opportunities to develop the
research skills that can lead them to successful future careers. In addition,
the fellowship will have a broader impact on the jurisdiction.

Forested ecosystem carbon flux dynamics have a tremendous impact on global
climate. In this project, the PI will extend knowledge of carbon dynamics by
establishing a new site for measuring GHGs fluxes in mineral soil forested
wetlands that are not well studied. The overarching objectives are to (1)
improve understanding of the controls on GHG fluxes in mineral soil wetlands,
and (2) to better understand the effects of landscape position and forest
composition on the GHG fluxes between terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere.
The proposed methodology is designed to use both empirical measurements to
identify hot spots and hot moments of GHG fluxes in these systems and improve
regional GHG predictions. The strategy of linking the field campaign with remote
sensing activities is aimed at providing new insights into the mapping of the
controls of mineral soil wetland CH4 fluxes. NASA Ames Research Center (ARC)
facilities will be essential for the processing and analysis of the satellite
imagery needed to accomplish the task of fellowship. Furthermore, host
collaborators will offer experience in methane modeling using remote sensing,
flux tower, and field observations as input variables. The PI will be advised in
the research associated with aquatic system satellite and airborne remote
sensing expertise as well as associated aligned aquatic field observations to
assist in accomplishing the proposed tasks. The information gained from this
fellowship will provide insights about drivers of tree stem and bald cypress
knees GHG emissions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.