* 2327418
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence in Science Communication: Promoting Identity Development and Equitable Student Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Garcia, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 345,084.00

This postdoctoral fellowship research project plans to explore student usage of
AI-based technological tools, such as ChatGPT, in the context of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) learning and investigate
students’ identity development while advancing their scientific communication
skills, a necessary competency for all STEM professional pathways. The emergence
of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, such as ChatGPT, is sparking
disruptions in how students are learning in college spaces and developing skills
to compete in a global economy. In particular, the underrepresentation of
minoritized groups in STEM is an ongoing challenge and will likely be impacted
by the use of AI. These challenges inspire the investigation and awareness of
systemic inequities amid the development of new teaching and learning
approaches. Notably, the current literature in STEM education does not extend to
students’ use of AI or AI’s role in identity development. To improve STEM
education and reduce STEM disparities, this project will examine the use of
artificial intelligence within STEM learning and its impact on students’
identity development. Moreover, it is vital that the experiences of students
from underrepresented groups are taken into account while new AI technology is
developed and used in STEM educational and professional contexts. Accordingly,
an important milestone in addressing STEM disparities and broadening
participation is to develop an evidence base for equitable instructional
approaches for the use of these tools in STEM teaching and learning. To this
end, this project will investigate and provide evidence to inform guidelines on
the use of AI learning tools, such as ChatGPT, in science curricula with a focus
on promoting STEM identity development and equitable student learning with AI.

Two quantitative-qualitative experiments will be conducted to determine how
experiences in science communication impact students’ competencies, confidence,
and identity development in a communication-intensive STEM course and how
students are using AI tools in scientific communication, and those tools' impact
on students' science identity development. The quantitative experiments will
assess students’ perceived science identity as STEM professionals and science
communicators as well as students’ perceived science communication training. The
qualitative experiments will assess students’ experiences with confidence,
competency, and identity development through the process of the writing format,
use of AI, and scientific writing and science communication. Providing more
detailed information on how students use AI and its effects on identity
development within STEM will support positive and lasting changes in STEM
courses and offer insight into equitable instructional features that
specifically support minoritized students in STEM, their science identity
development, and their access to evolving technology.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.