* 2327609
* CSR: Small: Squeezing More Performance Out of Distributed Storage Systems With a Transparent Ordering-Control Layer
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Haonan Lu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 580,736.00

Distributed storage systems are a fundamental enabler of today’s web
applications, which are ubiquitous in people’s daily lives and have an
unparalleled impact on society. In principle, academic research should be able
to directly benefit these systems, playing a vital role in improving social
welfare. However, existing research innovations rarely reach production. This
proposal designs novel techniques to improve the performance of deployed systems
without having to change their codebase, and thus ensures ease of adoption which
leads to direct practical impacts. The proposed research will advance the state
of the art in the design of distributed storage systems and help with the
translation of academic innovations into practical deployments. The project will
build STEM talent and broaden participation by training both undergraduate and
graduate students, providing research opportunities for underrepresented groups,
and inspiring curriculum design that integrates teaching and research.

This project aims to understand the impact of request ordering on the
performance of concurrency control and replication, which are two critical
components of distributed storage systems, and design solutions that improve the
system's performance without having to change its currently deployed concurrency
control and replication techniques. The scope of this project includes
distributed transactions, consistency models, concurrency control, and
replication. The project will take an experiment-driven approach to understand
the implication of request ordering on system performance and develop new
designs by leveraging request ordering. The project will evaluate the solutions
at scale against state-of-the-art techniques and make their details publicly
available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.