* 2327158
* Substrate-borne noise and its impacts on spider behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Damian Elias, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,533,393.00

This project will study the impact of human created noise, here road traffic, on
animal behavior. Noise has been shown to be a significant problem for animals,
whether they be birds, deer, humans, or arthropods like insects and spiders. The
investigator will examine the effects of road traffic noise on one of the most
common animals on earth, spiders. Spiders, as predators and even plant
pollinators, play an important role in maintaining healthy ecosystems and
virtually nothing is known about how road noise affects them. This project will
explore how road noise levels relate to which species of spider, how many
individuals, and the locations where spiders are found. The team will also work
with National Park Service scientists to develop tools to estimate noise levels
across national parks. Using laboratory experiments, the investigator will also
examine the ways that noise affects spider behavior and how different groups,
based on how they communicate, may or may not be able to deal with road noise
traffic. In the past few years, studies have shown rapid declines in arthropods
across the globe and this project has direct implications to conservation.
Finally, the project team will study how to effectively promote arthropod
conservation to the general public.

Noise has multiple deleterious effects across taxa, much of it mediated through
behavior. The investigator will examine the effects of noise, particularly
substrate-borne noise, on spider behavior. Like the vast majority of
invertebrates, spiders use substrate-borne vibrations to guide behaviors such as
mating, and anthropogenic noise is hypothesized to interfere with these
behaviors. The project team will first measure a ubiquitous noise source, road
traffic, to map air- and substrate-borne noise in the field. Next, the project
team will conduct behavioral studies with different species that vary in the
ways they produce acoustic signals. The project team will conduct studies
investigating (1) how noise impacts mating behavior, (2) the ability to modulate
behavior in response to noise, and (3) how experience with noise effects this
ability. The hypothesis that anthropogenic noise (particularly substrate-borne
noise) will negatively impact mating and that the ability to respond to noise is
related to how species produce their signals will be tested. Linking field and
laboratory studies will allow the investigator to test one potential mechanism
driving the documented losses in arthropod biodiversity and the cascading
effects of this on biodiversity. In addition to these research goals, the
project team will also (1) collaborate with National Park Service scientists to
build tools to estimate substrate-borne noise, (2) explore strategies to promote
invertebrate conservation by examining the viewpoints of different stakeholders
to invertebrates, and (3) develop outreach and curriculum materials for K-12
students using spiders aimed at teaching fundamental principles in arthropod
biology and conservation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.