* 2327460
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Investigation of Two-Phase Aerosol Formation, Transport, and Deposition in Aerosol Jet Printing for Submicron Manufacturing of Printed Electronic Devices
* O/D,OIA
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Roozbeh "Ross" Salary, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 293,493.00

This project will provide a fellowship to an Assistant professor, and a graduate
student at the Marshall University Research Corporation (Marshall) to conduct
research in collaboration with researchers at the NASA Marshall Space Flight
Center in Alabama. Through the fellowship, the PI aims to identify the key
phenomena behind the aerodynamics of aerosols jet printing that affect material
deposition and thus the resolution of device fabrication. The U.S. semiconductor
industry is a major economic driver, making up 10% of the nation's manufacturing
sector and contributing over $250 billion a year in value to the U.S. economy.
Semiconductor devices support a wide range of applications, such as fifth-
generation (5G) communications, artificial intelligence, high-performance
computing, security, and local/remote sensing. Commercial markets, such as the
Internet-of-Things, have significantly increased the need for semiconductor-
based products. Also, the rapid adoption of new, more powerful technologies is
driving demand for additional semiconductor production capacity in the U.S.
Additionally, there is a burgeoning need for "high-resolution" device
fabrication to fulfill today's performance characteristics, such as low power
consumption, fast switching speeds, and increased computing power. Aerosol jet
printing (AJP) has emerged as a high-resolution, direct-write manufacturing
method for fabrication of a broad spectrum of electronics, such as sensors,
optoelectronic devices, and fine-pitch electronics. However, despite recent
advances in the AJP technology and formulation of novel functional mate-rials,
"submicron" fabrication of electronic devices has encountered serious challenges
due largely to the intrinsic limitations and complexity behind the underlying
physics of AJP process. There is, therefore, a critical need to identify the
link between the governing physical phenomena and the resolution of AJP toward
submicron device fabrication beyond today's limits.

The longterm goal of this project is to contribute toward submicron direct-write
fabrication of printed electronic devices. In pursuit of this goal, the overall
objective of the project is to identify the key phenomena behind the
aerodynamics of AJP that affect the resolution of material deposition and
ultimately device fabrication. The proposed research plan is based on advanced
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models, followed by experimental
characterization of the resolution of aerosol deposition carried out at NASA's
Marshall Space Flight Center. The computational models include not only the 3D
geometry of various AJP deposition heads with different aerosol handling
mechanisms, but also the processes of turbulent aerosol atomization, transport,
and deposition. The contribution of this research project will be significant
because it is expected: (i) to identify the key aerodynamic phenomena
influencing feature size and therefore the resolution of material deposition in
AJP, and (ii) to pave the way for submicron direct-write fabrication of
semiconductor electronic devices (not feasible today). This project will
significantly enhance the device fabrication capability of the U.S., will
strengthen the U.S. semiconductor industry, and consequently will contribute to
the enhancement of national prosperity, security, and U.S. leadership in
manufacturing. In addition, NASA will be able to design, manufacture, and test
novel AJP deposition heads on the basis of the established computational models
as well as experimental observations of the AJP aerodynamics. Furthermore, this
project will reduce the scientific barriers that limit direct-write additive
manufacturing and will catalyze new manufacturing capabilities that have not
been materialized today.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.