* 2327966
* Collaborative Research: Very High Heat-flux Cooling through Stable Energy-Efficient Macro-scale Partial Flow-boiling Using Microstructured Surfaces and Ultrasonics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Siddhartha Das, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 100,000.00

The urgent demand for high power-density electronic devices in various
industries has created a pressing need for efficient and cost-effective cooling
solutions. One promising approach is the utilization of advanced and stable
flow-boiling processes, employing environmentally friendly dielectric fluids
with low boiling temperatures (40-50 deg C) near atmospheric pressures, and
relatively small operating temperature differences between the maximum allowable
chip temperatures and the cooling dielectric fluid. This project will
demonstrate an efficient cooling strategy by employing highly stable and energy-
efficient partial flow-boiling of Novec/3M-engineered fluids at high heat fluxes
(50 - 200 W/cm2 or more). The proposed approach will involve fluid-filled
microstructured surfaces that undergo special structural and sub-structural
micro-nano-scale vibrations, consuming very small amounts of energy. An
attractive benefit of this approach is the generation of significantly higher
pressure vapor (2-3 times more than other approaches), enabling significant
waste heat recovery from cooling heat exchangers: allowing these phenomena, when
scaled to large systems (such as data centers), to recover a large portion of
the waste heat (e.g., 200 TWh globally from data centers alone) as clean
electricity.

The proposed research will leverage the stable energy-efficient cooling
performance of partial flow-boiling in a millimeter-scale heat sink with a
fluid-filled microstructured boiling surface for enhanced nucleate boiling
(ENB). This proposal will deliver on achieving significant and sustainable
vaporization rates within the heterogeneously nucleated bubbles by leveraging
the acoustothermal effects caused by piezo-induced ultra-sonic micro-vibrations
of the sub-structures (i.e. of mesh wires at frequency: 1-10 MHz; amplitude:
nm/µm range), with superposed amplitude modulations at sonic frequencies ranging
from 100 to 10,000 Hz and resulting in µm-scale amplitudes. The sonic
frequencies will promote efficient and resonant structural micro-vibrations,
alternately enhancing both liquid rewetting and the removal of micro-bubbles
from the microstructured boiling region, allowing them to transition into the
macro-scale two-phase flow within the heat sink. Hence, ENB will be achieved
through the synergistic combination of resonant and energy-efficient structural
and sub-structural micro-vibrations. Furthermore, the additional heating induced
by this approach will generate high pressures within the vapor that can be
harnessed to develop new waste heat recovery technologies. This proposal,
therefore, with the potential to develop novel energy-efficient and environment-
friendly cooling solutions for high-power density devices as well as strategies
for improved waste heat recovery will have significant applications in data
centers and the hybrid electric vehicle market. Furthermore, the project will
foster university-industry collaborations, facilitate human resources
development through student mentoring, and contribute to promoting diversity and
inclusiveness within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.