* 2327344
* EAGER: GOALI: Explicating the gas-surface coupled reaction in oxidative coupling of methane via reaction kinetics, operando spectroscopy, photoionization spectrometry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Jonas Baltrusaitis, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Methane is the major component of natural gas, and while catalysts and processes
that convert it directly to higher-value hydrocarbons have long been sought,
none have achieved widespread industrial application. This Early-concept Grant
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses one of those technologies –
Oxidative Coupling of Methane (OCM) – to generate fundamental insights that have
potential to overcome barriers to commercialization. OCM offers scalable
technology that would utilize methane more efficiently, and with lower net
carbon emissions than current technology, thus supporting the U.S. transition to
sustainable energy, while ensuring energy security. Beyond the technical
aspects, the project includes several on-going educational and outreach
activities at the investigators’ institution. The project addresses several
knowledge gaps in catalytic OCM technology: 1) lack of understanding of how the
catalyst, as opposed to the gas phase reactions, couples with the reactant
species to activate methane and generate radical species, 2) which reaction mode
(heterogeneous or gas phase) controls selectivity to desired versus undesired
products, and 3) what are preferred catalyst and reactor designs for converting
methane selectively to value-added ethane and ethylene (i.e., C2) products.
Collaboration with scientists at Sandia National Labs is key to addressing those
challenges. Specifically, the investigators will utilize a novel reaction
chamber at Sandia National Labs for probing radical species in the near-surface
region of a catalyst. The instrumentation has previously been used for
identification of gas phase radical species in pure gas phase combustion studies
(utilizing vacuum-ultraviolet photoionization mass spectrometry (VUV-PIMS)).
Kinetic and mechanistic details of the high-temperature OCM reaction have eluded
prior investigators because of lack of experimental capability to quantitatively
interrogate the coupling between the catalyst and gas phase species as related
to the surface generation of radical species and subsequent reaction of those
species in the gas phase. The Sandia instrumentation has the potential to take
mechanistic and kinetic aspects of catalyzed OCM to new levels of understanding.
The kinetic data (as related to both surface and gas-phase reactions) will be
fed into reactor design models (developed by a collaborator at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) to identify catalyst and reactor designs that
favor high conversion of methane selectively to C2 hydrocarbon species. In a
separate thrust the GOALI partner PCI, Inc will conduct a thousand-hour
durability evaluation of the state-of-the-art catalyst under industrial
operating conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.