* 2327799
* Collaborative Research: IHBEM: The fear of here: Integrating place-based travel behavior and detection into novel infectious disease models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Nicholas Kortessis, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 181,932.00

When people change where, when, and why they travel, there are effects on
infectious diseases. People’s movements determine who is at risk of the disease
and whether new cases are counted by local public health agencies. For example,
during the COVID-19 pandemic, people’s movements changed drastically and, in
addition to COVID-19, influenza and Lyme disease cases also dropped nationwide.
These drops in cases may be because people spent less time in high risk areas,
or simply because people traveled to healthcare facilities less frequently, and
so fewer cases are reported. Distinguishing between these alternatives is
critical for understanding disease control and predicting disease spread, but is
made difficult when travel patterns change dramatically. This problem is
especially challenging because communities may modify travel patterns in
response to local disease, which can, in turn, change how diseases spread in
communities and how public health monitors disease. To determine the cause of
case reductions as human movements changed, the Investigators will develop new
mathematical models that account for the ways travel impacts both risk and
detection, using data from mobile phones to inform transmission risk and using
local surveys to inform underdetection rates. By developing this new collection
of models, the Investigators will better understand how transmission and
detection of various non-COVID-19 infections changed throughout the pandemic,
recognize how this depends on the biology of the disease being considered, and
predict how case numbers may change during future periods of significant
community-level changes in travel.

Community-level travel patterns have multifactorial effects on the dynamics of
any infectious disease. Major changes to travel patterns affect both
transmission, as people spend more or less time in high-risk places, and
detection, as people change their propensity to visit healthcare facilities.
These factors also influence individual behaviour, because local increases in
reported cases can cause people to change their travel further. This creates
critically important feedback loops between transmission, detection, and travel.
Depending on the interactions between these factors, changes to travel or
transmission could lead to undercounting of cases or a harmful population-level
response that leads to communities being exposed to more infections. As changes
in community-level travel patterns become more likely with global factors such
as climate change and emerging infectious disease threats, it becomes
increasingly important for models to integrate their effects on both detection
and transmission. The project addresses this need by developing novel models
that account for the ways in which travel can simultaneously affect both
transmission and detection, and be affected by reported and perceived disease
risk. The Investigators will combine the models with mobility data obtained from
SafeGraph and use local surveys to inform underdetection rates of key notifiable
diseases across the New River Valley Health District of Virginia, and to develop
a framework for predicting transmission and detection changes during future
large-scale changes in travel. Central Appalachia is a key region for this work,
as it experiences relatively high incidence of respiratory and Lyme diseases,
and intervention adherence was especially low during the later stages of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.