* 2327701
* I-Corps:  Tri-Cure Hybrid Organo-Silicon Coatings for Surface Preservation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Joseph Furgal, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of coatings for preservation, architecture, masonry, marine,
aerospace, and automotive industries. Currently employed protective coatings
often have long curing times leading to debris contamination, and typically have
a short pot life. The proposed technology is designed to provide more rapid
curing as well as storage as a one-pot solution for over one year with repeated
usage. There is a need to preserve and protect bronze plaques and lithography on
headstones. In addition, anti-fouling capabilities are of interest in the
protective and marine coatings industries. For architecture and masonry, the
proposed technology may prevent and/or reduce environmental effects on surfaces
and provide flame resistance for wooden structures ensuring future generations
will have access to these cultural experiences. For the marine industry, the
proposed coating may increase fuel efficiency by reducing adhesion and transport
of invasive marine organisms, and its graffiti resistance may limit offensive
content and decrease maintenance needs.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of silicon-based, tri-cure
coating technology. The proposed technology uses three distinct curing
methodologies to undergo a rapid (30-minute) non-impressionable surface upon
exposure to UV light (lamp or sun) that is quickly followed by secondary and
tertiary cures that occur more slowly, enhancing adhesion and stability. Test
results show that upon application, sunlight produces a non-sticky surface
within 30 minutes, with complete protection within 24 hours that lasts more than
2 years using a single coat. In addition, the stability of the base coating
solution and its recyclability reduce wasted resources. The proposed coating has
been found to provide these characteristics to a treated surface:
hydrophobicity, flame resistance and self-extinguishing, efflorescence and
oxidation resistance, fungal and Mollusca growth/attachment resistance,
microbial inhibition, anti-graffiti, and photo, thermal, and chemical stability.
It also has been shown to adhere strongly to most surfaces, is non-toxic, comes
in a single container, requires no mixing, is stable for multiple years, and may
be applied by dipping, spraying, or wiping on numerous surfaces. This may offer
a highly versatile coating to expand preservation methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.