* 2327319
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Examining how faculty awareness of systemic barriers and growth mindset influences students' belonging, self-efficacy, and success in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2024,04/30/2026
* Tiani Perkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2026
* USD 192,092.00

Traditional STEM college programs are based on cultural norms that do not
account for the experiences of students with identities that are historically
underrepresented in STEM. In practice, these norms may create hidden challenges
to underrepresented students’ success over the course of their STEM education.
This project is designed to look at college instructors as agents for change in
STEM education by studying (a) their attitudes about the flexible nature of
intelligence (i.e., growth mindset) and (b) their awareness of systemic barriers
in STEM. Combined, these attitudes could influence the ways instructors engage
in culturally relevant teaching practices and make meaning of student behaviors.
This research will be of significance in advancing knowledge about STEM learning
and learning environments that increase diversity, equity, and inclusion in
classrooms. This project also has implications for broadening participation in
STEM fields by directly studying students’ experiences as they relate to STEM
instructor’s attitudes. Overall, this research could contribute to STEM
instructor’s professional development and help to address the needs of an
increasingly diverse student population.

This study is designed to examine how STEM faculty’s awareness of systemic
barriers in STEM education and growth mindset beliefs influence undergraduate
students’ success in STEM. Existing quantitative research has not identified the
independent contributions of these faculty attitudes for their engagement with
culturally relevant teaching pedagogies, and the resulting implications for STEM
students’ outcomes. Findings from this project could provide preliminary support
that analysis of multiple dimensions of STEM faculty’s attitudes is crucial for
addressing existing challenges to underrepresented student success. This project
has three phases: 1) STEM faculty complete an online experimental survey to
examine whether their awareness of systemic bias and growth mindset influences
their causal attributions for an academically struggling underrepresented
student. 2) Faculty and student recruitment from introductory STEM college
courses to complete a survey at the beginning of the academic semester (Time 1),
and students complete a follow-up survey at the end of the academic semester
(Time 2). Findings are designed to examine whether faculty’s attitudes influence
students’ belonging, self-efficacy, and expectations for future STEM success. 3)
An online experimental design to examine whether an experimental manipulation of
a hypothetical faculty member’s attitudes will influence underrepresented and
traditional undergraduate students’ STEM interest, self-efficacy, and course
success. Additional analysis will also be conducted in each study to explore
differences by faculty and student race, gender, social class, and sexuality.
This research could have important implications for STEM education by
illuminating the influence of these attitudes for faculty’s causal attributions
of academically struggling students; the direct implications for students’
classroom experiences; and students’ resulting attitudes about STEM. Overall,
this research is designed to transform STEM education research by highlighting
the critical roles of both individual and systemic factors for undergraduate
student success.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.