* 2327493
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Process-Structure-Property Relationship of the Hybrid Manufactured Multifunctional Mechano-Luminescence-Optoelectronic Fibers
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Donghyeon Ryu, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,807.00

A health monitoring wearable has been considered as one of the promising
technological solutions to better understand how the human body behaves for
health diagnosis/prognosis, fitness improvement, and human-machine interaction.
However, the state-of-the-arts suffer from the battery-dependent external energy
supply. This project aims to provide a technological breakthrough with the
multifunctional mechano-luminescence-optoelectronic (MLO) fiber that is self-
powered for strain sensing and generates electrical energy via two-step
mechanical-radiant-electrical energy conversion. Additionally, this project aims
to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare and to secure the
national defense by promoting the progress of science through in-depth
understanding of the process-structure-property (PSP) relationship of the MLO
fiber’s functional building blocks. The gained knowledge can help enhance human
presence in space. This project can provide opportunities for students
underrepresented in STEM at New Mexico Tech (NMT) by visiting NASA Ames Research
Center (ARC) to work with world-renowned scientists in cutting-edge facilities
on the novel research topics and potentially work for NASA. Also, a
transdisciplinary graduate course will be created at NMT on a topic of advanced
manufacturing with an emphasis on the PSP relationship. The project is
envisioned to contribute to four key industries in New Mexico, including
Aerospace & Defense, Biosciences, Intelligent Manufacturing, and Sustainable &
Green Energy.

In this project, in collaboration with Dr. Koehne at NASA ARC, the PI aims to
advance knowledge in the PSP relationship of the functional building blocks of
the MLO fibers that are fabricated using a hybrid manufacturing. The MLO fibers
are composed of two functional building blocks: 1) mechano-luminescent (ML)
copper-doped zinc sulfide (ZnS:Cu) and 2) mechano-optoelectronic
poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). In the design of the MLO fiber, the mechanical-
radiant and radiant-electrical energy conversions of the ML ZnS:Cu and MO P3HT,
respectively, are coupled to generate direct current (DC) when exposed to
external mechanical stimuli. The generated DC varies with a strain and a strain
rate, which makes the MLO fiber multifunctional to perform as a self-powered
strain sensor and a mechanical-radiant-electrical energy harvester. Knowledge
can be acquired about how the MO P3HT that are deposited in thin film using air-
brushing form lamellae and exhibit MO properties. Also, the PI expects to
uncover the light emission mechanism of the ML phosphors that are embedded in
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) under mechanical deformation and how the ML light
emission is affected by the profile (e.g., shape, size, and doping
concentration) of the ML microparticles and related to a strain and a strain
rate. In addition, single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) will be used for
designing the nano-structures of P3HT to attain target functionalities. The PI
plans two research tasks on PSP studies on MO P3HT-SWNT and ML ZnS:Cu-PDMS to
conduct at NASA ARC during three-month summer visits in Y1 and Y2. Also, before
each summer visit, preliminary studies will be conducted at NMT for accumulating
database to be used for designing nano-/micro-structures of the MO and ML
functional building blocks through molecular dynamics modeling and simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.