* 2327844
* IHBEM: Using socioeconomic, behavioral and environmental data to understand disease dynamics: exploring COVID-19 outcomes in Oklahoma
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Tao Hu, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2026
* USD 425,713.00

One of the most critical modern challenges is to better understand the where,
why and how oflarge disease outbreak occurrence. Research shows that the
frequency of large disease outbreaks is increasing over time globally, and yet
differences in outcomes remain poorly understood. This research will explore the
factors that drove variation in COVID-19 outcomes across the counties and
metropolitan areas of Oklahoma, particularly which areas had more or fewer cases
than would be expected based on their overall population size. The investigators
will look at both environmental factors, such as weather patterns and air
quality, and socioeconomic factors such as numbers of doctors and differences in
the proportion of individuals that were willing to be vaccinated. The
investigators will also conduct surveys of individual across the state to try
and better understand why people made the healthcare choices that they did and
how behavior drove differences in outcomes. Understanding all of these factors
requires a team with diverse expertise. Traditionally, most mathematical and
quantitative models for disease dynamics have been developed and studied by
mathematicians, ecologists, and computer scientists. However, understanding
differences in attitudes towards health care measures and how they originate is
more the purview of social scientists and historians. By building a team of
collaborators spanning all of these disciplines, the research team will be able
to build a more complete picture of COVID-19 outcomes in Oklahoma. This will in
turn suggest what actions may be most effective to try and best mitigate the
effects of both COVID and other large-scale disease events in the future. The
final product of this work will include a new data repository and a public-
facing intelligent epidemiological modeling platform powered by Jupyter
Notebooks. The project will also provide outreach and training, including to
students from underrepresented groups.

Increases in outbreak frequency seem to be related to globalization and other
human activities. Yet the effects of most human behavioral, social and economic
factors on outbreak risk are rarely quantified. Relevant social factors can be
hard to measure, often needing specialists to generate and interpret data.
However social scientists with expertise to do so are rarely trained in
mathematical modelling of disease dynamics. To address these challenges, the
investigators will focus on developing data sources and mathematical models that
can be used to explore COVID-19 outcomes in Oklahoma. The project will be a true
collaboration between social scientists and experts in modelling infectious
diseases. Oklahoma is understudied, and is spatially heterogeneous such that
models of disease dynamics in Oklahoma are likely to be generalizable to many
other regions of the US. The Investigators will generate protocols for
standardizing existing data on behavioral and socioeconomic factors as well as
develop new data sources. The team will develop statistical models of past
outbreaks, and mathematical models reflecting factors shown to have driven
COVID-19 dynamics empirically. The latter work will demonstrate how baseline
SIR-like models can be modified to reflect human behavioral factors. The
Investigators will also contrast the performance of models based on existing
data on socioeconomic factors with models incorporating new survey data on
variation in behaviors and attitudes related to primary and secondary
prevention. The code and datasets to be generated will be made freely available
and searchable in an intelligent epidemiological modeling framework, which will
enable other researchers to easily iterate on them.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and the Division of
Social and Economic Sciences (SES) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.