* 2327790
* Collaborative Research: IHBEM: Multidisciplinary Analysis of Vaccination Games for Equity (MAVEN)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Oyita Udiani, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2026
* USD 241,962.00

The MAVEN (Multidisciplinary Analysis of Vaccination Games for Equity) project
addresses the global health threat of vaccine inequity in the fight against
emerging infectious diseases. This project aims to provide a comprehensive
understanding of vaccination coverage and identify key drivers of vaccine
uptake. This will reduce the risk of future pandemics by enabling targeted
interventions to increase vaccine acceptance among vulnerable populations, in
particular racial/ethnic/sexual minority and rural populations. The research
will also help to address vaccine inequities in the United States that are
currently disproportionately affecting minority subgroups and clinical
subpopulations (e.g., men with HIV infection). Ultimately, this research will
have implications for public health policy and practice, contributing to the
global effort to predict and mitigate the impacts of pandemics. In addition to
the scientific contributions, the project will provide valuable training
opportunities for over ninety undergraduate and graduate students and cultivate
a diverse pool of talent equipped to adequately respond to current and future
pandemics.

The project will answer three questions: Q1) What are the structural, social,
and individual factors related to vaccine uptake for common diseases (e.g.,
influenza), newer pandemics/epidemics, e.g., COVID-19, mpox (monkeypox), and
future diseases? Q2) How does population heterogeneity affect vaccination
behavior in a community context? Q3) How does individual behavior feedback into
mpox (monkeypox) disease dynamics? The project will combine expertise from
mathematical epidemiology and social and behavioral sciences to (1) develop a
general framework of vaccine uptake that incorporates individual, social, and
structural factors by analyzing a variety of secondary datasets, (2) collect
primary survey data and use the framework to develop universal vaccine uptake
(as well as vaccine refusal) models that are broadly applicable to mpox
(monkeypox) and future outbreaks, and (3) use traditional and modern economic
models of individual decision-making under uncertainty. Methodologically, the
project will develop a new epidemiological-behavioral system of ordinary
differential equations, using multiple data sources (observational, survey, and
experimental) and mixed methods to estimate peopleâ€™s vaccination preferences.
The project will also integrate the investigators' empirical findings into the
new epi-model, and use the parameterized epi-model to conduct retrospective and
prospective vaccine acceptance and hesitance/refusal models.

This award is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Division of Social and Economic Sciences in the Directorate of Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.