* 2327816
* Collaborative Research: IHBEM: Three-way coupling of water, behavior, and disease in the dynamics of mosquito-borne disease systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Mary Hayden, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2027
* USD 77,025.00

Complex behavioral responses to information from public health officials, social
media, and elsewhere during the COVID-19 pandemic laid bare the limitations of
the simplistic assumptions that epidemiological models have traditionally made
about human behavior. The investigators of this project hypothesize that human
behavior may also play a key role in why diseases transmitted by Aedes
mosquitoes, such as dengue and Zika, have been so difficult to control. Aedes
mosquitoes lay eggs in household water storage containers, meaning that
behaviors related to water storage, water consumption, and water container
management impact mosquito populations and, thereby, diseases transmitted by
these mosquitoes. The central objective of this project is to understand how
humans make decisions about preventive actions against Aedes-borne diseases and
how those actions in turn affect disease dynamics and subsequent individual-
level decision-making. The project will focus on the city of Ibagué, Colombia,
where public health officials have long used behavioral approaches to intervene
against Aedes-borne diseases. Empirical social science research will investigate
how individuals respond to these interventions and characterize differences
among individuals in their responses. Mathematical modeling research will
estimate the effectiveness of these interventions at the population level.
Throughout the project, a close connection with community members and local
public health officials will be cultivated to ensure the effective translation
of project outcomes. Training and capacity building activities will extend the
impacts of the project to settings beyond Ibagué.

This project aims to develop a mechanistic understanding of the role of behavior
in infectious disease dynamics and mathematical modeling tools that are capable
of accounting for those mechanisms, with the ultimate goal of enabling more
effective use of public health interventions. The project will be grounded in
empirical social science research in Ibagué, a city in Colombia with one of the
highest urbanization rates and Aedes-borne disease transmission rates in the
country. A combination of observational and experimental approaches will be used
to characterize heterogeneity in the adoption of mosquito prevention behaviors
in and around the home and to understand the cues that drive the adoption, or
neglect, of those behaviors. These empirical findings will be used to develop a
mathematical model of individual decision-making around the use of mosquito
prevention behaviors in response to individual-level behavioral dispositions
that change over time as cues arise and subside. This decision-making model will
then be incorporated into an agent-based model of Aedes-borne disease
transmission that will be used to infer the effectiveness of behavioral
interventions that public health officials use to control Aedes-borne diseases
in Ibagué. Finally, a suite of simpler macroscopic models will be developed and
assessed with respect to their ability to capture effects of behavioral
interventions on epidemiological dynamics simulated with the agent-based model.
The ultimate outcome of the project will be the development and validation of
minimally complex mathematical models that are capable of predicting responses
of epidemiological dynamics to behavioral interventions.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Division of Social
and Economic Sciences (SES) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.