* 2327211
* Multiscale data geometric networks for learning representations and dynamics of biological systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Guy Wolf, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 498,229.00

Recent years have seen significant volumes of high throughput, high dimensional,
biomedical data arising from single cell sequencing technologies. Further, in
contrast to past data of this type, current practices involve the collection of
multiple single cell datasets (e.g., for each patient in a large cohort), which
can represent data over time or in different conditions and can be analyzed
computationally as point clouds. There is a great need for new mathematical and
machine learning techniques to be able to process these types of complex data to
gain meaningful and predictive insight on healthy and disease processes. While
the majority of machine learning techniques used in the biomedical domain have
been supervised techniques arising from language or vision (image) models, this
project focuses on developing multiscale geometric and topological
representations of more complex data structures. Such representations allow us
to combine advances in several fields at the forefront of data science,
including geometric deep learning, manifold learning, and harmonic analysis in
order to analyze and predict from this data in an interpretable way. The
research will include several biomedical applications, such as characterizing
immune response in COVID-19, tracking the progress of metastatic cancer,
predicting the effectiveness of immunotherapy, and understanding
differentiation. Furthermore, the challenges addressed by these methods will
enable new advances in a wide range of fields where complex high throughput data
is collected in varying experimental environments.

The project will provide representation learning techniques to explore and
featurize high dimensional and complex datatypes including point clouds, graphs
collected in a variety of conditions in order to perform machine learning tasks.
Thrust 1 will involve the development of data geometric features to characterize
point cloud data, based on which a novel class of neural networks will be
created for regression on single cell data from a variety of systems. Thrust 2
will focus on methods for preserving directed information, by constructing
asymmetric kernels and using these kernels for embedding, inference, and feature
prediction. This will lead to the creation of directed graph neural networks
that utilize geometric scattering as defined on a directional graph Laplacian of
point cloud data. This will be used to learn and process data from gene
regulatory and metabolic networks. Thrust 3 will focus here on inferring
dynamics for interpolation of continuous dynamics from static snapshot single
cell data using optimal transport-regularized neural ODEs and PDEs and producing
interpretations of the underlying generative models. Further, it will involve
representing dynamics quantitatively using data geometry and topology for
prediction and classification, and will be validated on cancer and calcium
signaling data from epithelial cells. The techniques developed here will provide
fundamental advances in the use of neural networks to represent and make
predictions on point cloud data, as well as enable new ways to tackle the
problem of tracking dynamic biological processes over them.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.