* 2327465
* Designing Learning Technology Environments for Middle School Students to Analyze and Interpret Data Visualizations
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* JaCoya Thompson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 348,706.00

We live in a digital age where data are continuously generated and used to help
us understand and appreciate our world. Data visualizations have become a tool
for understanding data, revealing hidden structures, patterns, and social
movements to understand our world in new ways. Yet, many individuals have
difficulties interpreting and working with data visualizations, thus,
opportunities are needed to develop skills related to reading, communicating,
and comprehending data visualizations appropriately. This project aims to
develop and implement a curricular program for middle-school-aged youth in
community-based settings to develop data visualization skills through
technologies in the context of socio-scientific issues. The overarching goal is
to support middle-grade youth in developing data visualization skills that not
only allow them to become critical public consumers of data but also provide
them with the ability to understand data. The curricular program will provide
culturally relevant experiences that may motivate youth to pursue STEM majors
and careers, potentially broadening participation in STEM.

Data visualizations have become a ubiquitous tool for understanding the
multitude of data continuously generated. Accordingly, the ability to understand
and use data visualizations has become crucial not only for professional data
scientists but also for everyday citizens. This project integrates data
visualization practices within STEM education research and sociocultural
learning theories to build new theoretical understandings about the nature of
data visualization learning in the context of pressing socio-scientific issues.
The research goals of this project are to provide empirical evidence of middle
school students building data visualization practices through learning
technologies, and to develop a theoretical learning model for developing data
visualization practices in youth. Drawing on Integrated STEM education and
Experiential Learning Theory, the students’ learning experiences will also build
on the existing technical, programmatic, and social infrastructures that support
informal learning opportunities that are culturally relevant. The project will
create educational STEM ecosystems that promote the accumulation of non-
traditional STEM experiences that may enable multiple pathways to STEM degrees
and careers. Further, materials for the data science learning environment will
be made openly available and easily adaptable to both informal or formal
education settings.

This project is co-funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program and by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students
and Teachers (ITEST) program. The STEM Ed PRF program aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field. The ITEST program supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.