* 2327287
* RII Track-4: @NASA: Next Generation Hyperspectral Approaches to Detect Harmful Algal Blooms
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Khalid Ali, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,962.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows (RII
Track-4) project will provide a fellowship to an Associate Professor and
training for a graduate student at the College of Charleston. This work would be
conducted in collaboration with researchers at the NASA Ames Research Center
(ARC). The project aims to address Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in coastal
regions by utilizing state-of-the-art satellite technology and innovative
algorithms. HABs pose significant threats to marine ecosystems, human health,
and local economies. By leveraging new-generation satellite sensors and advanced
data analysis, the project seeks to provide accurate information on the spatial
and temporal distribution of HABs. This project's significance lies in its
potential to revolutionize HAB monitoring and management. Traditional methods
have limitations in resolution, hindering effective responses. Advancing
satellite remote sensing and data analysis contributes to scientific progress.
Furthermore, the project serves the national interest by promoting environmental
health, prosperity, and welfare. HABs disrupt coastal communities, affecting
fisheries, tourism, and human health due to harmful toxins. Timely monitoring
can mitigate these impacts. The project supports education and diversity by
fostering collaboration among researchers from diverse backgrounds.
Interdisciplinary opportunities attract scholars, advancing scientific
knowledge. Ultimately, the project benefits society by enabling effective
environmental policies and management. Understanding HAB dynamics will lead to
healthier coastal ecosystems, safer drinking water sources, and improved public
health, benefiting the nation's well-being and prosperity.

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are causing one of the most important environmental
crises in aquatic environments and are of growing concern worldwide due to their
serious impacts on public health as well as on the aquaculture and fisheries
industry. HABs occur in response to rising surface water temperatures and
increased flux of nutrients into streams and lakes. Over the past few decades,
earth-observation satellite-based tools have been developed for tracking the
development and movement of HABs and algal blooms. This has traditionally been
done using estimates of chlorophyll-a concentration (Chl-a, mg m−3), a proxy for
phytoplankton biomass. However, Chl-a alone does not provide a full description
of the inherent phytoplankton community structure or information regarding
specific HAB species. Thus, high-resolution satellite ocean color products that
go beyond universal Chl-a and provide information on specific HAB species are
critically needed for accurate HAB tracking and forecasting models. The goal of
the project is to utilize new-generation hyperspectral sensors and support the
continued effort of developing robust algorithms that can accurately provide
spatially and temporally explicit data on the distribution of HABs. The project
will merge multiple classes of data products to develop HAB products that are
best suited for use with next-generation hyperspectral sensors. We will work on
NASA’s semi-analytical optimization method, the Generalized Inherent Optical
Property and new machine learning-based HAB mapping algorithms which can be used
to characterize the optical properties of water and retrieve HAB products from
several existing and future ocean color satellites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.