* 2327026
* Planning: Southeast Alaska Research Coordination for Community Engagement
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 99,951.00

With environmental change occurring at a rapid rate in higher latitudes,
Southeast Alaska rural and tribal residents are experiencing significant changes
to their traditional and cultural way of life. Additionally, residents are also
keenly aware of the influence of scientific research in the Arctic, yet often
feel disconnected from the researchers working in their communities. This
planning project will support the Sitka Sound Science Center (SSSC) and Central
Council Tlingit Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska to improve engagement and
collaboration by providing communication training to scientists working with
small, rural, and tribal communities in the region. The planning grant will be
used to develop a communication strategy that will deepen and strengthen the
relationship between Southeast Alaska residents and scientists working in the
region, an area as big as the State of Florida.

The science communication training program will focus on providing scientists
with practical skills for engagement, approaches for working with and within
rural Alaska communities, and learning culturally appropriate communication
techniques and connecting with local knowledge. The workshop will be led and
developed by an integrated team, including Indigenous culture bearers, an
Alaskan science communication expert, an Alaskan journalist, and scientists with
experience working in the region. These planning efforts will explore and
evaluate effective ways to provide communication training to scientists,
potentially leading to broader efforts across the State of Alaska. Broader
impacts include creating strategies to improve communication and collaboration
between scientists and those living in Alaska. It will also benefit the broader
scientific community by exposing scientist and students to the concepts of co-
production and communication with the goal of building a future that allows a
diverse citizenry to access and understand scientific thinking and scientific
approaches to community problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.