* 2327079
* Better Scientific Software Fellowship Program: Recognizing and Developing the Cyberinfrastructure Workforce
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,11/30/2025
* MaryAnn Leung, Sustainable Horizons Institute
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 11/30/2025
* USD 327,614.00

Researchers supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and
Department of Energy (DOE) are longstanding leaders in advanced computing,
pushing the growth of computational and data-enabled science and engineering as
an essential driver of scientific and technological progress. However, we face
growing challenges and needs in scientific software and in recruiting and
retaining a skilled cyberinfrastructure (CI) workforce. Addressing these
challenges requires broad collaboration to foster a diverse and skilled CI
workforce, along with practices, processes, and tools to improve developer
productivity and software sustainability—as key aspects of increasing scientific
productivity and ensuring the integrity of computational results. The Better
Scientific Software (BSSw) Fellowship Program—launched in 2018 with support from
DOE, with NSF joining sponsorship in 2021—provides recognition and funding for
leaders and advocates of high-quality scientific software. NSF partnership in
sponsoring the BSSw Fellowship Program's 2024 cohort enables a more robust
approach toward pioneering the future of advanced computing ecosystems and
communities in support of US scientific leadership. This effort aligns with
NSF's vision for "an agile, integrated, robust, trustworthy, and sustainable CI
ecosystem that drives new thinking and transformative discoveries in all areas
of science and engineering research and education."

Beginning in summer 2023, the BSSw Fellowship Program (BSSwF) will be
administered by the BSSwF Management Partnership, consisting of Sustainable
Horizons Institute (who provide extensive experience in managing workforce
development programs), a representative from NSF, and the scientists at Argonne,
Berkeley, Livermore, Oak Ridge, and Sandia National Laboratories who launched
the BSSwF and lead it. The successes—and clear synergies of the BSSwF with NSF’s
Blueprint for CI Learning and Workforce Development—lay the foundation for
continuing NSF sponsorship of three BSSw Fellows and three Honorable Mentions
for the 2024 fellowship class. The program includes innovative workforce
development methodologies and approaches designed to engage a broad range of
diverse CI professionals on multiple fronts, including phase of career, age,
institution type and size, and topical specialty. A specific focus is broadening
participation of underrepresented groups, including people who are Black or
African American, Hispanic/Latinx, American Indian, Alaska Native, Native
Hawaiian, Pacific Islanders, women, persons with disabilities, and first-
generation scholars. The BSSw Fellowship Program enhances CI workforce
development and pathways to NSF and DOE software communities, through community
building and by nurturing a diverse network of people who advance software
practices as a fundamental aspect of increasing overall scientific productivity
and providing much-needed recognition for their contributions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.