* 2327014
* SCC-PG: Understanding the Technical and Social Challenges and Opportunities of Physically and Digitally Augmented Community Gardens
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Lining Yao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This NSF Smart and Connected Community (S&CC) planning grant will explore the
concept of the "meta-garden", which is a physically and digitally augmented
community garden aimed at addressing challenges associated with traditional
community gardens. Community gardens have the potential to provide numerous
benefits, but often face limitations such as scarce resources, limited access,
lack of persistent engagement, and other challenges. The significance of this
research lies in its potential to seamlessly connect physical and virtual
community gardens, and enhance their experiences and values by overcoming
spatial and resource limitations. Extending a physical garden into a virtual one
could potentially overcome space and resource limitations. Virtual gardens may
also provide new and engaging platforms to enable people to connect, share,
learn, and even generate revenue. Being able to remotely monitor and manage
physical gardens via a virtual platform may also provide more scheduling
flexibility for residents who are pressured to fulfill other time-demanding
duties, or during extreme events such as lockdowns due to pandemics. This
innovative approach benefits society by addressing challenges facing traditional
community gardens and expanding their potential in terms of community learning,
engagement, and well-being.

The research endeavors to identify design opportunities and potential social
benefits of the meta-garden through participatory design workshops, develop a
technical strategy, and create functional prototypes for physical and virtual
augmentations of a community garden. Moreover, it aims to conduct pilot tests
with community partners and summarize design guidelines for future
implementation. On the technical front, the research involves mapping out
relevant functional features, formulating technical development strategies,
developing preliminary functional prototypes, and evaluating system performance.
These processes are informed by specific research questions targeting technical
aspects such as key technical features, approaches for augmentation, technical
gaps, challenges, and potential solutions. From a social perspective, the
research employs a research-through-design approach involving participatory
design workshops, semi-structured interviews, and reflective thematic analysis.
These methods are guided by questions that explore the social benefits and
challenges of the meta-garden concept and how it can enhance community
experiences. Collectively, these endeavors serve to explore how meta-gardens,
facilitated by this planning grant, could redefine community gardens to be more
inclusive, accessible, and impactful. The potential for these mixed-reality
gardens may even stretch beyond the community garden context, with possibilities
for enhancing agricultural management, environmental quality monitoring, urban
and rural planning, and more.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.