* 2327113
* RI: Small: Optimal Transport Generative Adversarial Networks: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Qiang Ye, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 351,877.00

With the rapid advancements of sensing technologies, unlabeled high dimensional
complex interconnected data have become ubiquitous across various application
fields, spanning from science and engineering to social and behavioral sciences.
Generative models have emerged as a highly effective approach for modeling and
representation learning from such unlabeled data. As a result, they have taken a
central role in current research of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning, expanding frontiers of AI applications. One of the most prominent
generative models is the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN), which is a deep
neural network-based model designed to learn unknown data distributions. Since
its introduction, GAN models have proven to be exceptionally efficient and
effective, particularly in generating high quality samples. However, there are
some significant challenges in using GANs, with training difficulties being a
notable one. The objective of this project is to advance theory and training
algorithms for GANs and to demonstrate their effectiveness through two
applications: one arising in a human-robot collaborative welding system and the
other in imbalanced data sampled from skewed class distributions. By tackling
these challenges and studying real-world applications, this project aims to
contribute to the broader utilization of generative models across diverse
domains.

While GANs have enjoyed tremendous success in many real-world applications,
successful training of GANs remains elusive. Instability, mode collapse, and
non-convergence of training algorithms are the main issues and they can be
attributed to the current models and the theory that rely on exact solutions of
a minimax optimization, which adapt poorly when various approximations are
introduced in implementations. In this project, the investigators will
systematically study the challenges arising in various stages of approximations
by developing a new theoretical framework that is more amenable to
approximations and, consequently, new algorithms that have better convergence
property and stability. They will also develop two novel optimal transport based
GAN models for learning discrete data distributions and for graph structured
data respectively. They will test their capabilities in two applications that
cannot be adequately solved through the existing GAN models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.