* 2327579
* A Culturally-Responsive Maker Program Designed to Develop the STEM Interest, Self-Efficacy and Science Identity of Black Girls
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2023,07/31/2024
* LaShawnda Lindsay, GLOBAL FUND FOR WOMEN INC
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,941.00

Black Girls Create (BGC) is a program that uses maker pedagogy, social history
(i.e., Black women’s contributions in STEM), culturally responsive pedagogy, and
mentoring to engage Black girls in STEM. For the project, culturally responsive
making is operationally defined as the use of cultural knowledge and maker
technologies to create, design, and produce artifacts that are related to a
particular concept, theme, or person. The project will conduct a feasibility
research study that investigates how engagement in BGC affects participants'
STEM interest, STEM confidence, and racial and gender identities. In the
project, participants will discover how Black women have made an impact in STEM
fields and will learn how to digitally create cultural artifacts/wearable art
related to their discoveries. Approximately 120 middle school girls in grades
6-8 (8 groups of 15 participants each) from underserved neighborhoods will be
recruited for participation in this two-year study. Each group will meet for 3
hours per week over an 8-week period. Instructional materials from this research
will be made freely available online so that they can be adapted and used at
other formal and informal educational institutions that seek to garner interest
and access to STEM learning for Black girls and women.

A pre- and post-test, quasi-experimental design will be used to research the
program’s influence on participants’ self-efficacy, racial identity, and gender
identity. Lagged regression models that control for students’ age,
race/ethnicity, and pre-survey scores will be used to examine growth in each of
the four outcomes. Once all of the participants in the groups have completed
BGC, data from all groups will be combined to increase power and thereby detect
statistically meaningful differences in pre- and post-survey scores. In
addition, variables representing attendance and program engagement will be
entered into the model to examine whether students who are highly engaged in BGC
programming exhibit more growth in the four outcomes. Qualitative data will be
derived from students' journal entries as well as focus group interviews. Weekly
journals will be used to gather data about the context and experiences of
participants as they unfold throughout the program. Semi-structured focus groups
will center around the usefulness of skills and knowledge gained from the
program activities, significant experiences with peers and program staff, the
opportunity to learn about Black women STEM progenitors, and learning how to
make digitally fabricated artifacts. NVIVO, a computer software program, will be
used as a tool to support the analysis of the rich, text-based information
resulting from the journals and focus group narratives.

This feasibilty research project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.