* 2327732
* Collaborative Research: Cellular and Biomechanical Mechanisms of Rapid Stomatal Dynamics in Grasses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Joseph Turner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 352,565.00

Stomata, which are microscopic pores on the surfaces of plants, are gateways
that control photosynthesis in the crops that provide humanity with food and
sustainable materials. This project investigates how stomata in grasses, which
include staple food crops such as maize and wheat, are constructed with the
capability to rapidly open and close to regulate photosynthesis and water
transport in response to changing environmental conditions. The project will
provide interdisciplinary graduate training and support discovery-based
undergraduate research courses in molecular genetics, plant cell biology,
computer vision, and biomechanics experimentation and modeling, expanding
participation in these fields for diverse early-career scientists. The exciting
biology of stomatal dynamics in plants and how understanding and engineering
stomata can help address pressing societal challenges such as food security and
climate change will be shared with K-12 students through a middle school summer
camp and mentoring of high school students who will design and complete
independent research projects. The outcomes of this work promise to help improve
the efficiency with which plants capture carbon dioxide and convert it into food
and useful materials such as fibers and wood.

The four-celled stomatal complexes of grasses have been hypothesized to function
via a “see-saw” mechanism by which the expansion of dumbbell-shaped guard cells
is matched by deflation of the round subsidiary cells that flank the guard
cells, enabling rapid adjustment of the size of the stomatal pore in response to
environmental shifts. However, this hypothesis has not been rigorously tested,
and our understanding of stomatal biomechanics and function in grasses is
limited. This project combines molecular genetics, cell biology, computer
vision, mechanical testing, and computer modeling of stomatal biomechanics to
dissect the molecular, physiological, and cellular underpinnings of rapid
stomatal dynamics in a model grass species, Brachypodium distachyon. The
composition of the cell walls in guard and subsidiary cells will be manipulated
in Brachypodium distachyon through advanced genetic engineering. The resulting
changes will be examined with respect to stomatal function, biomechanical
properties of the modified plants will be measured and modeled, and computer
vision pipelines will be used to quantify changes in cell volumes and shapes.
With these approaches, experimentally testable computational models of normal
and altered stomatal complexes will help predict how stomatal function might be
further optimized to enhance crop yields, water use efficiency, and carbon
drawdown.

This project is jointly funded by the NSF/BIO/MCB Cell Dynamics & Function
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.