* 2327563
* CAREER: Electro-Shock Synthesis of High Entropy Alloy Nanoparticles from Sub-Femtoliter Reactors
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeffrey Dick, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 582,628.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, Dr.
Jeffrey E. Dick of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill aims to
develop an innovative approach to the synthesis of high entropy alloy
nanoparticles at room temperature. High entropy alloy nanoparticles contain five
or more equimolar metallic elements homogenously distributed through the
particle. Such nanoparticles may display unusual chemical properties and have
implications in catalysis, energy storage and conversion devices. However, it is
challenging to synthesize these nanoparticles at room temperature with precise
control of their shape, size, compostion, and surface coverage on different
substrates. Dr. Dick's group is developing a novel electrochemical methodology
to deposit high entropy alloy nanoparticles on conductive surfaces at room
temperature. This research strives to achieve a mechanistic understanding of the
electrodeposition process in order to enable precisel control of the
nanoparticle structure and properties. Students working on this project will
gain experience in synthesizing nanomaterials. Students will also use state-of-
the-art nanoscience tools to study high entropy alloy nanoparticles and
reactivity. This project will enhance the participation of underrepresented
minorities through the Nanomaterials Outreach via Education, Research, and
Scientific Engagement (NANOVERSE) program. The NANOVERSE program will engage
students in Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in North
Carolina. The workshop activities are designed to inspire them to pursue
graduate work in nanoscience, electrochemistry, and materials science. Finally,
the NANOVERSE program will give secondary education STEM teachers resources to
introduce students to nanoscience in their high school classrooms.

The Electro-Shock synthesis being developed involves the electrodeposition of
high entropy alloy nanoparticles from metal salt precursors in sub-femtoliter
water droplets that are suspended in a non-aqueous phase. The overarching goal
of this project is to understand the electrodeposition mechanism and factors
that influence the nanoparticle shape, size, morphology, microstructure and
surface coverage. A high level of control requires a detailed understanding of
the reactivity and the boundary between the water droplet, the oil continuous
phase, and the electrode surface. The first goal is to understand and quantify
the nucleation and growth mechanisms at the single nanoparticle level and probe
ion transfer thermodynamics and kinetics. The second goal is understanding the
effect of surfactant, applied potential, and annealing on nanoparticle
morphology and microstructure. The third goal is probing substrate effects and
how surfaces influence the nanodroplet geometry and the resulting high entropy
alloy nanoparticle. These results could have broad implications on the fields of
electrocatalysis, energy storage and conversion, nanomaterials, and next-
generation biosensors that take advantage of high entropy alloy nanoparticles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.