* 2327263
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Expanding the Inquiry into Undergraduate Engineering Admissions to Broaden Engineering Participation
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Trevor Franklin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 07/31/2025
* USD 363,752.00

Engineering educational pathways have been thoroughly studied prior to college
in elementary and secondary school years (K-12), as well as during undergraduate
engineering college programs. However, research on the admission processes for
undergraduate engineering programs is considerably scarcer. Studies have
discovered relationships between high school grades or standardized testing and
success in college engineering programs but have not typically addressed other
student experiences represented in the college applications of prospective
engineers. This gap is troubling given the known inequities of access to
experiences that are valued in college admissions and known biases in current
admissions processes. This research will advance the understudied area of
engineering undergraduate admissions to discover strategies that can reduce
admissions practices that limit the acceptance of a diverse population of
engineering students. New university admissions practices that recognize diverse
engineering potential will be of significance to and impact tens of thousands of
students and broaden the number of students enrolling in undergraduate
engineering degree programs, with critical downstream impacts on the size and
composition of the engineering workforce that is critical to solving
contemporary technological challenges.

This research on engineering undergraduate admissions is organized in two
phases: 1) a classification of engineering admissions practices and 2) a mixed
methods approach to probing student-crafted components of undergraduate
engineering applications. The first part describes the ecosystem of admissions
protocols in undergraduate engineering programs nationally. University
admissions processes vary across institutions, but the engineering education
research community lacks a coherent framing of admissions practices. Using
taxonomy development and subsequent exploratory data analysis, this research
will classify what data is required in the applications of prospective engineers
to ABET-accredited institutions, how requirements and admission protocols vary
by institution type, and the prevalence of such requirements and protocols
across the United States. The second part investigates student-written
components of undergraduate engineering applications to determine which
experiences and characteristics are valued as important for acceptance by
engineering applicants and admissions reviewers. Using a mixed methods design,
this research will analyze diverse data sources spanning applications from
prospective engineers, documentation from admissions reviewers, and interviews
to understand the way students attempt to represent themselves as capable,
prospective engineering, how admissions reviewers interpret the same set of
student information, and where bias arises in the construction and
interpretation of applications that limits participation in engineering. The
collective two-phase project will provide a systematic classification of
engineering admissions to support future research into engineering admissions,
expand the evaluation of engineering admissions protocols by the research
community, and underpin evidence-based strategies to eliminate bias in the
admission of undergraduate engineers. The goal of improving engineering
education research and admissions practices inspired by this guidance have the
potential to expand participation in engineering higher education by reducing
barriers at the point of entry.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.