* 2327715
* Eco-Design of Hydrogenation Catalysts for Oxyanion Reduction: The Overlooked Roles of Nitrogen-Containing Groups on the Catalyst Supports
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Daqian Jiang, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Toxic oxyanions such as nitrate (NO3−) and perchlorate (ClO4−) are persistent
pollutants that have been detected in groundwater, surface water, and drinking
water sources in the United States and worldwide. The consumption of drinking
water containing toxic oxyanions can adversely impact human health. Ion exchange
(IX) and reverse osmosis (RO) are the best commercially available technologies
for removing toxic oxyanions from drinking water sources. However, IX and RO do
not destroy contaminants. In addition, they generate residuals including
concentrated waste brines that need to be treated and/or disposed of. Water
treatment by catalytic hydrogenation has emerged as a promising technology that
can rapidly and effectively destroy toxic oxyanions in contaminated aqueous
solutions including concentrated waste brines. The most effective oxyanion
hydrogenation catalysts (e.g., Pd) are in the form of nanoparticles. Anchoring
catalytic nanoparticles on supports such as activated carbon can facilitate
their use in water treatment. In this project, the Principal Investigators (PIs)
propose to carry out a fundamental study of the activity and reactivity of Pd
nanoparticles immobilized onto supports that contain nitrogen groups in aqueous
solutions and brines contaminated by toxic oxyanions with the goal of improving
their performance. The successful completion of this research will benefit
society through the development of new fundamental knowledge to advance the
design and development of more efficient and cost-effective oxyanion
hydrogenation catalysts for water treatment. Additional benefits to society will
be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of
one graduate student and one undergraduate student at the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology and one postdoctoral researcher at the University of
Alabama.

Palladium (Pd) nanoparticles have emerged as promising catalysts for reducing
toxic oxyanions such as nitrate (NO3−) in aqueous solutions/brines and
converting them to harmless by-products such as dinitrogen (N2) gas. Pd
nanocatalysts are immobilized on support materials to 1) reduce nanoparticle
aggregation and leaching and 2) facilitate catalyst handling and reuse. The
presence of nitrogen-containing groups (e.g., amines) on the supports of Pd
nanocatalysts have been found to significantly enhance catalyst performance
(including activity, selectivity, and stability) during the hydrogenation of
oxyanions in aqueous solutions. However, a fundamental understanding of the role
of nitrogen-containing groups (NCGs) on the structure and performance of Pd
hydrogenation nanocatalysts has remained elusive. To address these knowledge
gaps, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose to carry out
fundamental studies of the structure and performance of Pd nanocatalysts
immobilized onto supports with NCGs. The specific objectives of the research are
to 1) characterize and unravel the relationships between NCG support and
catalyst structure and physicochemical properties; 2) investigate the impact of
NCG support on the performance of Pd nanocatalysts for the reduction and
conversion of oxyanions in model aqueous solutions and complex water matrices
using hydrogen (H2) as reducing agent ; and 3) leverage the data collected in
this project to develop machine learning (ML)-informed life cycle assessment
(LCA) to guide catalyst design, synthesis, and optimization. The successful
completion of this project has the potential to advance the practical
implementation of Pd-based catalysts and reactors for the treatment of drinking
water sources and concentrated waste brines contaminated with toxic oxyanions.
To implement the education and training goals of the project, the PIs propose to
leverage existing programs at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
and the University of Alabama to 1) recruit and mentor graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the project and
2) develop and implement outreach activities to advance diversity, equity, and
inclusion in STEM education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.