* 2327502
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Combining Physics and Deep Learning for Accurate River Discharge and Bathymetry Estimation from the Surface Water and Ocean Topography Mission
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Jonghyun Lee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 10/31/2025
* USD 247,742.00

Estimation of river bottom elevation and discharge plays an essential role in
many practical applications such as safe and efficient maritime transportation,
flood risk management, and water management planning. However, in-situ
measurement of river depth and discharge is logistically challenging, expensive,
and time-consuming. Recently launched Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT)
satellite mission opens a new possibility to estimate river discharge and depth
measurements by providing the river water elevation above sea level, river
width, and slope over the watershed to continental scales. This proposed
research will enable the development and application of large-scale accurate
river depth measurements and discharge estimation using the recently acquired
SWOT data sets. The research will also focus on the effect of surface-
groundwater interaction on river discharge estimation. The fellowship program
will train the PI and a graduate student from the University of Hawaii at Manoa
in both technical aspects of SWOT data processing and analysis as well as
computational approaches for real-time water depth estimation. The collaborative
research will ultimately improve the research capacity of the home institution
and benefit the State of Hawaii, which is the state that resorts to groundwater
resources and is subject to both water management and balance.

This EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) Track-4: EPSCoR Research
Fellows (RII Track-4:@NASA) will provide a fellowship to an Associate Professor
and training for a graduate student at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. This
work would be conducted in collaboration with researchers at NASA Jet Propulsion
Laboratory (JPL). The PI and one graduate student will visit the Terrestrial
Hydrology group at NASA JPL to learn the SWOT mission data acquisition and
associated river discharge estimation from experts in the field. The PI has
actively developed river dynamics-based machine-learning techniques to estimate
river bathymetry and discharge and their corresponding uncertainties in a
computationally efficient unified framework. The main objectives of this
research study are to advance the currently used methods to account for the
surface-groundwater interaction, improve the accuracy of the discharge
estimation, and develop a new data assimilation method to estimate
spatiotemporal river bathymetry and discharge using the SWOT data. For close-to-
real-time bathymetry estimation, the shallow water equations will be
approximated through physics-informed neural networks with a controlled accuracy
for real-time simulation. The proposed methods will be packaged in a Python
library, with the intent of releasing them in a public repository once properly
tested and quality checked. Expertise gained during this fellowship will enable
the PI to train and educate students at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in
cutting-edge remote sensing data analysis and machine learning-based
assimilation techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.