* 2327388
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Marginalization through Diet, Oral Health and Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 16,983.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation project examines the degree to which
social categories such as gender and status are associated with health and diet
during the Athenian Archaic period—a politically unstable period in Athenian
history. During this period political organization oscillated between nascent
democracy and rule by aristocratic “tyrants.” Primary knowledge comes from
accounts by writers who were often members of the upper class. Additionally,
they were writing from secondary historical sources, not events they themselves
experienced. Because these are the works that survive to the present, it is not
known how non-aristocratic and marginalized people experienced this political
turmoil. This project focuses on information contained in archaeological
evidence: the skeletal remains of the people who lived during this period. The
Phaleron cemetery is not only one of the few examples of an Archaic period
burial space, but it also contains graves of low status adults and children. In
addition, the cemetery includes multiple burials and mass graves of shackled
adults. This provides a unique opportunity to understand how cuisine—which the
researchers are defining as diet, oral health, and immigrant status—reflects
social categories like gender and status during this tumultuous period.
Political turmoil and instability, especially in areas where democratic rule has
been recently established, continues to be of interest to national security and
to humanitarian aid groups who are interested in human health. The project
fosters collaboration between American and Greek scholars and creates
opportunities for American undergraduate students in the laboratory sciences.

Researchers utilize biogeochemical methods alongside oral health data to
investigate social differences at the site of Phaleron. From an analysis of both
bone and tooth samples, the researchers determine if differences in
diet—identifiable from distinctive ratios of stable isotopes in the structure of
the sample—coincide with differences in burial circumstance or other factors,
such as age, sex, or migratory status. Additionally, these researchers collect
data on oral health and disease to strengthen arguments about the variability of
health and diet in this community. Were there strict divisions between those
buried in simple pit graves and those who were shackled at the time of burial?
Or did this community have many different cuisines and diets that suggest that
social status did not determine one’s health status? The researchers employ
multiple lines of evidence and sophisticated statistical techniques to discuss
complex social issues during a turbulent period.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.