* 2327411
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Towards a Diverse Professoriate: Experiences that Inform Underrepresented Scholars' Perceptions of Value Alignment and Career Decisions
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Jennifer Tashiro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 12/31/2025
* USD 291,780.00

Some colleges and universities work to recruit individuals from underrepresented
groups into faculty positions in STEM departments in ongoing efforts to create
more diverse, effective, and inclusive learning environments for undergraduate
and graduate students. While successful faculty recruitment efforts are
essential for the Nation to meet STEM educational challenges, little prior
research has focused on experiences that inform the decision-making processes of
scholars who opt out of academic careers. This project will focus on scholars
from underrepresented groups and recognize intersectionality, that is the
interconnected nature of social identities such as race and gender
intersectionality, as defined by Crenshaw. This postdoctoral research fellowship
project is designed to deepen our understanding of the factors that contribute
to decisions to opt out of academic careers.

The proposed project aims to advance knowledge of the career choice processes
for STEM scholars from underrepresented groups receiving terminal degrees and
advance understanding of the experiences that inform those choices.
Specifically, the project is designed to address the following research aims: 1)
identify scholars’ values and the developmental experiences that informed those
values within the context of families, communities, and cultures; 2) evaluate
graduate school experiences that shaped scholars’ perceptions of the alignment
or misalignment of those values with academia as a factor in employment
interests; and 3) examine influences on scholars’ career decisions and values
over time. To accomplish these aims, the investigator will conduct a
longitudinal qualitative study to explore the career choice processes of
scholars from underrepresented groups in chemistry graduate programs at
universities across the country using phenomenographic methodology and guided by
Social Cognitive Career Theory.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.