* 2327644
* Conference: Broadening Participation and Supporting Early-Career Scientists at the International Polyploidy Conference, May 9-12, 2023 in Palm Coast (FL)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Douglas Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Polyploidy (whole-genome duplication; WGD), the possession of three or more
complete sets of chromosomes, characterizes the genomes of most eukaryotes. WGD
is central to the study of genetics, evolution, ecology, as well as agriculture
and medicine. Nearly all agricultural crops are polyploid, as are many human
organs (e.g., the liver, heart, and placenta), and at least one third of all
cancers arise from WGD. Despite the importance of WGD, our understanding of this
critically important speciation mechanism and source of raw material for genomic
and phenotypic evolution is both limited and disjointed. The International
Polyploidy Conference entitled “Polyploidy Across the Tree of Life”, to be held
May 9-12, 2023 (Palm Coast, FL) brings together researchers across diverse
fields—cell biology, physiology, evolution, ecology, genomics, agriculture, and
cancer—to discuss and identify commonalities that derive from shared polyploid
cellular processes across organismal diversity, levels of biological
organization, and fields of inquiry. NSF funds will be used to help support
early-career researchers to attend the conference and participate in various
networking and training opportunities.

A central goal of the Polyploidy Across the Tree of Life Conference is to help
uncover both the commonalities and distinct roles of WGD across lineages of the
Tree of Life and at diverse levels of biological organization, i.e., gene
regulation, cell function, organ formation, organismal performance, ecological
responses, and landscape-level species distribution. This conference, with
representation across currently siloed research fields of WGD, will promote
dialogue and interactions that will hopefully lead to new, synthetic
understanding of polyploidy and provide a foundation for translational
innovations – from biodiversity and biocomplexity to medicine and agriculture.
To date, no single conference has explicitly addressed establishment, evolution,
stress, development, and disease or considered polyploidy across major clades of
life. Supporting the participation and training of early career investigators in
the exploration of these topics in diverse organisms at the conference will
hopefully stimulate new directions in polyploidy research by a new generation of
scientists. In addition, the use of NSF funds will help support efforts to
maximize diversity across multiple axes: scientific discipline, perspective,
country, geography, gender, race, ethnicity, institution, and career stage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.