* 2327438
* RII Track-4:@NASA: Bluer and Hotter: From Ultraviolet to X-ray Diagnostics of the Circumgalactic Medium
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Joseph Burchett, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2025
* USD 226,917.00

The brilliant spiral appearances of galaxies have dazzled humanity since their
discovery through the first telescopes. However, this picture of galaxies is
highly incomplete, containing only their starlight. Those stars, like our Sun
must form out of an enormous gas supply, both inside and outside the galaxy,
that cannot be seen in light visible by human eyes. Thus, understanding how and
why new generations of stars may or may not form (i.e., whether galaxies 'live'
or 'die') requires observations over an enormous range of wavelengths, as the
gas reservoirs in and around galaxies may span a factor of 100,000 in
temperature. We now know that gas flows in and out of galaxies engage in a
complex interplay, like ecosystems often encountered in nature. The mechanics of
these ecosystems lies at the core of our own cosmic origins. The National
Academy of Sciences has set these 'cosmic ecosystems' as a key national priority
for astrophysics research over the next decade and beyond. The Principal
Investigator's (PI) research group has been focused on the cooler gas in cosmic
ecosystems, those detectable at ultraviolet and visible wavelengths, but the
hotter phases requiring X-rays to observe play a critical role. This fellowship
will equip the PI's research group at New Mexico State University to address
this national priority from a comprehensive multi-wavelength perspective. The
project will leverage the X-ray expertise at the NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center to train the PI and a graduate student in X-ray astronomical
observations. The research team will engage in three key investigations that
couple our current expertise with the newly acquired X-ray techniques while
employing X-ray facilities receiving substantial U.S. investment.

The gas permeating cosmic ecosystems has been primarily characterized
observationally at ultraviolet (UV) and optical wavelengths, which are sensitive
to cool (10^4 K) and warm-hot (10^5−10^6 K) gas. However, galaxy formation
theory is increasingly pointing towards the hotter phases (> 10^6 K) observed in
X-rays as holding the answers to the critical processes within cosmic
ecosystems. We stand at an exciting juncture with the imminent data release of
the eROSITA All Sky Survey (eRASS), the U.S.- and Japanese-led high spectral
resolution XRISM X-ray telescope launching in 2023, and the X-ray community
tirelessly developing mission concepts for the next X-ray space telescope to be
launched by the U.S. within the next decade (another National Academy
recommendation). In partnership with astrophysicists at NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center, the research team will build the necessary research
infrastructure at New Mexico State University (NMSU) to seize these emerging
opportunities. Towards this end, we will conduct research projects that involve
the key facets of X-ray analysis. 1) We will employ the eRASS X-ray imaging to
unveil the interactions between the hot intragroup and circumgalactic medium
(IGrM; CGM) in galaxy groups. 2) After the launch of XRISM, we will measure
precise hot intracluster medium velocities within galaxy clusters and compare
with the cool-phase H I velocity distribution from existing UV absorption line
observations to characterize high-velocity, multiphase gas flows. 3) Looking
towards the future, we will employ state-of-the-art galaxy formation simulations
to generate mock X-ray microcalorimeter spectra and mock UV absorption and
emission spectra of spatially coincident regions in the CGM. We will then
propagate this expertise back through our NMSU Astronomy Department, as X-ray
observations are used in every subfield of astronomy studied by the NMSU
faculty, but X-rays are missing from our observational skill portfolio.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.