* 2327138
* CAREER: Quantifying Multi-Scale Climate-Smart-Agriculture Management for Triple Wins in Food production, Climate Mitigation, and Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Wei Ren, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2026
* USD 363,356.00

The Mississippi River has the third-largest drainage basin and represents one of
the most productive agricultural regions in the world, yielding >80% of US total
corn and soybean production and 92% of the nation’s agricultural exports. Large-
scale industrial agriculture has led to significant socio-economic gains, but at
environmental costs (soil erosion, nutrient pollution, and aquatic
acidification) in this region. Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) management
practices have been proposed as solutions to these costs, as they not only
increase crop yield, but also reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and sustain soil
and water quality. However, the effectiveness of CSA practices varies under
diverse climate and land use conditions and involves tightly coupled carbon,
water, and nutrient cycles. These interactions have not been well studied, and
this knowledge gap has hindered understanding and efficient application of CSA
practices to achieve the benefits of enhancing food production, climate
mitigation, and environmental sustainability. The overall goal of this project
is to develop an integrated ecosystem monitoring, modeling, and machine learning
framework (EcoM3) that incorporates field observations, satellite remote sensing
data, process-based modeling, and a deep-learning approach to systematically
investigate specific effects of CSA practice (no-tillage and cover crops) on key
agroecosystem indicators (crop yield, soil carbon storage, greenhouse gases, and
carbon/nitrogen leaching) at multiple scales. This project will use a long-term
field site in Kentucky (continuous observations over 50 years) as one testing
site to investigate CSA practice effects from daily to seasonal, annual, decadal
scales; examine varied CSA effects at multiple sites with diverse climate and
soil conditions across the Mississippi River basin; and predict the potential
impacts of CSA practices at the entire river basin scale. Multi-scale data and
model results will be integrated into the learning platform of the EcoM3
framework to communicate temporal and spatial CSA effectiveness with diverse
stakeholders and policy-makers.

This study addresses a challenging question: Will an enhanced systems approach
advance our understanding of the interconnected relationships among
agroecosystems, climate, and environment systems sufficiently to allow us to
simultaneously manage multiple goals (food security, carbon sequestration, and
environmental sustainability)? This study represents a systematic method to
investigate the comprehensive effects of CSA practices in agricultural systems
at both site and regional scales under heterogeneous climate and soil
conditions. The proposed EcoM3 framework incorporates CSA management that is
targeted to advance conceptual and operational understanding of interactions and
feedback loops among climate, land use/management, and ecosystems. Products
derived from this study will improve the mechanistic representation of the
agroecosystem in Environmental System Models toward a more accurate prediction
of biogeochemical cycles and future climate change and will provide viable
recommendations for farmers and a scientific basis for making evidence-informed
policy about building sustainable and climate-resilient agriculture. Research
findings will be communicated with farmers through local extension meetings and
the Multi-state Farmer Summit (representatives across regions in Mississippi
River basin). Project products will enhance awareness about the importance of
CSA management in building climate-resilient agroecosystems and preserving soil
and water health. Multi-scale datasets will be made publicly available for
research and education.

This project is jointly funded by the CBET Environmental Sustainability program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.