* 2327314
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: STEMEdIPRF: Resource Use as a Mediator of Sociodemographic Disparities in Student Success
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2024,07/31/2026
* Maryrose Weatherton, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 07/31/2026
* USD 332,246.00

From office hours, to textbooks, to mental health counseling, the use of
resources is essential to undergraduate STEM students’ academic success.
Previous work has revealed significant relationships between students’ use of
specific resources and their academic outcomes, and between resource use and
sociodemographic factors (e.g., gender identity, socioeconomic status, race).
College success rates vary among different student groups in the United States.
Student access to resources may contribute to these differences. This project is
designed to investigate the resources that undergraduate students use and how
that might be related to their success in higher education. Insights will be
developed on how students from historically excluded groups engage with
resources. This research hopes to benefit society by increasing the
participation of historically excluded groups in STEM. The project focuses an
intersectional lens on the experiences and needs of marginalized groups in STEM
with the goal of influencing higher education policies and procedures.

This project utilizes a novel, multivariate approach to examine relationships
among variables. Specifically, this project is designed to test whether student
resource use mediates the relationship between sociodemographic factors and
academic outcomes. Further, qualitative approaches will be used to probe the
relationships between students’ expectations, values, and sociodemographic
factors, and ultimately what drives students to use resources. Using Expectancy-
Value Theory for Help Sources as a theoretical framework, approximately 4,000
undergraduate students in Introductory Biology courses across seven
collaborating institutions will be surveyed. Cluster analysis will identify
participants with similar resource use patterns. Resource use clusters will then
be used as a mediating variable in a multilevel mediation analysis. Interviews
will sample participants from across clusters, sociodemographic characteristics,
and academic outcomes. This combination of advanced quantitative methods and
intensive qualitative approaches will provide new insights into how and why
students use resources. This information is critical to address extant
disparities in student outcomes in STEM and aims to use a strengths-based,
intersectional approach to do so. The proposed research acknowledges that
students often hold multiple, intersecting identities that impact their
experiences within higher education. By understanding strategies that
historically excluded individuals are currently using to succeed, institutions
and instructors can leverage this knowledge to tailor resource recommendations
to students’ unique needs and backgrounds.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from The Kaleta A. Doolin
Foundation. The STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF)
program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and practices of
recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related disciplines to
advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied research that
advances knowledge within the field. The Kaleta A. Doolin Foundation through a
partnership with the National Science Foundation seeks to promote greater
diversity within the STEM/STEM education research workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.