* 2327217
* NCS-FO: Functional and neural mechanisms of integrating multiple artificial somatosensory feedback signals in prosthesis control
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Xiaogang Hu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,608.00

After a limb amputation, both motor and sensory functions associated with the
limb are lost. Substantial effort has been devoted to restore lost motor
functions. In contrast, there has been less advancement in restoring sensory
function. Although earlier works have used sensory substitution or nerve
stimulation techniques to elicit a single type of artificial sensation, there is
limited understanding of how the human brain integrates different sources of
artificial sensation, when multiple sensory stimulations are provided. This
project will help understand the integration principles of different
artificially evoked sensations of joint movements. By identifying key factors
that determine the integration principle of multiple sources of artificial
sensation, this project can generate potentially transformative outcomes for
human-robot interactions, specifically developing brain-inspired sensory
stimulation strategies that can enable intuitive interactions of assistive
devices. The project will provide educational opportunities. Different project
components will be integrated into existing undergraduate courses. Summer
projects incorporating the sensory stimulation techniques will be offered to
local school and community college students. Outreach programs associated with
the research outcomes will be developed targeting underrepresented students.

The goal of this project is to understand the integration principles of
different artificially evoked proprioceptive feedback. The research team will
combine psychophysical testing, behavioral modeling, and brain signal recordings
to understand the integration principle of artificial sensory signals.
Proprioceptive feedback of the joint kinematics will be evoked using
vibrotactile stimulation and peripheral nerve stimulation. Both upper and lower
limbs will be investigated to evaluate whether the integration principle is task
or end-effector dependent. The research team will use a Bayesian integration
model and electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings to quantify how uncertainty and
intuitiveness-associated attentional bias of artificial feedback impact sensory
integration. The project outcomes will provide a theoretical basis for
developing artificial sensory feedback for intuitive human-robot interactions,
and will also provide a research platform for studying sensory perception.

This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the
Directorates for Biology (BIO), Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.