* 2328889
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Development of Quantum Information Science Programs at an Undergraduate Institution through Research in 2D Qubit Systems
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Timothy Kidd, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: This project creates a new program of research into
manipulating quantum materials for potential applications in quantum computing.
Quantum materials are of special interest as, unlike standard metals or
semiconductors, they exhibit certain properties that are purely quantum
mechanical. These quantum effects can be harnessed for use in the development of
quantum computers. This project establishes an international collaboration to
investigate the fundamental characteristics of such materials to efficiently
store qubits, the quantum equivalent of the basic elements of traditional
computer memory. In addition to advancing fundamental research into quantum
computers, this research is integrated into educational and outreach activities
to prepare future scientists and engineers in this rapidly evolving field.
Undergraduate and high school students benefit from summer programs and hands-on
research activities developed from this work. Undergraduate students also
benefit from enhanced quantum computing coursework and the ability to work at
national laboratories as part of the research effort, gaining valuable
experience and exposure to world-class scientists and facilities. Partnerships
with area Upward Bound programs and high schools create new opportunities for
students from underrepresented backgrounds as well as their teachers. This
combination of research, educational opportunities, and community engagement
enhances the potential for students to enroll in and succeed in disciplines
related to science and engineering.

Technical Abstract: This research effort is focused on the development of
isolated spin and/or magnetic defects within two dimensional materials, such as
transition metal dichalcogenides. Such defects have shown strong potential to
serve as qubits for future quantum computation applications. The research is
based on a combination of local expertise in the synthesis, modification, and
analysis of two-dimensional materials and an international collaboration with
experts in the field of quantum information and quantum materials. To accomplish
our goal, synthesis techniques are developed to selectively incorporate dopants
into single molecular layers, research which is of interest to the broader
condensed matter physics community. These synthesis techniques are optimized
using systematic feedback between density functional theory calculations to
predict candidate systems, synthesis using chemical vapor transport and chemical
vapor deposition, and assessing the defects in the final material by using
electron spin resonance, spin-resolved Raman spectroscopy, transmission electron
microscopy and spectroscopy, and other standard techniques for assessing crystal
quality such as x-ray diffraction. The systems are also explored using a
combination of electron spin resonance and scanning tunneling microscopy to
characterize the local physical, electronic, and spin characteristics. These
measurements are important for verifying the utility of these systems for
applications in quantum memory. This collaborative effort enables the faculty
and students from the University of Northern Iowa and Iowa State University to
expand on their current expertise to incorporate research methodology pertinent
for quantum information studies.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.