* 2328096
* FMSG: Eco: Field Assisted Nano Assembly System (FANAS) for Next-Generation Photonics and Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Zongfu Yu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Description

Physicists and engineers have discovered many new optical phenomena in
structured materials, such as negative refraction and nontrivial topology of
light. Put simply, in nano photonics, structure determines function. In
particular, 3-dimensional (3D) photonic structures have exciting potential for
new computing paradigms. However, realizing their potential has proven
challenging. Hero demonstrations of 3D structured photonic devices have been
achieved using stacking or self-assembly. These approaches lack design
flexibility or cannot be scaled up for production. This project focuses on
advancing the design and fabrication of 3D photonic structures using a novel
manufacturing platform: Field Assisted Nano Assembly System (FANAS). This
platform uses thermal and acoustic fields to guide droplets to precise
locations, building 3D photonic structures with submicron resolution. Successful
implementation of FANAS will result in a Future Manufacturing system capable of
producing novel 3D nano photonic structures reproducibly at scale. This project
will enable new opportunities for fast optics platforms, impacting the multi-
billion-dollar quantum computing industry. Investigators will integrate research
with outreach programs such as Women in Science & Engineering (WiSE) program at
the University of Wisconsin – Madison to promote diversity and inclusion. The
project will also partner with the Wisconsin MRSEC Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) to recruit and work with students from underrepresented
groups. This project will also enrich the investigators’ outreach to K-12
students through an Engineering Expo Day hosted by their institution. Finally,
the team will launch a series of research symposiums for workforce development
and dissemination of research outcomes. This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Division of Electrical,
Communications, and Cyber Systems (ECCS).

Technical Description

Quantum technology relies on photons as the carrier of the qubit. 3D photonics
provides a new dimension to control light at small scale. Such control can
enhance the ability in the storage, transfer, and transduction of photonic
qubits. The overarching objective of this project is to investigate new design
theorems and manufacturing principles for 3D photonics based on the physics of
wave dynamics. In the FANAS system, acoustic-, electrohydrodynamics-, and
thermal- fields are utilized to construct heterogeneous 3D structures designed
for 3D photonics and quantum computing. These structures will be realized by
developing methods to precisely place quantum dots and dye molecules in a 3D
photonic structure. A new computational method will be developed to model the
interaction between quantum emitters and complex 3D photonic structures. The
multi-physics modeling will also advance the understanding of material
interactions with the applied fields. The integration of multiple fields brings
the versatility of the manufacturing method to an unprecedented level, since
both the chemical and physical properties of the materials are exploited to
achieve assembly and targeted performance. The field-assisted assembly platform
enables: (1) assemble, alignment, and patterning of nanoparticles and
nanomaterials at the micro/sub-micron scale, 2) precise droplet generation and
flight behavior control, 3) manufacturing of complex 3D structures that could be
scaled up using drop-on-demand concepts, and 4) novel device fabrication and
demonstration via case studies for future broader applications in 3D photonics
and quantum computing. This project lies at the intersection of two of the NSF’s
10 Big Ideas – Growing Convergence Research and the United States Chips and
Science Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.