* 2328993
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: Leveraging synthetic degrees of freedom for quantum state engineering in photonic chips
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Roger Dorsinville, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,620,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: This ExpandQISE program at The City College of New York
seeks to advance the fundamental understanding of quantum phenomena in
engineered optical structures endowed with additional degrees of freedom by
manipulating the fundamental properties of light and its interaction with
nanomaterials. This initiative aims at the development of nascent quantum
materials with novel properties that can be attained by combining topological
photonic properties and quantum properties of light and matter. This project
advances the fields of integrated quantum photonics through the systematic
discovery of new materials that possess the necessary functionalities to enable
development of novel quantum devices. To maximize the effectiveness of the
discovery process, this project combines theoretical and experimental efforts
from interdisciplinary teams, including academia (City College and University of
Central Florida) and industry. In addition to its direct scientific impact, the
project will have a broad societal impact through the development of emerging
technologies for quantum information processing and advances ongoing workforce
development efforts thanks to the strong involvement of undergraduate students
in all aspects of research. Outreach programs with active participation of high
school and undergraduate students, with focus on underrepresented groups, will
further broaden the project impact.

Technical Abstract: This ExpandQISE program at The City College of New York
seeks to address fundamental questions of materials science and light-matter
interactions in artificial quantum optical materials endowed with additional
synthetic degrees of freedom – pseudo-spins – and characterized by nontrivial
topological properties. Our research team builds on our existing expertise in
theoretical nano-photonics as well as advanced fabrication and experimental
techniques to attain novel materials characteristics and functionalities
emerging in quantum regimes. Specifically, this activity focuses on development
of the concept of active quantum topological materials that will enable control
over quantum excitations of both light and matter on a photonic chip. This
effort enables generation and manipulation of quantum states of structured
optical modes and topological boundary states endowed with synthetic degrees of
freedom on a chip. Additionally, by harnessing the fundamental properties of
such quantum photonic states this project enables novel polaritonic states with
tailored properties that can be used for quantum technologies, such as control
of pseudo-spins with synthetic gauge fields engineered at nanoscale, including
actively via light-matter interactions. The possibility to imprint the state of
a pseudo-spin onto quantum states of light emitted by integrated quantum
emitters enables novel opportunities for integrated quantum photonics, where
quantum information is encoded in the modal structure of optical states. Our
approach to quantum materials design leverages a variety of quantum excitations
in materials integrated into topological photonic structures, such as van der
Waals materials, organic excitonic materials, and wide bandgap semiconductors.
The coupling of structured light with quantum emitters is attained through their
precise integration. At the same time, strong and highly tailorable light-matter
interactions engineered in our platform enable extreme nonlinearities, including
nonlinear effects with selection rules dictated by symmetry-engineered pseudo-
spins, photon blockade and synthetic gauge fields. Tunable synthetic gauge
fields emerging from such tailored light-matter interactions open a pathway to
realize unitary operations – reprogrammable quantum gates – in the photonic
pseudo-spin subspace.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Directorate of Engineering (ENG), and the Technology Frontiers
Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.