* 2328044
* FMRG: Eco: Carbon-Inverted Manufacturing of Inverted Cements (CIMIC)
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,999,862.00

Ordinary Portland cement (OPC) is by far the world’s most widely used
manufactured material and is central to sustainable built environments, yet its
manufacturing demands high energy, emits a large amount of CO2, and overconsumes
natural resources, and hence is not eco-friendly. This multidisciplinary Future
EcoManufacturing research grant seeks to create future eco-friendly
manufacturing of next-generation greener cements by simultaneously utilizing the
CO2 equivalent (CO2e) emissions from OPC manufacturing and innovatively
upcycling the wastes generated from mining and refining industries as
feedstocks. The approach is inspired by and further engineers two geological
processes, namely: (1) subaerial exothermic rock weathering for carbon
mineralization, and (2) subsurface diagenetic alteration of mineral deposits
under low-temperature, hydrothermal conditions to form rocks at a massive scale.
The targeted product is a new class of silicate-cemented carbonates (iCem) to be
manufactured for the first time by transforming Ca/Mg-leached polymeric
silicates from waste feedstocks as cementing agents, promoted by silanization to
prevent their folding and aggregation, to bond the precipitated carbonates that
permanently store gaseous CO2 in solid minerals as value-added products. This
project is designed not only to generate the fundamental science on the
polymeric silicate-cemented iCem and develop knowledge on future manufacturing
of iCem, but also to tackle multiple pressing global challenges, including CO2
emission, climate change, and industrial waste upcycling. The project aims to
contribute to advancing sustainability, environmental protection, and circular
economy, thereby generating significant impacts on the environment and human
society at multiple scales and dimensions.

The project aims to have a transformative impact on traditional OPC
manufacturing and mining/refining processes. It intends to create: (1) a new
manufacturing pathway for next-generation, eco-friendly cementitious materials
(iCem) that simultaneously maximizes carbonation and improves iCem’s properties;
(2) new science through which polymeric silicate structures are preserved by
silanization as cementing and scaffolding constituents to strengthen iCem; (3)
innovative multifunctional use of amine silanes to enhance CO2 adsorption and
carbonation, bridge different silicate structures, and regulate nano-sized
carbonate precipitation; (4) novel combination of carbonation and cold sintering
to create eco-friendly manufacturing processes; and (5) eco-friendly
technologies for upcycling mine wastes towards a more circular economy,
addressing pressing techno-socio-economic challenges of the massive mine wastes
anticipated from worldwide adoption of electric vehicles. Concurrent education,
workforce development, and outreach activities aligned and accompanied with the
research plan are jointly conducted among five collaborating academic
institutions (with two from EPSCoR states, one being an HBCU/MSI), to train a
diverse, next-generation workforce with multidisciplinary skills in future
manufacturing of sustainable cementitious materials (a field that critically
needs new workforce), through research training and mentoring, curricula
development, short courses and workshops, and various outreach activities at
local community colleges, vocational, middle, and high schools.

This Future Manufacturing award is supported by the Divisions of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) and Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.