* 2328647
* Developing a Predictive Understanding of Soot Formation in Wildfires
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hope Michelsen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2026
* USD 383,716.00

Soot particles emitted from wildfires have enormous detrimental effects on human
health, agriculture, air and water quality, and global and regional climate. The
combustion processes involved in soot-particle production strongly influence
their composition and reactivity, toxicity, impact on agricultural productivity,
crop value, and water quality, processing in the atmosphere, ability to nucleate
clouds, atmospheric lifetime and transport, and optical and radiative
properties. In addition, large radiative heat transfer from soot particles
increases the difficulty of controlling and extinguishing medium- to large-scale
wildfires. Increasing droughts from climate change and expansion of the
wildland-urban interface further increase the frequency of large and
uncontrollable wildfires responsible for heavy atmospheric-soot loading and
their impact. Reducing wildfire damage requires effective methods to predict and
control fire spread. Radiation from soot is a critical component of wildfire-
propagation models, but current models do not accurately model soot-formation
chemistry, largely because of a severe lack of understanding of soot-production
mechanisms. The goal of this project is to address gaps in the understanding of
soot-formation chemistry relevant to wildfires and gain enough knowledge of
soot-formation mechanisms via targeted experiments and modeling to develop a
realistic sub-model for incorporation into wildfire-propagation models. An
advanced fundamental understanding of soot formation could also benefit
predictions of soot formation under a wide range of conditions and for
applications such as engines, furnaces, boilers, and explosives. This project
will also provide training for the next generation of scientists and engineers
who will tackle the challenges of climate change and the increasing frequency of
large-scale fires at the wildland-urban interface.

The objectives of this project are to (1) identify the most likely precursors to
soot inception, species that lead to particle surface growth, and mechanisms for
particle inception and growth during wildfires and (2) develop a predictive
model for soot inception during pyrolysis and combustion of biogenic organic
compounds and biomass. Vacuum-ultraviolet photoionization aerosol mass
spectrometry will be used to probe the precursors and composition of particles
generated during the pyrolysis and combustion of biogenic organic compounds.
Particle-size distributions associated with these experiments will be measured
using a scanning mobility particle sizer and particle volume fraction, and
optical properties will be measured using laser-induced incandescence. The
results of these experiments, coupled with theoretical investigations, will be
used to develop a chemical kinetic model for soot inception and growth. The most
significant expected outcome is the improvement soot-formation and radiative-
heat-transfer sub-models in wildfire propagation and emissions predictions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.