* 2328540
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Development of Er-doped Semiconductor Nanophotonics to realize Optoelectronic Capabilities for Quantum Information Applications at Telecom Wavelengths
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Matthew Doty, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 797,576.00

Non-technical Abstract: Classical information technologies use optical
interconnects to relay information between different media platforms. This is
typically done by fiber optics, relaying digital ones and zeros as pulses with
light on and off, respectively. For classical technologies, it is not necessary
to precisely control how many photons are emitted or detected, only to be able
to distinguish bright from dark. Quantum information technologies require
quantum interconnects that can transmit single pairs of entangled photons, which
is much more challenging. In this regard, a compact electrically-activated
source of single photons would be an important advance. One approach is to
utilize single photons emitted from individual Erbium (Er) atoms at standard
telecommunication wavelengths. The Er atoms must be embedded into a
semiconductor host to enable electrical excitation, and Gallium Arsenide (GaAs)
is ideal due to its well-established growth and nanofabrication. However,
attaining emission only from the Er atoms, rather than the GaAs host, remains a
challenge. One way to improve the rate of photon emission from Er atoms is to
embed the atoms into nanocavities. The primary objective of this project is to
investigate the application of Er-doped GaAs nanocavity devices for QISE, with
the ultimate aim of developing an on-chip electrically-pumped single-photon
device operating at telecom wavelengths. This project brings together an expert
in Rare Earth (RE) physics for classical optoelectronic applications from West
Chester University (WCU) and experts in scalable quantum photonic technologies
from the University of Delaware (UD). Additionally, this partnership advances a
new 3+2 dual degree program where students earn a bachelor's degree in physics
from WCU and a master's degree in QISE from UD in five years. This accelerated
educational track is designed to support low-income and underrepresented
students, promoting diversity in the QISE workforce while expediting its growth.

Technical Abstract: Creating scalable and reliable QISE technologies requires
material and device platforms that preserve quantum coherence and provide
suitable interactions to produce and control entanglement. Defect-based quantum
emitters in wide bandgap semiconductors have emerged as leading candidates for
future QISE applications due to their potential for scalability and integration.
Rare Earth-doped insulators have been extensively studied because the embedded
RE ions have sharp, stable optical transitions and long lifetimes that
facilitate high-fidelity quantum control. RE-doped semiconductors, however, have
not previously received similar attention for QISE due to the limited
availability of samples and challenges associated with competing native defects
and background spins. If these challenges can be overcome, the RE-doped
semiconductor platform could fill a significant gap for quantum technologies by
providing a spectrally-stable electrically-pumped single-photon source, quantum
memory, or element of a quantum repeater operating in the telecom C-band. In
this approach, single Er ions are coupled to photonic device components,
allowing the characterization of Er-doped GaAs as a single-photon source via
anti-bunching experiments. These new devices will be achieved through controlled
dilute doping and by enhancing the radiative rates of the Er ions using
nanophotonic structures. As part of this effort, the growth of Er-doped GaAs at
UD and the design and fabrication of new nanophotonic devices incorporating
waveguiding and out-coupling schemes for enhanced light-collection efficiency
are established.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.