* 2328509
* Conference: Ingram Olkin Forum at Carleton College
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Tarak Shah, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

A forum on “Statistical Challenges in the Analysis of Police Use of Force” will
be hosted at Carleton College in Northfield, Minnesota on November 9-10, 2023.
Analysis of data regarding force used by police presents a number of statistical
challenges that can, if not addressed carefully, lead to an incomplete or
inaccurate understanding of the issues. This can in turn hamper or improperly
redirect reform efforts, damage the credibility of advocacy campaigns, and
alienate the communities most directly impacted by the use of force by police.
This forum is part of a larger series of workshops hosted by the National
Institute of Statistical Sciences (NISS) in a forum series titled “Statistics
Serving Society.” This series seeks to address urgent issues of statistical
importance in society. Past forum topics have included algorithmic fairness,
unplanned disruptions to clinical trials during COVID-19, and privacy-preserving
methodologies. The Fall 2023 forum will result in collaborative research that is
aimed at improving evidence-based policy on policing in urban and rural areas.
Practitioners and community partners will further motivate the work being
conducted and the resulting output of the forum. Engagement of both
undergraduate and graduate students will be incorporated into the forum.

This in-person forum will highlight the unique approaches and perspectives
developed by scholars working in this area, in order to build a deeper
understanding of the issues and to improve the quality of evidence used to
inform reform efforts. The range of obstacles and data limitations present in
police use of force data make it a particularly challenging area to study, with
issues including data quality and completeness, processing of unstructured data,
privacy concerns, and statistical challenges in analyzing fairness. These issues
are present in the study of other important social phenomena, and the knowledge
gained through this exchange can improve research on related urgent social
issues. This forum will also foster interdisciplinary collaboration between its
proposed audience of statisticians, community members, activists, social
scientists, policymakers, and law enforcement professionals. Such collaboration
can lead to the development of innovative, data-driven approaches to address the
complex issue of police use of force. Link: https://www.niss.org/events/iof-
workshop-statistical-challenges-analysis-police-use-force

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.