* 2328837
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Investigating biomass pretreatment with nanodiamond quantum sensors
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jie Dong, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 745,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Leveraging novel quantum systems to realize measuring
devices beyond classical capabilities and expanding their applications to a
broader scientific community is at the heart of modern quantum science. This
project exploits the power of nanodiamond-based quantum sensors in the field of
bioenergy research to investigate the biomass pretreatment process, a crucial
step toward the production of sustainable biofuels. By developing a cell imaging
microscope with quantum sensing capabilities, the research team plans to
investigate the structure change of biomass in real-time, which will help to
accelerate the optimization of bioenergy production efficiency. On the
educational and outreach front, the research team will introduce the developed
quantum imaging microscope as a shared facility to the researchers at Southern
Illinois University Edwardsville. Moreover, the researcher team plans to create
a new summer course and research experience on quantum information for
undergraduate and master students, which helps to motivate and prepare them to
pivot to the brand-new and exciting opportunities enabled by quantum science.

Technical Abstract: The overarching goal of this project is to apply quantum-
enabled sensing technology based upon nitrogen-vacancy defects and other color
centers in nanodiamonds to directly visualize and image in real-time the
structure change of lignocellulosic biomass during the pretreatment process.
First, an existing cell imaging microscope at Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville will be modified and upgraded to detect and optimize nanodiamond
quantum sensors. Second, a robust and efficient functionalization procedure is
developed for nanodiamond surfaces to attach cellulase/xylanase enzymes.
Finally, the structure change of lignocellulosic biomass during pretreatment is
imaged and investigated, which helps to explore the optimal conditions for
pretreatment processes. Compared to conventional spectroscopy methods for this
task, nanodiamond quantum sensors feature several unique advantages: (1) the
ability to image and track in real-time biomass components in situ; (2) the
potential to label and differentiate different components of biomass (cellulose,
hemicellulose, and lignin) with different colors of nanodiamonds; (3) the
capability to actively modulate the signal intensity of nanodiamonds sensors and
isolate them from the background fluorescence (background-free).

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.