* 2328208
* ASCENT: Platforms for Integrated/Isolated Optical Power Transfer (PI2-OPT) for Multi-Scale Power and Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,325,170.00

Wide and ultrawide bandgap (WBG/UWBG) power semiconductor devices have
significant benefits in a variety of applications from electric vehicles to
grid-interface power electronics. However, these systems are subject to a number
of challenges and bottlenecks. Notably, WBG devices typically operate at high-
voltages, often in floating or isolated domains; they also require high-
frequency and accurate control and, importantly, a means to power floating and
isolated gate drivers. However, conventional isolated gate drivers rely on
electromagnetic isolation which scales poorly to small size, is expensive,
lossy, and prone to electromagnetic interference. This work will address the
needs of future high-voltage (HV), harsh-environment power electronics for
isolated power transfer such as can be used for WBG/UWBG gate drivers as well as
associated sensors, transducers, and embedded controllers. Specifically, this
project will develop platforms which use integrated/isolated optical-wireless
power transfer as a means to deliver both power and data (for control, feedback,
and fault detection) in future HV power electronics. Smaller, faster, optically
isolated power and signal interfaces may have broader impacts in a range of
modern power and energy systems from renewable energy and electrified
transportation to performance computing and communications infrastructure. The
project will also provide workforce development through training of graduate and
undergraduate students in critical areas of need, integration of research and
teaching, and connecting research to k-12 students and the general public
through organized dissemination and outreach.

The project will be completed by an interdisciplinary team that leverages skills
in semiconductor design, optics and photonics, power electronics, and integrated
circuits. The project is designed to maximize synergies and explore challenges
at the boundaries of these disciplines. Specifically, in this proposal we will
1) study and optimize single- and multi-chip photovoltaic-mode optical power and
signal receivers with high-efficiency monochromatic isolated power transfer; 2)
develop nanophotonics and package structures that can improve photon capture via
light trapping and photon recycling; 3) design a pseudo-adiabatic switched
capacitor gate-driver that can increase optoelectronic system efficiency, reduce
overall gate-drive power, and provide local control, diagnostics, and
communication; 4) develop kV-level isolated packaging, integration, and assembly
schemes that combine OPT and IC functions; 5) complete a final system
demonstration of a HV hybrid switched capacitor DC-DC converter prototype. By
using a system approach, we aim to show that optical power combined with
specifically tailored, integrated electronics can increase efficiency, while
reducing size, and enable new directions and opportunities in high-voltage and
harsh-environment power and energy systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.