* 2328471
* I-Corps: Long-Term, User-Friendly, and Motion-Artifact-Free Heart Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Zheng Yan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is focused on
improving the wearable heart monitorâ€™s long-term biocompatibility and long-
lasting fidelity of signal recording. Heart diseases, the leading cause of
mortality in the United States, contribute to nearly 655,000 deaths each year
and approximately $219 billion annual healthcare cost. Continuous, long-term
electrocardiogram monitoring outside clinical settings is critical for early
detection and timely intervention of a variety of heart conditions. However,
current wearable heart monitors usually suffer from limited long-term
biocompatibility and motion-induced artifacts, constraining their efficiency.
Recently developed, porous wearable heart monitors can surmount these
limitations and improve the quality of life for those afflicted with diverse
heart conditions. This project aims to assess the potential of this new
technology to spawn new business opportunities. The planned commercialization
path, including founding a start-up or licensing the technology to interested
third parties, offers promise for contributing to economic development and
creation of new jobs. Additionally, this project can also enhance scientific and
technological understanding in the field of biomedical monitoring and holds
potential to catalyze progress in healthcare technology.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a new porous wearable heart
monitor, which can simultaneously achieve ultrasoftness, high breathability,
outstanding antimicrobial property, thermal regulation, and strain-insensitive
electrical performance. Ultrasoftness can mitigate skin irritation and promote
seamless device-skin integration. High breathability can help to reduce the
likelihood of inflammation and data loss caused by sweat accumulation. The
antimicrobial feature can prevent infections from foreign pathogenic microbes, a
particularly crucial attribute for home-based applications. Thermal regulation
can avoid potential skin burns from wearable circuits and mitigate the effect of
temperature changes on device performance. Strain-insensitive electrical
performance can minimize artifacts caused by human motions. The integration of
these unique features can facilitate the creation of motion-artifact-free
wearable heart monitors with unprecedented long-term biocompatibility and user-
friendliness. Besides, additive manufacturing is employed in device fabrication
to ensure cost-effectiveness. Moreover, beyond heart monitors, this technique
can be harnessed to build a range of customized wearable devices with long-term
biocompatibility and long-lasting fidelity of biosignal recording to satisfy a
variety of arising requirements of home-based, personalized healthcare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.