* 2328241
* ASCENT: From sensors to multiscale digital twin to autonomous operation of resilient electric power grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Na Li, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,499,991.00

The modernization of power systems for clean energy by integrating multiple
renewable resources is changing the dynamics of power grids at a fundamental
level. There is a dire need to understand new phenomena and possible failure
mechanisms to unlock the design of countermeasures so that operators can make
electric grids more resilient. But the required degree of understanding must
keep up with the pace of new technologies in generation and storage, sensing and
communications, optimization and control, power electronics, machine learning,
and data science. This NSF project aims to develop a unified framework towards
this goal, starting from sensors to algorithms to real-time control. The project
will bring transformative change by leveraging fundamental developments in
control, power electronics, and machine learning, and fusing them with trusted
power system models, significantly enhancing the ability to predict and control
grid dynamics with a high share of renewable energy resources. Results will be
verified by building a digital twin of a large-scale transmission grid. The
intellectual merits of the project include a balanced solution between models of
renewable-integrated power systems developed from first principles and those
identified from data, and the convergence of advanced methods under development
within otherwise disconnected research communities. The broader impacts of the
project include addressing pressing research questions whose solution will
enable the building blocks of a cleaner power grid. The project will also engage
underrepresented groups in STEM.

A central problem hampering the pace at which one can integrate renewable energy
sources into electric power grids is the insufficient understanding, at a
systems level, of the dynamic interplay between existing assets and inverter-
based resources (IBR) deployed at scale on a transmission grid of substantial
size. This project will address this challenge by creating a unified modeling
environment for bulk transmission grids that integrates data-driven yet
analytical IBR models. The resulting framework lends itself seamlessly to a
state-space form familiar to those working with dynamical systems. Thus, the
proposed framework is inclusive beyond traditional disciplines in power systems
modeling. The approach will be to leverage this inclusiveness by absorbing into
a digital twin of a transmission grid the latest developments in tangential
areas driving innovations in power systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.