* 2328549
* Conference: Funding for Student and Young Scientist Attendance at the 16th International Solar Wind Conference Series
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Juan Carlos Martinez Oliveros, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 36,657.00

The International Solar Wind Conference series is a triennial event that brings
experts from around the world to discuss the latest research and advancements in
the field of solar wind physics and the connections between the solar wind and
other space-environments. Over the past fifty years, the conference has grown in
size and scope, attracting scientists from a wide range of disciplines,
including solar physics, heliophysics, space physics, and planetary science. The
conference has also evolved to include sessions on cutting-edge topics such as
solar flares, coronal mass ejections, and space weather, providing opportunities
for interdisciplinary interactions between professionals working on various
aspects of space physics research. This project supports students and young
scientists to attend the 16th International Solar Wind Conference Series to be
held June 12-16, 2023 in Asilomar, California.

The Solar Wind 16 conference has compiled a diverse set of selected topics that
comprehensively cover the vast field of space physics and solar wind science.
The conference brings together experts and researchers from various disciplines
to discuss and present the latest advancements and research findings in the
field. From the origin and acceleration of the solar wind to its impact on the
heliosphere and planetary environments, the selected topics encompass a wide
range of themes that reflect the multidisciplinary nature of the field. The
chosen topics promise to foster engaging discussions and collaborations among
the attendees and contribute to the advancement of space physics research. The
topics and proposed sessions are: i. Fundamentals of Solar Wind Physics; ii.
Heating and Acceleration of the solar wind ; iii. Solar Wind Interactions; and
iv. The “Big Picture”. The NSF funds will be distributed among students and
early career scientists as stipends to cover their registration, lodging and/or
travel expenses. This budget will allow for a significant number of students and
young scientists to attend the conference, providing them with the opportunity
to present their research, network with their peers, and learn from established
experts in the field. This investment in the next generation of scientists will
help to ensure the continued growth and success of the solar wind research
community and additionally provide an opportunity to support diversity and
inclusivity within this community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.