* 2328489
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Quantum Molecular Dynamics on Quantum Computers
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dmitri Babikov, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 797,576.00

Non-technical Abstract: One of the long-thought applications of quantum
computers is to simulate quantum systems, such as molecules and materials, at
the atomistic level. Several algorithms exist for the calculations of molecular
electronic structure (called quantum chemistry) using either gate-based quantum
computers with only a few tens of qubits, such as Sycamore, IBM Q-machines, or
using quantum annealers with a larger number of qubits, such as the D-Wave
systems. Another essential component of chemical modeling is the propagation of
the equations of motion for constituent atoms in time and space (e.g., along the
reaction path), called molecular dynamics. Molecular dynamics simulations play a
pivotal role not only in guiding and analyzing experiments, but also as an
interdisciplinary computational tool capable of reaching far beyond experimental
conditions in a variety of research topics. The project team is among the first
to run molecular dynamics simulations on actual quantum hardware -- the DWave
quantum annealer, trying to harness the power of quantum computing for the
benefit of molecular dynamics simulations. The researchers at Marquette
University and at Los Alamos National Laboratory will jointly supervise
undergraduate and graduate students and one teaching postdoc to conduct research
on quantum dynamics. At Marquette, these students take the Introduction to
Quantum Computing course and several other courses related to scientific
computing and quantum chemistry and attend a series of Quantum Seminars
presented by invited QISE experts. During the summer, these students are routed
to Los Alamos for internships, where they attend the Quantum Computing Summer
School, interact with other scientists at the Information Science and Technology
Institute, and are immersed in the research environment of the national lab.

Technical Abstract: Building upon these developments, the project team carries
out research within three parallel thrusts, that include: 1) Development and
applications of Quantum Annealer Eigensolver (QAE) for calculations of the
rotational-vibrational spectra of molecules and for the description of chemical
reactivity; 2) Quantum molecular dynamics simulations on quantum annealer within
the time-dependent framework, using quantum differential equations (QDE)
algorithm with applications in the modeling of molecule + surface phenomena; and
3) Theoretical studies of coherent control of molecular eigenstates with the
focus on QISE applications including phase effects, coherent manipulation of
molecular vibrational and rotational levels, interaction and energy transfer
between polar molecules, and the use of external fields to interrogate such
interactions for possible development of molecular qubits.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.