* 2328248
* GOALI: ASCENT: Online Stability Assessment, Flexibility, and Enhancement of IBR-dominated Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Qing-Chang Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,233,079.00

This NSF project aims to develop a comprehensive theoretical framework for
modeling, designing, sensing, and controlling the post-fault stability of future
power systems with varying levels of inverter-based resources and synchronous
generators. The project will use an innovative energy-function-based approach to
study how system stability responds to configurations, pre-fault conditions, and
faults. This work promises to transform how we assess and enhance the stability
of power systems, advancing scientific knowledge in this critical field. The
intellectual merits of the project include (1) using energy-function-based and
direct methods for stability assessment, which significantly reduce the need for
detailed time-domain simulations; (2) considering inverters' fast dynamics and
generators' slow dynamics as a two-time-scale system, thereby simplifying the
complexity of stability analysis; and (3) implementing bounded control theory to
narrow the gap between simulation results and actual hardware performance,
enhancing the practical applicability of the findings. The project outcomes will
likely have a broader impact in diverse fields, including robotics, ecosystem
modeling, and optimization. Creating an online stability assessment tool will
benefit utility engineers, while an inverter design guide will inform and
influence the work of the power electronics community. Additionally, the project
will engage diverse individuals through various activities at the four
participating institutions, reinforcing its educational and societal benefits.

The technical goals of this project involve establishing the theoretical
foundations of energy functions for two-time-scale systems, exploring the
connection between power system stability and inverter controller dynamics, and
minimizing discrepancies between power system models and inverter hardware. This
will be accomplished by applying direct methods to identify stability regions,
conducting theoretical investigations, and validating findings across software
simulations, hardware-in-the-loop simulations, and a physical 108-converter
network. As a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project, the team will collaborate with a utility partner on a realistic
transmission system model. The project will rigorously validate the proposed
online transient stability assessment method on a 5000-bus system, encompassing
a broad spectrum of IBR penetrations from 0 to 100%.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.