* 2328712
* FuSe: Co-designed Systems for In-sensor Processing with Sustainable Nanomaterials (COSMIC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tania Roy, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2026
* USD 452,543.00

The proposal aims at developing a new technology for artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning (ML). Using environmentally sustainable materials, a
system for processing information – specifically for image processing – will be
developed. The current AI models, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT, require a massive
amount of power and resources to run. More companies are rushing to create their
ChatGPT clones, which is not sustainable and will only exacerbate climate
change. Specialized hardware for vision sensing that is smaller in footprint and
more energy-efficient to run AI models on conventional devices like laptops,
without relying on cloud servers, is proposed. Artificial vision sensors can
transform the future by enabling vision beyond the human eye’s capabilities,
leading to impact across the entire landscape of modern life. By detecting
changes in motion, it will lead to a new generation of self-driving cars for
future “smarter” cities. The proposed vision sensors will enable improved
monitoring of processes in the industry, and improved understanding of body
movements of athletes, all with low energy consumption and on a small area.
Future products enabled by the scientific discoveries and advancements of this
work will augment the semiconductor industry. For instance, improved synthesis
processes for electronic nanomaterials that are fully recyclable will supplement
the industry’s growth, creating new job opportunities. Semiconductor workforce
development will be strongly emphasized and enabled by this grant, and students
trained through this project will be equipped to join the multitudes of
industrial efforts accompanied by the CHIPS for America act and other
initiatives. Local college students will be exposed to the developments and
trained as a workforce for the semiconductor industry. High school teachers will
be exposed to cutting-edge research in semiconductors to convey the enthusiasm
of the field to their students.

A materials-devices-system co-design for in-sensor computing with pixel arrays
heterogeneously integrated with crossbar arrays to form a convolutional neural
network (CNN) for image processing, with a special emphasis on sustainable
manufacturing, is proposed by the Co-designed Systems for In-sensor Processing
with Sustainable Nanomaterials (COSMIC) team. The team will pursue co-design and
heterogeneous integration for bio-inspired sensing-to-action to optimize power
consumption, performance, and hardware footprint using machine learning
architectures. Pursuit of these goals will be undertaken by experts in
neuromorphic devices (Roy), nanomaterials for sustainable electronics
(Franklin), and neuromorphic circuits and algorithms (Li). The objectives are
to: A. Develop in-pixel computing circuits with the highest possible fill factor
of each pixel; B. Integrate the pixel arrays with a crossbar-based in-memory
computing circuitry to realize a CNN for image classification and segmentation;
and C. Develop the entire process with recyclable materials to reduce electronic
waste. For in-pixel computing, novel optoelectronic synaptic devices using two-
dimensional materials as channel and gate electrode, with multi-wavelength
sensing capabilities will be designed and optimized. The in-pixel computing
circuit forms the first layer of the CNN. Subsequent layers of the CNN will be
realized with crossbar arrays of memristive synapses. Materials-device co-design
will ensure the best characteristics of the synaptic devices for in-pixel
computing and crossbar implementation, while device-system co-design will
mitigate the remaining non-idealities while maximizing performance through a
hybrid analog/digital computing scheme. Peripheral circuits with nanomaterials
will be co-designed based on device performance and precision requirements of
the crossbar circuits. The recyclability of all circuits will be studied and
ensured for sustainable manufacturing. Finally, the optoelectronic synapse-based
pixel arrays will be heterogeneously integrated with the crossbar arrays and
peripheral circuitry, and the performance of this hardware for image processing
tasks, such as classification and segmentation, will be evaluated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.