* 2328975
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: R3AP: Retunable, Reconfigurable, Racetrack-Memory Acceleration Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Mimi Xie, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 12/31/2026
* USD 72,713.00

In traditional Von Neumann computing systems, a significant bottleneck arises
because the data transfer speed to and from the computing units has considerably
fallen behind capacity, processing speed, and efficiency. To mitigate this
bottleneck by bridging the gap between storage and computation, many innovative
storage technologies have been introduced, along with near- and in-memory
processing solutions designed for both emerging and traditional memory systems.
Nonetheless, a considerable challenge remains: the prototyping and
characterization of actual fabricated systems, especially those encompassing
both mature technologies and cutting-edge technologies. To overcome this
challenge, this project develops a cutting-edge Retunable and Reconfigurable
Acceleration Platform (R3AP) based on emerging racetrack memory, leveraging a
device-architecture-application co-design approach. The standout features of
R3AP include its ability to function as a reconfigurable logic, a processing-in-
memory (PIM) accelerator, and a high-density memory storage. It is retunable,
meaning it can operate with bit-wise, integer, and floating-point precision, and
can simulate analog-like storage and processing. R3AP effectively mitigates data
movement inefficiencies while offering domain-specific acceleration and
adaptability. With its dense, reliable, energy-efficient, and ultra-low latency
computational capability, R3AP has the potential to revolutionize the storage
and processing capabilities of future computing systems, such as those in
Internet of Things (IoT) and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). It can also be
applied to high-performance and cloud computing systems. The project's findings
are shared through publications, workshops, design contests, tutorials,
industrial courses, and technology transfer activities. Educational resources
and outreach activity plans are made available on the project website, and
software artifacts are released on GitHub.

To realize R3AP, the project comprises a series of interrelated research tasks
spanning multiple system layers. At the device level, the project integrates the
voltage-controlled skyrmion motion mechanism with the industrial-grade 8-inch
wafer magnetic tunneling junction stack and demonstrates a fully functional
Skyrmion racetrack memory (SRTM), including the formation, shifting, and
detection of the skyrmion stream. Additionally, it evaluates the performance of
SRTM, focusing on aspects such as write-error-rate, shift-error-rate, read-
error-rate, operation speed, and energy consumption. It also addresses and
mitigates non-idealities, such as the pinning effect, and goes on to develop and
demonstrate CMOS-integrated SRTM. On the architecture and circuit layers, the
project involves the creation of a mutable lookup table, compute, and memory
unit. This unit performs like multi-context Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
logic, parallel PIM logic, massively parallel accumulators, and analog-like
storage and compute structures, leveraging the unique properties of SRTM. This
layer ensures high-speed memory access from a hierarchy consisting of banks,
subarrays, tiles, etc., and further adds links via configurable switch boxes and
a mesh-based network-on-chip to enable data movement operations for PIM that
would otherwise be challenging. At the application layer, the project develops
novel modeling, analysis, design space exploration, and runtime adjustment
techniques to exploit the high degree of reconfigurability provided by R3AP. The
goal is to adapt future IoT and CPS applications to changing environments and
requirements, optimize resource usage, withstand external disturbances, and
enhance overall system performance, resilience, and sustainability. Across all
these layers, the project develops a scalable computer-aided design (CAD) flow.
This involves a multi-level intermediate representation-based compilation flow,
which can compile high-level description languages such as PyTorch and C/C++
into binaries for the R3AP device. This flow uses a multi-level hierarchy
including front-end, middle-end, and back-end compilation of the designs, and
abstracts various optimization and management problems to a suitable level for
efficient resolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.