* 2328433
* Conference: 2023 Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Lihini Aluwihare, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 45,825.00

The Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference brings together members of
the scientific community, graduate students, postdocs, and early career
scientists to discuss new, cutting-edge research in chemical oceanography and
marine chemistry. The National Science Foundation, along with the Gordon
Research Conference, will co-sponsor the participation of 15 Discussion Leaders
and Speakers as well as 20 graduate students, postdocs, or early career
investigators attending this conference. In addition, this award will support
early career participants (postdocs and students) attending the Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS), a 2-day workshop held prior to the GRC meeting that aims to build
a cohort of early career chemical oceanographers.

The 2023 Gordon Research Conference on Chemical Oceanography will be held at
Southern New Hampshire University on July 16-21, 2023. The primary goal of the
conference is to provide a forum that brings together scientists who are leading
contributors in the field of marine chemistry along with graduate students and
postdocs to exchange ideas on new, innovative research. Presentations and
discussions at the 2023 Gordon Research Conference will revolve around the theme
of "Tracers in the Sea” with a focus on the molecules, elements, and isotopes
that are used as tracers of biogeochemical and physical processes in the past
and the present ocean. Session topics at the 2023 Gordon Research Conference
include: (1) Tracers of Biogeochemical Processes in the Sea; (2) Geochemical
Proxies; (3) Vertical Export; (4) Life at the Margins and its Influence on Ocean
Chemistry; (5) Emerging Anthropogenic Impacts on Ocean Chemistry; (6)
Anthropogenic Tracers in the Sea; (7) Gases in the Ocean’s Interior; and (8)
Controls on Dissolved Organic Matter Accumulation. There will also be a session
on Late-Breaking Topics. The Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference
has become recognized as an important venue to exchange ideas in the
interdisciplinary field of marine chemistry and to forge new scientific
collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.