* 2328383
* FMRG: Eco: GOALI: CAS: Understanding the Sustainability Framework for Convergent In-Space Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Christopher Roberts, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,995,494.00

With the democratization and commercialization of space poised to springboard
the next generation of space technologies, scientific discoveries, and
explorations, distinct advantages will be realized by whichever nation first
establishes these “factories-in-space” for manufacturing, assembly, repair, and
reclamation in non-terrestrial environments. Recent advances in the space
industry have brought humanity closer to exploring potential ways to utilize
space resources and protect the Earth’s environment. With the emerging interests
and technological progress in in-space manufacturing (ISM), it is of utmost
importance to conceptualize the fundamental principles of ISM sustainability and
to guide its technological development through these principles to ensure that
the pursuit of progress aligns with the goals of environmental stewardship and
long-term viability. There is a significant national need to advance sustainable
ISM to be a world leader in such knowledge and technologies, as is reflected in
national budget priorities and critical emerging technologies list. The long-
term Earth and humanity benefits from ISM are immense, especially in the context
of globally pressing challenges related to climate change, resource depletion,
environmental pollution, and population growth. The overarching goal of this
project is to enable a sustainable space industry that minimizes its impact on
the Earth and space environments. The project integrates research, education,
and workforce development to provide career awareness and preparation in support
of a future diverse and inclusive workforce knowledgeable in technical and
societal best practices for ISM. The project is supported by the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences (MPS), and co-funded by the Division of Translational Impacts (TI) in
the Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP), the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) in
the Office of Integrated Activities (OIA) in the Office of the Director (OD).

The proposed work converges multi-process and multi-material interfacial
manufacturing, sustainable engineering, and participatory science to serve as a
benchmark to re-imagine a new form of space commerce that manufactures at the
point-of-need. The team will investigate how existing resources in space, such
as metallic space debris and lunar regolith, can be used to manufacture products
for use in space and reduce the supply from Earth. Mechanisms by which variables
akin to multi-material and multi-process interfacial engineering influence the
sustainability and quality of ISM products will be identified. The vision is to
realize a flexible hybrid ISM platform allowing the fabrication of an array of
specialty, one-off parts using resources available in space with the Earth and
space environmental impacts and benefits clearly and accurately assessed and
attained. This research integrates approaches and tools, including participatory
modeling, hybrid asynchronous additive and forming process design and modeling,
experimental verification of ISM with simulated space conditions, post-process
mechanical performance evaluation, prospective life cycle assessment, scenario
analysis, and multi-objective decision-making, to pioneer the development of a
sustainability framework for ISM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.