* 2328448
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Diet and Foodways among Urban Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Sarah Baitzel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 31,109.00

This project investigates the ways in which colonialism and local competition,
conflict, and environmental factors shaped the diets of populations in urban
trade centers. Previous scholarship has emphasized how foodways reflect the
convergent histories and global interactions of urban trade centers in terms of
exotic foods. European colonialism is often understood to impact inadvertently
local food systems by introducing new crops or animals and change local tastes
and ideas about food, leading to the abandonment or transformation of local food
systems, as seen for example in the introduction of rice, potatoes and maize
from their points of origin to multiple other regions without considering the
diverse cultures of urban residents. Archaeology is well placed to move beyond
the focus on colonizing forces to examine how individual experiences related to
religion, gender, age and kinship shaped the incorporation of local and foreign
resources into diet. By comparing individual dietary histories from various
urban centers, what patterns emerge about personalized, communal, and broader
regional food choices in response to local and colonial influences? This
research provides training for undergraduate students in STEM methods. Results
on foodways and personal identities are particularly well suited to be
disseminated to scholarly and public audiences in formats that will allow their
use for research and especially K-12 educational material.

To investigate how urban elites negotiated such influences in light of deeply
rooted foodways shaped by global trade networks and local environments, this
project reconstructs human dietary patterns using stable isotopic analysis. By
applying this method to different human skeletal elements, researchers gain
insights into dietary changes through individual lives. Combining dietary and
bioarchaeological data with contextual information about burial associations and
site locations allows researchers to elucidate dietary patterns related to local
environments, gender, and affinity. Based on these fine-grained distinctions,
researchers thus are able to assess contributions of local, foreign, and
colonial influences on foodways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.