* 2328217
* FMRG: Bio: Manufacturing Ultra-High-Density DNA-Enabled Nanoelectronics Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

The ability to design, manufacture, and integrate semiconductor-based devices
led to the Information Technology revolution. Key to this advance was the
decrease in the size of transistors from the micron-scale to the nanometer-
scale. However, physical limitations within the manufacturing process are now
limiting further decreases in size and hence the density of electronic devices.
Alternatively, it has long been imagined that molecular-scale components could
play a role in electronic systems as they naturally reside at nanometer-scales
and can be synthesized to perform an array of interesting functions from
rectification and amplification to sensing and light emission. However, robust,
high-yield integration of nanoscale components such as graphene nanoribbons,
carbon nanotubes, nanoparticles, or single-molecules with conventional
electronic circuits has proven to be challenging. Toward this end, this project
aims to catalyze the long-term expansion of manufacturable DNA-based electronics
by leveraging advances in DNA nanotechnology, synthetic biology, and nanoscale
electronics. Toward this vision, this project focuses on designing and
manufacturing a plug-and-play DNA nano-cartridge from the bottom-up that can be
integrated with conventional, top-down electronic circuits to create ultra-high
density systems. The nano-cartridge platform will enable a myriad of potential
applications, and as an initial target the project will focus on manufacturing a
novel class of inexpensive electronic biosensors capable of rapid, simultaneous
detection of hundreds of unique biomolecules (e.g., DNA or RNA). Immediate
applications for these sensors range from monitoring the supply chain in the
agricultural industry to pathogen detection and disease tracking. In addition,
this project, which includes two HSIs, aims to help prepare a workforce
inclusive of diverse backgrounds (K-12, community colleges, four-year colleges
and research universities) to work in this nascent field. The research goals and
workforce development plan are integrated with an outreach effort aimed at
expanding the enrollment of under-represented groups in STEM fields, providing
teacher training and research experiences to undergraduate students, and
introducing K-12 students to cutting-edge science and engineering.

This project presents an interdisciplinary approach to developing a foundation
for manufacturing ultra-high density, carbon-based electronics. To enable this
capability, the research team will work to catalyze a manufacturing pipeline
that leverages DNA nanotechnology to address critical roadblocks to the wide-
spread use of these systems. To advance this pipeline, this project focuses on
developing: (i) scalable, high-purity methods for obtaining chiral-specific
carbon nanotubes, self-aligned single-molecule junctions, and hierarchically
assembled hybrid DNA nanostructures; (ii) reliable methodologies for integrating
bottom-up and top-down architectures utilizing a combination of field-driven,
directed-assembly and microarray liquid dispensing processes; (iii) computer
aided design (CAD) and design for manufacturing (DFM) tools for designing and
modeling the electronic properties of DNA nanostructures, carbon nanotubes,
their interconnects, and their assembly processes; and (iv) a framework that
will allow a workforce to be trained with a sufficient background in synthetic
biology, DNA nanotechnology, nanoscale electronics, and manufacturing to help
move this field from a leading-edge research platform to a foundational
manufacturing platform in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.