* 2328112
* FMSG: Cyber: Using a cloud-based platform to quantify the uncertainty of the process-structure-property-surface relationship for repeatable additive manufacturing of Inconel 718
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Nasser Ghariban, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,999.00

This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project supports research into the
theoretical and experimental foundation required to use metal additive
manufacturing (AM) as a production process for functional end-use parts. Metal
AM is a driver for innovation and competitiveness of United States manufacturing
because it allows rapid implementation of new part designs to reduce the time-
to-market of new products. However, using metal AM as a production process
instead of a prototyping tool requires reliably and repeatably manufacturing
parts with near-identical structure, surface topography, and properties.
Consequently, understanding the uncertainty associated with the process-
structure-property-surface (PSPS) relationship is important. Yet, PSPS research
is time-consuming and costly because many specimens are required to derive
meaningful information and, alternatively, aggregating existing datasets of
different studies to expand and enhance insights about the PSPS relationship is
not straightforward because of access/permissions and inconsistencies between
data formats. Hence, this research specifically aims to address these
fundamental problems by leveraging an uncertainty quantification (UQ) framework
and machine learning (ML) algorithms to analyze microstructure and surface
topography images, and quantify the PSPS relationship. Additionally, a cloud-
based database will make the data and knowledge available to other researchers.
Research integrates with education and workforce development, specifically
underrepresented groups, through a partnership with Virginia Tech (VT), Virginia
State University (VSU), a 4-year Historically Black College/University (HBCU),
and the Commonwealth Center for Advanced Manufacturing (CCAM), a public-private
partnership in Virginia.

The research objective of this project is twofold: quantify the uncertainty of
the PSPS relationship for laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) of Inconel 718 and,
establish a cloud-based database to aggregate and share PSPS data among
different researchers, to reduce duplication of effort and accelerate PSPS
research by data-sharing. To accomplish this objective, the research aims to
combine a UQ framework with ML algorithms to derive data-driven models that
relate L-PBF process parameters to metrics that quantify the microstructure and
as-built surface topography. The knowledge resulting from this research will (1)
quantify the uncertainty of the microstructure and as-built surface topography
as a function of the L-PBF process parameters (forward UQ problem); (2)
determine the L-PBF process parameters required to obtain specific uncertainty
(or probability definition) of microstructure and as-built surface topography
(inverse UQ problem); (3) derive an operating map of the solution of the forward
and inverse problems and its uncertainty as a function of the L-PBF process
parameters; (4) implement a cloud-based database to aggregate microstructure
images and surface topography maps that can be cited using a digital object
identifier, and enable combining user-generated datasets. The outcomes of this
project will reduce technical barriers and spur adoption of metal AM as a viable
manufacturing process for functional end-use parts.

This Future Manufacturing research is supported by the Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate's Division of Computer and Network Systems
(CISE/CNS) and the Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Directorateâ€™s
Division of Social and Economic Sciences (SBE/SES).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.