* 2328610
* Postdoctoral Training Program to Develop Critical Research Skills
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Annie Fukushima, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 09/30/2026
* USD 648,784.00

There is a critical need to increase the number of individuals with relevant
expertise that align with emerging economic needs in areas such as high-tech
manufacturing, artificial intelligence, safe renewable energies, and cyber
security. In order to meet these needs, it is of the utmost importance that STEM
education researchers come from diverse perspectives to help identify and answer
consequential questions relating to STEM education research, including gender
and sexual minorities. This postdoctoral research cohort program seeks to train
early-career scholars to carry out STEM education research projects that
incorporate analyses at the institutional, classroom, and cultural levels. The
program is designed to prepare postdoctoral fellows for careers who are well-
positioned to lead productive careers carrying out research aligned with
emerging needs and is policy relevant. The cohort program is designed to foster
a sense of belonging through a STEM education research community. This project
is designed to recruit and train a cohort of three postdoctoral scholars to
address intersectional concerns of marginalization and disciplinary activity in
STEM. The project is designed to respond to the need to (1) support early-career
STEM education researchers who have strong potential to address the needs of
STEM learners that are under-researched and (2) help postdoctoral fellows to
further develop skills required to conduct rigorous STEM education research that
analyze phenomena at the institutional, cultural, and classroom-levels. Fellows
will be engaged in research through two research rotations prior to choosing two
permanent mentors (one in science education and one in critical studies) to
support them in creating and implementing an independent research project. The
project incorporates a rich series of development opportunities including
mentoring, conference attendance, and a research symposium.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.