* 2328841
* Collaborative Research: FuSe:Substrate-inverted Multi-Material Integration Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Jifeng Liu, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 10/31/2026
* USD 115,241.00

Heterogeneous integration of new materials promises to significantly expand the
range of capabilities accessible by silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs).
However, classical integration protocols require custom deep etching through the
top layers to access the photonic devices underneath, and thus face severe
limitations in integration capacity, density, and process complexity. This
program will explore co-design of new materials, integration processes, device
architectures, and packaging solutions to realize a transformative universal
heterogeneous integration platform: Substrate-inverted Multi-Material
Integration Technology (SuMMIT). Upon success, the SuMMIT platform will
significantly expand and expedite heterogeneous photonic integration of new
materials—a key driving force for PIC technology advances. The program will also
strengthen academia-industry partnership and workforce development through
development of both online and in-person photonics training programs.

The SuMMIT integration scheme leverages advanced wafer-scale 3-D packaging
technologies such as through-Si vias and direct bond interconnects to enable
seamless integration of materials traditionally considered incompatible with
complementary metal-oxide semiconductor processing. Another innovative aspect of
the proposed scheme is the use of through-Si vias to establish a bi-facial
electrical and optical interconnect configuration, which offers much higher
interconnect density and improved electrical performance such as latency and
power consumption as compared to peripheral wire-bonding. Furthermore, the
SuMMIT platform opens up a plethora of design concepts creatively re-purposing
existing components and structures in industry-standard PICs towards
facilitating heterogeneous integration. The program’s focus on building on
standard PIC processes and structures with minimal customization facilitates
industry adoption of the innovations and their integration into the existing
semiconductor manufacturing ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.