* 2328160
* FMRG: Cyber: Manufacturing USA: Exploiting Spatio-Temporal Interdependency Between Electrochemical Manufacturing and Power Grid to Optimize Flexibility and Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Emmanouil Mavrikakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,999,467.00

The chemical manufacturing sector and the power grid are becoming increasingly
coupled. This is driven by their shared interest in decarbonizing operations:
the chemical sector is aiming to decarbonize via electrification of key
technologies, while the grid is aiming to decarbonize via adoption of renewable
(wind/solar) power. As such, mitigating the inherent intermittency of renewable
power is a grand challenge that needs to be overcome to achieve decarbonization
of both sectors. This will require the design of new and flexible technologies
that can shift power demands from the seconds to seasons timescale and from the
local to the national level. The chemical sector is uniquely positioned to help
provide these unprecedented levels of flexibility. This can be achieved via
modular electrochemical (EC) technologies that use highly intermittent power to
produce chemicals in a distributed manner and via the efficient production of
energy carriers (e.g., hydrogen, ammonia, formic acid) that can be used to
store, transport, and re-generate power. To realize this vision, a paradigm
shift under which EC technologies are co-designed with electricity markets is
needed; specifically, EC technologies need to be designed as flexibility
providers that actively participate in electricity markets and such markets need
to properly remunerate flexibility services. More broadly, EC technologies are
vital sector-coupling assets that can provide flexibility to enable risk
mitigation (e.g., extreme weather, cyber-attacks) and can play a key role in
ensuring that the power grid and chemical supply chains operate in a reliable,
sustainable, and economic manner. Accordingly, This Future CyberManufacturing
research grantÂ will boost American chemical manufacturing and advance the
prosperity and welfare of the United States. The project will also lead to new
design principles, simulation models, data, and technologies that enhance the
training of the next-generation workforce of chemical engineers, electrical
engineers, and chemists to leverage multiscale thinking to develop technologies
and solutions. The project will also lead to new business practices that foster
coordination between chemical and power sectors with the goal of helping
accelerate the adoption of new technologies and decarbonization efforts.

The goal of this Future Manufacturing project is to conduct fundamental
computational and experimental research to design new and flexible
electrochemical (EC) technologies that best integrate with the power grid and
with chemical supply chains, to identify key aspects that limit flexibility of
these technologies, and to determine how to best exploit their flexibility to
achieve economic and sustainability goals at a societal scale. Specifically, an
interdisciplinary team will: (i) develop infrastructure-level modeling
techniques that capture the multiscale coupling between the chemical and power
sectors that capture different types of EC technologies and help identify
amounts and types of flexibility needed; (ii) develop device-level models for EC
technologies that capture the interplay between flexibility and design (e.g.,
cell capacity, ramping capacity, efficiency, durability); (iii) develop density
functional theory models that help identify electrode materials to meet design
specifications; and (iv) develop experimental procedures to evaluate different
reaction chemistries, materials, and EC configurations (e.g., coupled,
decoupled, tandem, cascade), and to collect key data that informs modeling and
economic/environmental assessments. These capabilities will be combined via
convergent studies that will answer questions of societal and industrial
relevance. The convergent research approach will lead to new design principles,
simulation models, data, and technologies that will serve as the backbone of a
workforce development plan that will train a new generation of chemical
engineers, electrical engineers, and chemists that leverage multiscale thinking
to develop technologies and solutions. The project will lead to new business
practices that foster coordination between the chemical and power sectors with
the goal of helping accelerate the adoption of EC technologies and
decarbonization efforts. This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the
Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET), Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC), Chemistry (CHE), and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences (DMS).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.