* 2328775
* 2023 Alan T Waterman Award
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Asegun Henry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr. Asegun Henry as the 2023
recipient of its Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's highest honor that
annually recognizes an outstanding researcher age 40 years or younger and funds
his or her research in any field of science or engineering. This year's awardee
will receive a $1 million grant over a five-year period for further advanced
study in his field.

Dr. Asegun Henry is the Robert N. Noyce Career Development Associate Professor
and Director of the Atomistic Simulation & Energy (ASE) Research Group at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Dr. Henry is also the founder and
CEO of the Thermal Battery Corporation. Prior to joining the faculty at MIT, Dr.
Henry was an Assistant Professor at Georgia Tech.

Dr. Henry's research activities span a broad spectrum from studying phonon
transport (heat transport) at the atomistic scale to addressing renewable energy
storage and energy conversion systems at high temperatures. At the fundamental
level, Professor Henry has made significant advances and contributions to phonon
transport in disordered materials, and phonon transport at interfaces using
advanced computational approaches. In the area of energy storage he has
developed concepts of converting excess renewable electricity into thermal
energy stored in molten silicon, that can then be later converted on demand to
electricity using photovoltaics. He has developed the highest temperature pump
on record, which uses an all-ceramic mechanical pump, to pump liquid metal above
1400°C (in the Guinness Book of World Records).

Professor Henry has been the recipient of a number of awards including: the
National Science Foundation CAREER Award, the Lockheed Inspirational Young
Faculty Award, the Georgia Power Professor of Excellence Award, the ASME
Bergles-Rohsenow Young Investigator Award in Heat Transfer. He was also the
winner of the 2018 World Technology Award for Energy. He has been awarded a
number of fellowships including an MIT Lemelson Presidential Fellowship, a
Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship, a UNCF-Merck
Postdoctoral Fellowship and a Ford Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.