* 2328457
* Travel: Student Travel Support for HDF5 User Group (HUG) meeting 2023
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Surendra Byna, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The HDF5 User group (HUG) meeting 2023, to be held in Columbus, OH from August
16-18th, 2023, will bring together a diverse set of experts to discuss the
design, development, and usage of HDF5 libraries and tools that form an
ecosystem based on HDF5. The associated presentations and discussions bring a
plethora of opportunities for graduate students working in HPC and experimental
/ observational data management and analysis to get a range of benefits. The HUG
meeting is unique in nature. The event will include a set of invited talks from
researchers, users, and library developers, who are experts in the field. The
event also includes contributed presentations that are submitted through an open
call for presentation and selected by the HUG organizing team. The event also
contains tutorials and presentations from the HDF5 Group and expert HDF5
developers on tuning and optimization strategies for various HDF5 library
components and troubleshooting guidelines. The HUG meeting is organized by a
leading group of experts in HDF5 and data management technologies. The project
will fund students to participate in the meeting, to engage with the HDF5
research and user community. The funding provided by NSF will have a significant
impact on increasing readiness of students for entering the workforce at
national laboratories, HPC centers, cloud companies, and academia.

HDF5 (Hierarchical Data Format version 5) provides a data model, library, and
file format for storing and managing data. Due to the versatility of its data
model, and its portability, longevity, and efficiency, hundreds of thousands of
scientific applications use HDF5 as part of their data management solution. The
HUG 2023 meeting organizers are recruiting students wishing to participate in
the event from a diverse set of institutions. To increase the participation from
the under-represented communities in computer science, the event organizers will
engage with communities such as The Ohio LSAMP Alliance. Prospective
participants will have to apply, and submissions are evaluated by a committee
for scientific merit and for promoting diversity. The students will get several
benefits from attending the event, including: (1) exposure to the latest data
management, analysis, and I/O technologies (computing platforms, accelerators,
and networks), their features, and their impact on designing HPC, cloud, and
edge computing software environments; (2) in-depth exposure to the challenges
and techniques in designing, developing, and maintaining open-source software
environments for HPC systems and cloud environments; (3) exposure to the
sustainability aspects of software development; (4) training on systematic
tuning and optimization of data management and storage software stacks.; and (5)
Interaction with national laboratory and industry professionals related to data
management. The project will promote the progress of science as it provides a
forum to disseminate research efforts, connect researchers, and train the next
generation of diverse workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.