* 2328476
* Travel: Inclusion at Robotics: Science and Systems 2023; Daegu, Republic of Korea; 10-14 July 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Nadia Figueroa, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2025
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports travel for United States students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in robotics, and in early stages of their careers, to
participate in the Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) conference, along with
its associated workshops taking place in Daegu, Republic of Korea, 10-14 July
2023. The students will be mentored virtually by senior researchers to prepare
them prior to the conference. They will also be paired with senior researchers
attending the conference to receive one-on-one mentorship throughout the
conference events. By exposing early career researchers from underrepresented
groups in robotics to this type of intellectual environment, they will be better
able to situate themselves in the field and gain better ideas for the type and
quality of research required to have an impact in the field.

This project supports travel for students in robotics. The recipients of these
travel grants will complete post-conference surveys to assess the value of
attending the conference. The responses will be analyzed to help shape future
travel awards. The primary goal of the program is to increase the number of new
conference participants from traditionally underrepresented groups in robotics
in order to broaden the pool of future robotics researchers to a more diverse
set of backgrounds than is currently typical among robotics researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.