* 2328787
* Active antiferromagnetic materials for hosting hybrid magnonic functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Joseph Sklenar, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 395,192.00

Nontechnical Description

Antiferromagnets are a class of materials with microscopic magnetic dipole
moments that align in the opposite direction of their neighbors. They possess
dynamic modes that emerge from microscopic oscillations at frequencies ranging
from billions (GHz) to trillions (THz) of cycles per second. This is important
for emerging technologies based on THz devices for communications, computing and
sensing. Whereas permanent magnets can be magnetized through a magnetic field,
antiferromagnets are highly resistant to external control. This makes it
difficult to manipulate their magnetic properties and develop new technologies
based on these materials. To advance technologies based on antiferromagnets, the
research team will synthesize structures designed to effectively excite and
manipulate their dynamic properties. The materials focus will be on
antiferromagnetic oxides of iron (Fe2O3), chromium (Cr2O3), and nickel (NiO).
The team will engineer interactions between the oscillating modes within thin
film structures composed of antiferromagnets and other materials. The PI seeks
to broaden participation in STEM by involving female undergraduate and graduate
students in the laboratory. The PI will also organize seminars and round table
discussions where women speakers from industry, with relevant technical
backgrounds, engage with the students in both formal and informal settings. The
objective is to develop and support a network that empowers women to achieve
their career aspirations and provides a broader perspective on how their
technical skills can contribute to the STEM workforce.

Technical Description

Within antiferromagnetic materials and metamaterials, magnons exist across a
wide range of frequencies, spanning from tens of GHz to THz. However, practical
methods to robustly manipulate and excite the antiferromagnetic magnon spectrum
at the sub-THz or THz level have yet to be demonstrated. This is primarily due
to the insensitivity of antiferromagnetic order to external fields. The
functionalization of these ultrafast magnetic excitations holds significant
potential for unlocking next-generation THz electronics and ultrafast magnetic
memory technologies that are currently nonexistent. The team's approach to
functionalize antiferromagnetic magnons combines motifs from spintronics with
emerging concepts in hybrid quantum magnonics. Specifically, magnon-magnon
interactions between various acoustic and optical modes are leveraged to exert
control over the magnon energy spectrum. In this project, sputter deposition
techniques are employed to synthesize heterostructures that either emulate
antiferromagnets or incorporate bulk antiferromagnets into the overall
structure. The heterostructures resembling antiferromagnets are akin to
synthetic antiferromagnets, comprising multiple ferromagnetic films coupled
together by a non-magnetic spacer material. The total number of magnetic layers
and the choice of spacer layer materials in a given structure are key factors in
exciting magnons and generating magnon-magnon interactions. By synthesizing
heterostructures based on bulk antiferromagnets, the team relies on interactions
between spatially uniform antiferromagnetic magnons and short-wavelength
ferromagnetic magnons to control the energy level spectrum in the sub-THz and
THz regime. Conventional ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy, spin-torque
ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and frequency-domain THz spectroscopy
techniques are employed for the characterization of these samples.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.