* 2328051
* Collaborative Research: Towards Task-Agnostic and Device-Agnostic Ankle Exoskeleton Control for Mobility Enhancement
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Aaron Young, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cang Ye
* 08/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

Exoskeletons have tremendous potential to improve or augment human mobility.
However, despite recent work showing the impact on easily defined tasks such as
walking, researchers have tended to ignore the more complex maneuvers that are
necessary in daily life, such as shuffling in the kitchen, bending to pick up a
backpack, or transitioning in and out of a vehicle. Accordingly, exoskeletons
are currently incapable of assisting beyond a highly limited range of tasks and
may even reduce performance in these more complex tasks. Further, they must be
tuned on a subject-specific basis for adequate performance, hindering broad
adoption and leaving the devices inaccessible for many people. This project aims
to revolutionize the field of lower limb exoskeletons by leveraging recent
advancements in wearable sensing and machine learning.

Proposed research involves mapping sensor readings to exoskeleton assistance and
requires collecting motion data exoskeleton wearers performing a wide range of
tasks. The goal is to make exoskeletons capable of assisting with all possible
tasks of daily living, increasing their utility and accessibility for a broader
range of people. This is aligned with NSF's mission to advance national health
and welfare, as this new technology will significantly improve mobility and
independence in the future, particularly during aging and for individuals with
neuromuscular deficits. This project will open-source its datasets and deep
learning models, promoting the progress of science by enabling other researchers
to build upon our advances and further drive technological innovation in this
domain. Finally, this project supports education and diversity through outreach
events related to biomechanics and robotics, bringing students from minority-
serving high schools to Northeastern University and Georgia Tech for hands-on
demos and competitions with wearable robotics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.