* 2328947
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Collaborative Optically Disaggregated Arrays of Extreme-MIMO Radio Units (CODAeMIMO)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Danijela Cabric, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 153,418.00

NonTechnical: This research aims to create a new set of technologies enabling
collaborative optically disaggregated extreme multiple input multiple output
(CODAeMIMO) high-capacity communication and high-fidelity sensing systems. The
researched technology stack spans novel cell-free collaborative extreme MIMO
algorithms and communication infrastructure concepts enabled by new optically
disaggregated array architectures, to electronic-photonic links and new
fundamental circuit and device components – all optimized to enable the required
communication and sensing system scalability. The research explores the design
of future dense, large-scale extreme MIMO communications and sensing platforms,
enabling significant advances in the array power, size and signal
fidelity/processing capability, by designing electronic-photonic systems-on-chip
(EPSoCs) that enable direct connection of mm-wave signals from antenna arrays to
the central processing hub nodes. The EPSoCs enable inexpensive, collaborative,
disaggregated arrays in a new cell-free architecture paving the way to a new
generation of communication systems with significantly higher spectrum
utilization, through larger number of users and higher spatial utilization. This
collaborative multi-disciplinary work will educate a unique crop of engineers
and scientists that cross the boundaries of communication systems design for mm-
wave, extreme MIMO and large-scale phase-array beamformers, and electronic-
photonic systems and devices, which are in severe demand for building advanced
next-generation wireless systems. The Principal Investigators have an
established track record of direct engagement with high-school students
providing summer internships at Berkeley Wireless Research Center and exemplary
undergraduate research activities at Boston University. The goal is to utilize
these exciting research directions with big social impact outcomes to attract
underrepresented students to undergraduate education in engineering. The
educational and outreach activities will ensure early exposure and continued
training of new generation of leaders in this field, from K-12, through
undergraduate and graduate studies, and continuing workforce education, with
special focus on underrepresented students. This research approach will utilize
advanced monolithic electronics-photonics integration in a single RF photonic
EPSoC in advanced high-volume manufacturing platforms like 45nm SOI CMOS. At the
core of the researched approach is the demonstration of mm-wave electronic-
photonic integrated circuit functions. At the device level, the approach will
demonstrate efficient “photonic molecule” electro-optic modulators based on
coupled active silicon microrings, which provide electro-optic signal conversion
efficiencies 15-50dB higher than conventional silicon photonic microring (and
Mach-Zehnder) modulators. The goal of the effort is to develop the advanced
photonic and circuit components for the researched antenna-to-photons link
architecture as well as provide an experimental demonstration of the researched
wavelength-division multiplexed analog photonic link prototype featuring the
advanced photonic components and mm-wave circuits specifically tuned and
monolithically integrated with these photonic components. The effort will also
produce scalable device and link models correlated with the experimental data to
enable engineering of larger array prototypes and development of collaborative,
distributed extreme MIMO algorithms and system-level architectures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.