* 2328291
* FMSG: Bio: RAMP-Bio-CAFe: Routing Advanced Manufacturing of BioPolymer(s):  Capturing Agri-feedstocks in Cell free Factories
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* TANVI GOVIL, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Bacteria produce polymers when there is excess carbon. Bacterial carbon storage
polymers are referred to as PHAs. PHAs are biodegradable and exhibit useful
material properties. Recovering PHAs from bacteria is a major hurdle. The
primary objective of the project is to develop a cell-free method for PHA
synthesis. This would greatly simplify the recovery process and would increase
the yield of the polymer from natural feedstocks. Enzymes from a novel
thermophilic bacteria will perform the cell-free synthesis. The productivity of
that system will be characterized. Undergraduates from nearby tribal colleges
will be recruited to participate in the research. They will be supported by a
series of professional development online workshops developed as part of this
project.

This project will establish a proof-of-concept to rewire the synthesis of PHAs
as an extracellular product. To accomplish this, several intermediate steps are
anticipated. First is the single-step consolidated bioconversion of agri-
materials into PHA precursors by engineering a non-model microbial strain to
synthesize C6-C12 hydroxy acids from unprocessed corn stover. Next is cell-free
enzymatic polymerization of these acids into PHA using thermostable enzymes from
the model strain. Finally, purification of the synthesized biopolymers using
green ionic liquids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.