* 2328755
* Conference: 2023 Molecular Mechanisms in Evolutions GRC and GRS: Genetic and Phenotypic Evolution at the Organismal, Cellular and Molecular Levels
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Daniel Jarosz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2024
* USD 29,100.00

Molecular biology and evolution are the two fundamental unifying principles of
life on earth. It is only through the combination of knowledge from these two
disciplines that we can (i) unravel how the molecular components of organisms
allowed them to survive their past environments, (ii) understand the challenges
imposed by present day ongoing evolution occurring in immune cells, cancer
tissues or microbial populations, including pathogens, (iii) predict the future
responses of organisms to climate changes and other human-driven current
selective pressures. The 2023 Gordon Conference on Molecular Mechanisms in
Evolution will assemble international experts in molecular, medical, and
evolutionary biology to present the latest findings and diverse perspectives on
the molecular basis of evolutionary change. This conference will provide an
engaging atmosphere for open and creative discussions aimed at stimulating
collaboration among the participants. Short talks and posters will provide young
scientists and their ideas access to the opinions and suggestions of the more
experienced scientists who are invited speakers and chairs.

The conference program will cover a wide range of topics including: the
evolution of proteins and RNAs, the evolution of mutation and recombination
rates, non-genetic variation and inheritance, metabolic evolution, the making of
complex traits. The principal goal of this GRC is to encourage and nurture a
community of researchers, spanning several formal disciplines, with a shared
interest in the molecular basis of evolutionary change across biological scales.
Evolutionary scientists include ecologists, geneticists, evolutionary, cellular,
and molecular biologists, as well as physicists, and applied mathematicians.
With such a wide range of disciplines, it is important to provide an opportunity
to experts in these diverse disciplines to appreciate the important discoveries
and new technologies from across the breadth of evolutionary science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.