* 2328235
* Using a Novel Cross-cultural Platform to Train Social and Behavioral Sciences Undergraduates as Emerging Leaders in Best Research Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* John Edlund, PSI CHI INC
* Standard Grant
* Leah McAlister-Shields
* 09/30/2024
* USD 73,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by training undergraduate
students in the social and behavioral sciences to become emerging leaders in
best research practices through engagement in cross-cultural collaboration and
adoption of cutting-edge psychological research practices. This project will
enhance the quality of psychological science research, as well as increase
access for a broad range of undergraduate student researchers through a one-day
conference incorporating a unique platform: Network for International
Collaborative Exchange (NICE). NICE will serve as an ideal teaching tool as it
incorporates evidence-based practices proven to substantially improve research
quality, while facilitating crowd-based, cross-cultural collaboration that
supports increased undergraduate participation in research. The project will
serve as an important tool to help undergraduates develop critical skills needed
to conduct high-quality research and contribute to research projects of global
scale that significantly advance psychology as a science.

The overarching project goal is to educate and train students in the social and
behavioral sciences to become emerging leaders equipped to begin adopting best
research practices with the support of the NICE platform. Towards this goal the
project team will pursue three specific objectives through a one-day conference
and broad post-conference access to the conference materials. First, is
introducing attendees through keynote speakers and panel discussions to ongoing
discussion around research issues in psychological science including the
replication crisis and Open Science methods. Second, is equipping attendees with
knowledge and tools to address existing research issues by providing hands-on
training workshops about the NICE platform and train-the-trainer sessions to
give faculty and graduate student mentors the tools to teach the platform at
their home institutions. Third, is supporting future research collaborations
within the NICE framework by offering opportunities for networking and training
on the crowd-based platform. The workshop’s impact will be evaluated, and the
outcomes will be disseminated widely, including through the Research Advisory
Committee pages on Psi Chi’s website and on the Open Science Framework website.
Funding for this conference is from the NSF IUSE: EDU Program which supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.