* 2328188
* FMSG: Cyber: Toward Future Underwater Additive Manufacturing of Bio-Based Construction Materials Through AI-Guided Sensing and Material Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2025
* Yaxin An, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 485,166.00

With the global rise in sea levels and frequent extreme weather conditions,
effective and efficient underwater construction methods are increasingly
essential for the resilience of coastal communities. However, traditional
underwater construction approaches face a host of challenges, including severe
working conditions, restricted access, and potential ecological damage. This
Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) funded project will explore the potential
of additive manufacturing as an autonomous, advanced construction method to
overcome these hurdles. Nevertheless, the complexity of implementing underwater
additive manufacturing, from materials selection and process optimization to
instrumentation development, presents significant challenges. The key concern is
the formulation of concrete additives, typically handled via a trial-and-error
method due to the regional variation of materials. Utilizing artificial
intelligence-driven material modeling coupled with novel smart sensing systems,
this research aims to unravel new insights to enable innovative underwater
concrete additive manufacturing. This research could revolutionize underwater
construction methods, fostering more efficient, sustainable, and eco-friendly
solutions for coastal communities and infrastructure. The research will also be
complemented by incorporating courses and outreach programs on artificial
intelligence and underwater additive manufacturing topics for graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students. Specifically, the research team will actively
involve underrepresented K-12 students at fundamental project levels and inspire
them to further explore STEM fields. The specific goal of this project is to
decipher the intricate process-structure-property in underwater concrete
additive manufacturing. This endeavor will replace traditional, tedious trial-
and-error methods using molecular dynamics simulations, providing a
comprehensive understanding of the physical principles governing the
interactions between cementitious compositions and various chemical additives.
The project will address compatibility issues and potential side effects of
chemical admixtures on the cementitious system. Additionally, considering
changing materials formulations and underwater environmental conditions that
will affect concrete rheological properties, the project will develop a novel
multi-sensor system that will be integrated into the concrete 3D printer,
providing an accurate real-time monitoring approach. The team will develop an
advanced data fusion methodology that merges experimental data, simulation
outputs, and sensor results. The study will incorporate fluid mechanics, thermal
dynamics, and domain knowledge (such as hydration curves) to build a physics-
guided machine learning model. This model will offer a comprehensive
understanding of the additive manufacturing process, leading to precise
parameter control and improved reliability in underwater concrete additive
manufacturing. The project's outcomes will advance the fundamental comprehension
of the process-structure-property relationship in additive manufacturing and
accelerate the technique development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.