* 2328948
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Analog quantum simulation of non-Markovian dynamics of multi-qubit systems
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Hang Liu, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: A multi-qubit system is used in various quantum
technologies, including quantum communication, quantum sensing, quantum
cryptography, and quantum simulation. Since any quantum system cannot be fully
isolated from the environment, open quantum systems are introduced to model the
evolution of a quantum system while considering the interactions between the
quantum system and the environment. Depending on the strength and the type of
this interaction, there are two types of open quantum systems dynamics -
Markovian and non-Markovian, where the non-Markovian dynamics are more accurate.
In this research, the project team will advance and promote the research on
analog quantum simulation of non-Markovian dynamics of multi-qubit systems. In
addition, this research will implement an investment and reward feedback loop
for inspiring K-12 students and attracting, retaining, and educating
undergraduate, female, and underrepresented minority students by exposing them
to this quantum-related research. Further, this project broadens and strengthens
the current quantum physics curriculum at the undergraduate level by enhancing
existing courses and creating new ones.

Technical Abstract: Understanding the dynamics of a quantum system in connection
with its surrounding environment is crucial for harnessing the full potential of
quantum information processing tasks. However, modeling the non-Markovian
dynamics of open quantum systems faces two grand challenges: (i) current efforts
use a modified Markovian master equation to describe the non-Markovian dynamics,
which could be inaccurate. (ii) The lack of a systematic method for obtaining
approximated positivity-preserving master equations (PPME) limits the capability
of current techniques in practice. The research aims to develop analog quantum
algorithms to study the non-Markovian dynamics of multi-qubit systems built on
the quantum-state-diffusion (QSD) equation approach. Particularly, this
research: (i) leverages the QSD approach to obtaining the generalized formalism
of the non-Markovian master equation; (ii) optimizes and generates PPME with
approximations applied; (iii) develops a systematic method to derive Kraus
operators for complicated interactions; (iv) devises a Monte-Carlo-based quantum
simulation algorithm initiated from the stochastic quantum trajectories, instead
of the density matrix.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), Computing and Communications Foundations (CCF) Division, and the
Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.