* 2328083
* Equipment: Analytical Instrumentation at Sitting Bull College
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Mafany Ndiva Mongoh, Sitting Bull College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2025
* USD 287,188.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular infrastructure at
these institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project
aligns directly with that goal. The necessity of modern analytical equipment is
almost as great a priority as the necessity of compelling STEM instruction and
research. The acquisition of higher resolution, higher speed, and broader
capacity instrumentation at Sitting Bull College will have a disproportionately
positive impact on the view students have of scientific inquiry and career
options. The college will upgrade from a PerkinElmer Atomic Absorption
Spectrometer AAnalyst 800 with graphite furnace to a PerkinElmer NexION 1000
ICPMS. The college will also replace its OI analytical flow IV Analyzer with a
Xylem FS3700 analyzer. The college uses these instruments for the extensive
analytical work that it does with and for the Tribe and to train students from
K-12 through graduate studies. The new instrumentation will increase both the
speed and range of the college’s analytical capabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.