* 2328351
* FMRG Eco: Manufacturing, repairing, and re-using biomineralized infrastructure materials through low-energy biological processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Recep Avci, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,989,176.00

The manufacturing of building and infrastructure materials currently heavily
relies on cement and concrete. The large resource needs and limited re-use and
recycling of cement and concrete are at odds with a resource-limited future.
This Future EcoManufacturing research grantÂ (FMRG: Eco) project envisions more
sustainable, eco-manufacturing of building materials through leveraging the
natural metabolic activities of microorganisms. The long-term goal of this
project is to transform how, where, and when these materials can be produced as
well as who can participate in their manufacturing. The specific goal is to
improve the ability to make complex, load-bearing structures through microbial
biomineralization. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through the generation of fundamental knowledge about the control of
microbes to build, assemble, repair, and reuse or recycle building materials.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of three graduate students and up to 15
undergraduate students at Montana State University (MSU).

Concrete, which includes cement along with fine and coarse aggregates, is
ubiquitous in building materials. Concrete requires increasingly scarce
materials such as high-quality sand while cement requires high energy, time,
labor, and material resources to manufacture. Cement manufacturing also has a
high carbon footprint. This research advances the eco-manufacturing of
sustainable building materials using microbes by addressing several key
challenges that limit how current biomineralized structures are built, repaired,
and recycled. The specific research objectives are to 1) improve spatial control
of biomineralization through strategies including functionalizing surfaces to
bio-trap microbes and 3D printing; 2) engineer biological glues and/or layer-by-
layer deposition of biomineralized scaffolds to assemble more complex
biomineralized structures; 3) activate an embedded biomineralizing bacteria,
fungi, or enzymes or external microbial or enzyme delivery to facilitate in-situ
repair; and 4) explore repurposing or recycling biomineralized structures aided
by material breakdown or re-mineralization by microorganisms. The successful
completion of this research will improve future manufacturing through advancing
technology needed for on-site production, re-use, and repair of complex material
structures, particularly in resource-limited settings. To implement the
education and workforce goals of the project, the team plans to develop an eco-
manufacturing course and training modules as well as biomineralization activity
outreach to K-12 students through existing MSU programs and teachers through an
existing Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) program. Additionally, a
workforce development program, Eco-Manufacturing Student Research and Train
(Eco-Start), will train up to 15 undergraduate students through academic and
industry laboratory work experiences to prepare them for employment and
leadership in eco-manufacturing.

This Future Manufacturing award was jointly funded by the Division of
Translational Impacts (TI) in the Directorate for Technology, Innovation and
Partnerships (TIP), the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) and Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems (CBET) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) in the Office of Integrated
Activities (OIA) in the Office of the Director (OD).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.