* 2328262
* FMRG: Eco: Circular manufacturing of sustainable bioplastics from hemp-derived building blocks
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Mukerrem Cakmak, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,985,348.00

Developing a manufacturing-ready biopolymer with exceptional properties and
multiple routes to recycling and degradation could accelerate the displacement
of legacy polymers based on petrochemicals, ultimately reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and limiting the proliferation of microplastics that are dangerous to
humans and the environment. This project will investigate materials partially
derived from hemp for applications in electronics manufacturing and medical
devices. The general availability the source material, hemp, benefits
manufacturers by shortening supply chains and reducing supply chain
vulnerabilities and benefits society by reducing the generation, transportation,
and disposal of toxic materials. Contrasting with other biopolymers that are
generated through the fermentation of food sources (e.g. corn), hemp provides a
feedstock that does not compete with food. The workforce development plan
includes engagement strategies to guide students starting from middle school to
securing their first job in manufacturing. Middle school and high school
outreach is designed to provide inspiration and positive, hands-on experiences
to entice students toward STEM and manufacturing. The Additive Manufacturing
Experience (AMx) program provides opportunities for high school students to
learn hands-on manufacturing skills from industry professionals that can be
leveraged in finding a first job. Training through research and coursework will
prepare undergrad and grad students for future careers in sustainable
manufacturing.

This project will investigate two hemp-derived diol monomers with differing
properties in combination with several dicarboxylic acids. The variety of
combinations will result in bio-based polyesters with widely tunable properties.
This work will synthesize several polyester variations and to expand the
fundamental knowledge of structure-property relationships to further improve
performance metrics. Structure-processing knowledge will be derived from
characterizations such as melt viscosity, crystallization rate, and solubility.
Processing parameters will be determined for manufacturing approaches including
melt processing, 3D printing, and solution processing from green solvents. As
electronics are a likely market entry point, the investigators will study the
protective properties of the polymers for corrodible metals and the factors that
affect the dispersion state and resulting mechanical properties and electrical
conductivity in composite inks. Thermal reprocessing and depolymerization
recycling will be characterized to enable circularity of the polymer, and
degradation studies will determine safety in the environment. Printed
electronics for medical devices and environmental sensors will provide
demonstration device platforms that leverage the unique properties of these
materials to attract industry adoption.

This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the Technology, Innovation and
Partnerships Directorate and the Division of Chemistry and Division of Materials
Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.