* 2328774
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: EQUIP-UMB-Expand Quantum Information Programs at UMass Boston
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Akira Sone, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,300,000.00

Non-Technical Description: UMass Boston is in a unique position to perform
cutting-edge research in Quantum Information Science and Engineering (QISE) and
to train a diverse future QISE workforce through its student population as the
most diverse public research institution in New England. The project aims to
expand UMass Bostonâ€™s existing academic and research activities in QISE and make
UMass Boston a leading public research institution in this field. It delivers
high-quality research products, develops academic activities, and establishes a
workforce development infrastructure at UMass Boston in partnership with Harvard
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Research activities
include the exploration of quantum correlated and entangled states, and the
development of methodologies to manipulate and mitigate errors in quantum bits
(qubits) while incorporating machine learning assisted technologies. Results
deriving from this project will inform the design of future large-scale quantum
processors. This project expands UMass Boston efforts in academics and workforce
development and promotes a symbiotic relation with Boston area companies and
academic institutions by providing access to experimental capacity for the
growing local quantum computing ecosystem and creating training opportunities
and internships for UMass Boston undergraduate and graduate students. This
project contributes to workforce buildup from the ground up through Community
Outreach activities, which are deliberately dedicated to engaging participants
from broad and diverse backgrounds.

Technical Description: This project is built around three research focus areas
(FAs): (FA-1) Quantum Fundamentals; (FA-2) Quantum Metrology and Control; and
(FA-3) Co-Design and Quantum Systems. FA-1 includes the study of symmetric
informationally complete states, their measurement and their experimental
implementation using the Rydberg atoms platform. An additional direction
includes the study of quantum fluctuation theorems, which account for quantum
coherence, and the design of their experimental verification using nitrogen-
vacancy (NV)-centers. In the context of ultracold quantum gases and correlated
quantum many-body systems, the project develops numerical techniques adapted to
controlled non-equilibrium diagrammatic Monte-Carlo and for the study of the
Grasshopper problem in connection to Bell inequalities and entangled states.
Studies of a hybrid molecular ions platform to generate entangled states and to
implement quantum gates using conditional transfer of internal atomic states
into molecular ion states are being performed. In FA-2, the Rydberg atoms
platform is used to coherently transport entangled qubits with dynamic and
nonlocal connectivity across two spatial dimensions. Rydberg interactions and
their impact on optical tweezers are studied. Results from the latter study
inform hardware-efficient algorithm implementation. A complementary direction
analyzes noisy quantum algorithms, quantum metrology via NV-centers and error
correction in noisy systems to elucidate aspects of superconducting quantum
circuits which are critical to realize scalable error-mitigated quantum
processors. The latter research is complemented by the development of machine-
learning enhanced quantum sensing to develop variational quantum circuits for
optimal state preparation and measurement design, which is to be applied to the
NV-center setup. FA-3 includes the development of stable and controllable
superconducting qubits. The system developed is used to measure and control
multiple quantum circuits spread-out across a chip to investigate correlated
noises and their impact on large scale quantum processors. Finally, the team is
involved in all activities of FA-4 on Education and Workforce Development,
ranging from the Quantum Information Certificate (QuIC) and future QISE graduate
courses, to outreach activities, to internships and training with industry
partners in Greater Boston.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA) and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.