* 2328747
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: A Deep-Dive into the Materials Science of Alpha-Ta Growth on Oxides for Superconducting Resonator Development
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Joseph Corbett, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 799,163.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum computers can potentially make revolutionary
changes in how computers function and how computing algorithms are designed.
Traditional computers utilize a “bit” to compute and process information,
creating a computer speed bottleneck. Quantum computers operate on a different
kind of a bit, a quantum bit, the “qubit,” which can be enormously faster in
computation times. Superconducting qubits are one of the leading candidates to
create quantum computers with the potential to surpass modern supercomputers in
solving specific problems. A popular way to create a qubit is to pattern a qubit
circuit on a low-loss insulator/ metal structure made of Josephson junctions,
coplanar capacitors, inductors, and resonator waveguides. However, creating
these circuits for qubits introduces disorder into the insulator/metal
structure, causing errors and loss of quantum information. The research team
implements a holistic deep-dive of material science on the insulator/metal
structure to uncover the sources of this disorder to improve the quality of the
qubit circuits. The research team simultaneously implements a new quantum
curriculum and a new quantum information science micro-credential utilizing
evidence-based teaching methods to reach optimal learning objectives, impact the
quantum education field with new teaching modules and classes, and increase
participation in the quantum workforce. To this end, the research team
concurrently performs physics education research within new quantum science
courses and micro-credential by applying evidence-based active engagement and
benchmarking learning outcomes versus intended learning goals. This project is
conducted across the collaborating universities and measures the success of
adapting an early undergraduate-level quantum information science course and
incorporating active engagement strategies. Vital improvements in quantum
education and workforce development are made by broadening evidence-based
instruction in the quantum information science curriculum.

Technical Abstract: This research aims to alleviate some of the mystery in two-
level system dissipation sources for alpha-Ta superconducting resonator systems
by performing a holistic characterization of the dissipation sources and where
these dissipation sources are introduced in the growth and fabrication process.
To this end, the research team conducts a comprehensive investigation of alpha-
Ta grown on several low-dissipation insulating oxide substrates. The research
team identifies critical defects introduced during growth and subsequential
device processing to remedy defect bottlenecks that adversely affect the quality
factor of superconducting resonator circuits. The team systematically correlates
the quality factor to specific thin film synthesis procedures, microfabrication
procedures, bulk material, and interface defect types identified in structural
and conductive electron and scan probe microscopy characterizations. This
holistic materials science deep-dive identifies systematic relationships between
structure and dissipation and possibly establishes a room-temperature proxy for
low-temperature superconducting device performance. At the same time, this
research seeks to investigate the fidelity of implementing quantum information
education tools and frameworks developed to be accessible at the high school and
early undergraduate levels. The project will contribute to quantum education and
workforce development through evidence-based instructional strategies such as
implementing interactive quantum learning tutorials and clicker question
sequences.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.