* 2328962
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: A Reconfigurable Ferrolectronics Platform for Collective Computing (FALCON)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Suman Datta, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2026
* USD 430,000.00

Digital computing has been the bedrock of the modern information revolution.
However, improvements in energy efficiency and reductions in compute costs for
digital hardware have decelerated. The impact of this slowdown is felt most
acutely when solving computationally challenging problems, such as those in
combinatorial optimization (CO), where the computational resources (energy,
time, memory) required scale exponentially with problem size. Moreover, such
problems find extensive real-world application in fields ranging from artificial
intelligence, to autonomous driving, to airline scheduling, to power
distribution, creating a practical need to develop new alternative approaches to
solving such problems efficiently. Analog dynamical systems such as coupled
oscillators offer a promising physics-based approach for solving such hard
problems since they exhibit collective properties that are unavailable in
digital systems. However, current coupled oscillator platforms address a very
limited set of CO problems, exhibit little reconfigurability, and lack the
hardware-algorithm ecosystem that made digital computing so successful.
Therefore, the goal of this research is to develop a new analog coupled
oscillator platform, FALCON, that overcomes these challenges using a cross-
cutting effort that spans the development of new oscillator-based computational
models to the design of new ferroelectric materials, devices, and circuits for
implementing them. The research will enable fundamental advances in analog
computing that will subsequently translate to performance improvements for
practical applications. Furthermore, to broaden the impact of this work, the
team will create an open-source repository of computational models, coupling
architectures, and design schemes that will be developed through the course of
this project. The team will also focus on workforce development through various
activities, such as organizing an industry day, developing new courses, and
creating research opportunities for students underrepresented in STEM fields.

The coupled oscillator-based FALCON platform developed in this project will
offer tailored coupling cores with differentiated phase synchronization dynamics
that are specifically engineered such that specific classes of CO problems can
be directly mapped and solved in hardware. The proposed paradigm marks a radical
departure from the ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach used until now, wherein the
oscillator synchronization dynamics could only be mapped to a single
computational model (e.g., Ising model) that may not always be computationally
efficient for the CO problem to be solved. This approach can result in
significant pre-processing overhead and entail additional hardware requirements
(oscillator nodes) that far exceed the size of the original problem. Moreover,
the additional pre-processing and hardware needs can reduce, if not eliminate,
any performance advantage of the analog approach, as well as limit its
scalability. In contrast, the FALCON coupling cores will offer multiple types of
synchronization dynamics, with each core facilitating the mapping of a large
number of CO problems directly onto the hardware with minimal overhead. The
FALCON platform will be developed through across-the-stack innovation in
ferroelectric materials, devices, and mixed-signal circuits, in close
conjunction with the advancement of the theoretical foundations of coupled
oscillator-based computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.