* 2328619
* CRII: RI: Sub-mm 3D Scanning of Real-World Scenes with Active Multi-View Event Sensing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Florian Willomitzer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 86,454.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

State-of-the-art 3D imaging methods are not able to measure all possible classes
of objects at once and still need to be tailored to a specific application. This
is one of the main reasons why 3D imaging is still not omnipresent in our
society, and still solely trained experts with task-specific equipment are able
to capture high-quality 3D models. This project seeks to build a “one fits all”
system that has the potential to change this. The targeted system enables
precise 3D measurements of complicated surfaces/scenes in today’s billion-dollar
industries, such as virtual reality, industrial inspection, autonomous
navigation, or medical imaging. Many of these industries routinely run into
particularly challenging scenarios for 3D scanning systems. Moreover, a scene-
independent and precise 3D sensing system can have many applications. The
produced sets of high-quality 3D data can usher the next wave in vision-related
artificial intelligence research, leading to algorithms with unprecedented
detection quality, prediction accuracy, or navigation precision. Given the
current dissimilation of related techniques in all sectors of our modern
society, everyone can profit. The project is accompanied by a comprehensive
education program incorporating 3D imaging principles in a curriculum for
Chicago afterschool programs to introduce at-risk youth to basic concepts in
optics, image processing, and electronics.

The focus of this research is to solve a long-standing problem in Computer
Vision: high-resolution active 3D scanning of scenes cluttered with objects of
mixed specularity and polluted by undesirable light contributions such as
ambient illumination or strong inter-reflections. Existing approaches for this
challenging task deliver rather sobering results or rely on large training
datasets or other extensive prior knowledge, such as the geometry and
reflectance of objects in the scene. An easy and flexible solution that delivers
high-quality data is of significant interest for researchers in the broader
computer vision community. This research distills the past decade’s research of
the investigator and his colleagues. It combines previous experience in active
multi-view 3D imaging concepts for different object classes with the novel
detection modality of biologically inspired event sensors (which operate on a
fundamentally different principle than conventional sensors). By properly
facilitating the existing tradeoffs in 3D imaging and event sensing, the team
will develop theory, hardware, and algorithms that lead to a fundamentally new
type of 3D camera. The developed technique significantly advances the state-of-
the-art and our fundamental understanding of limits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.