* 2328585
* Conference: NSF EPSCoR Workshop: Intelligent Manufacturing for Extreme Environments
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Marco Schoen, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,445.00

This conference proposes to host a two-day conference at the Center for Advanced
Energy Studies (CAES) in Idaho Falls, Idaho. This conference will feature
keynotes, panels, and breakout sessions with an estimated sixty participants
covering various aspects of intelligent manufacturing for extreme environments.
The conference will convene world-class experts, researchers, educators, and
students to identify gaps and envision solutions in relevant areas of great
importance. The conference will promote exchange of ideas and knowledge during
the proposed event and will catalyze new collaborations and research directions
that will support the growth of carbon-free advanced nuclear energy research in
Idaho, Wyoming, as well as other western states. The conference organizers will
use funding for travel grants, recruiting women and persons from
underrepresented groups to participate to achieve participation from a diverse
section of the society. The outcomes of the conference will include an
opportunity for researchers and educators to network and form collaborations and
preparation of a full report to inform policy makers, industry, and the academic
community of various challenges and opportunities of advanced manufacturing,
specifically in the nuclear energy sector.

The overarching goal of this conference proposal is to host a two-day conference
on Intelligent Manufacturing for Extreme Environments. The conference will
identify gaps and envision solutions for five inter-related challenges of
intelligent manufacturing in extreme environments. These challenges are: (1)
printable electronics that can survive extreme environments, (2) in situ
manufacturing process monitoring and feedback control, (3) machine learning to
optimize process variables in manufacturing and materials composition, (4)
extreme temperature qualification and testing, and (5) workforce development and
community college engagement. Nuclear reactors need to operate under extreme
service conditions such as high temperatures, corrosive environment, and high
radiation doses. Hence, reactor components must be able to withstand those
conditions. Successful innovation would revolutionize the nuclear power sector,
enable fast commercial development, create economic opportunities in the US,
reduce carbon footprint and associated climate risks, and promote a skilled and
highly competitive workforce. The novelty of the conference is the convergent
integration of computational design, process control, materials discovery,
materials characterization, and workforce development. The conference will
provide an opportunity for the community to discuss new scientific research, the
needs for future research, gaps in the scientific literature, and provide a
conference of national interest that could drive scientific engagement with the
broader community including involving researchers from the underrepresented
groups, and industry collaborations. The conference will provide opportunities
to engage with industry, provide opportunities for community college educators
to learn about what is happening at the cutting-edge of manufacturing science,
and increase public awareness through science engagement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.