* 2328140
* CAREER: Assigning comprehensive, standardized sample annotations to enhance the ability to discover, use, and interpret millions of –omics profiles
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Arjun Krishnan, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 315,509.00

There are nearly 2 million experiments now in open online databases where, in
each experiment, scientists have recorded data on the activity of tens of
thousands of DNA elements, genes, or proteins in a particular biological sample.
These samples come from a variety of tissues in human or other organisms under
numerous conditions and are an invaluable resource for other scientists to
reanalyze and discover new biology. However, these data are severely underused
because finding the samples one is interested in from the sea of all samples is
still very hard. This is because most sample descriptions are written using
language that is hard to search unambiguously or are incomplete in reporting
every critical aspect of the sample source. This project seeks to democratize
data-driven biology by annotating publicly available samples from six species
(human and five animal models) on a massive scale, which will enable researchers
to discover relevant published data for further analysis. A web-interface will
be developed to provide researchers a single access point to all these
annotations and the related search tools. The insights and tools from this
project will have far-reaching implications for how the biological researchers
will submit, store, manage, access, reuse, and re-share data. Improving data
discoverability and reusability will increase the accuracy, efficiency, and
reproducibility of biological research overall, saving resources by accelerating
scientific discovery. The educational/training activities that will be developed
in this project will result in formalizing and openly disseminating the “hidden
curriculum” in modern bioinformatics: the abstract experiential skills critical
for holistic, practical competency in conducting large data analysis and
research in a rapidly changing bioinformatics landscape. This effort will create
openness and equity in professional training in applying computing to study
biology.

This project will develop new machine learning methods that use both text and
molecular data to assign comprehensive, standardized annotations to publicly-
available omics samples. The barrier for complete and structured sample
descriptors is two-fold: Samples are routinely described using non-standard,
varied terminologies written in unstructured natural language, and Even basic
attributes, e.g., tissue or environment, are omitted from sample descriptions if
they were not factors considered in the original study. The objective of this
project is to remove both of these barriers and will integrate state-of-the-art
machine learning (ML) advances to: develop ML methods to infer standardized
annotations from plain text descriptions, jointly from multiple omics types;
develop ML models to predict structured metadata from molecular omics profiles,
jointly from multiple species; and develop methods to integrate these text- and
omics-profile-based models to comprehensively annotate millions of samples, and
tools for researchers to use this massive resource to glean novel biology.
Integrated with this research is an education plan to develop ties to formalize
and openly disseminate the hidden curriculum in data-driven biology. All the
results from this project including data and code will be available at
https://www.thekrishnanlab.org.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.