* 2328205
* ASCENT: Boosting Cyber and Physical Resilience of Power Electronics-Dominated Distribution Grids in Energy Space
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Chunting Mi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This NSF project aims to develop an innovative sensing and control system needed
to enhance the cyber-physical resilience of power distribution systems with
massive power electronics-interfaced resources (PERs), e.g., renewables, energy
storage, and electric vehicles. The project will transform the ways of designing
energy management systems of PERs. With the proposed system, the PERs will be
capable of collaboratively providing reliable electricity services to their host
grids under extreme weather-induced events. The system will also enable the PERs
to self-detect cyber-attacks, and to take corrective actions. The above features
will be achieved by explicitly modeling, monitoring, and controlling the
interactions between PERs and their host grid in the energy space, and by
watermarking their measurements via local renewable and load fluctuations. The
intellectual merits include the following: 1) the project conceptualizes for the
first time the co-design of cyber and physical resilient solutions for networked
PERs in the energy space where the complexity of PER dynamics exhibited in a
conventional space can be significantly reduced; 2) the proposed cyber-attack
detector can differentiate cyber-attacks from large physical disturbances; 3)
the microgrid simulation platform will be the first-of-its-kind, open-source,
hardware-verified platform that will accelerate the innovation of clean energy
technologies. The broader impacts include the following: 1) the project will
catalyze the adoption of clean energy, and contribute towards improving energy
equity by enabling PERs to power their distribution systems under extreme
weather conditions. Disadvantaged communities who cannot afford their own solar
panels or energy storage can enjoy reliable electricity services by this
mechanism during extreme weather conditions; 2) it will educate the workforce,
especially in Hispanic communities, by enriching power system education with
topics on cyber resilience. It will also grow a talent pipeline by organizing
Renewable Energy and Cybersecurity Summer Camps for K12 students.

The project will be carried out in terms of three thrusts. Thrust 1 will
conceptualize a system-aware, resilient controller for PERs. In Thrust 2, an
interactive robust framework for cyber-attack detection will be designed by
watermarking measurements of PERs in the energy space. In Thrust 3, both
software-based-, and entirely-hardware-testbeds will be configured to test and
validate the proposed algorithms. The scalability of the proposed methods on the
test system will be tested via simulation studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.