* 2328010
* FMRG: Cyber: Manufacturing USA: Manufacturing of Next-Generation Perovskite Semiconductors at Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* David Fenning, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

For the past century, semiconductor manufacturing has relied heavily on
sequential deposition and removal of material layers to fabricate integrated
devices. However, sequential layer-by-layer processing imposes restrictions on
the processing parameters that can be used for the top layers in the device,
which must maintain chemical and thermal compatibility with the underlying
layers. This limits the ability to engineer precise interfaces in many
applications, especially when integrating emerging functional materials with new
processing constraints. To overcome these limitations, this Future Manufacturing
Research Grant (FMRG) explores a novel lamination approach for halide perovskite
semiconductors that enables the engineering of functionality and new device
architectures. Potential applications of this technology are solar cells, LEDs,
and other optoelectronic devices. By developing the cyberinfrastructure for
distributed manufacturing, trained machine learning models are generated to
optimize a specified objective function that is unique to each end-user, thereby
supporting the ability of small-to-medium manufacturers (SMMs) to prototype
their designs and scale-up their processes. This research is closely integrated
with education and workforce development activities, where partnerships with
local workforce development organizations and an industry advisory board (IAB)
are formed to identify the education and training needs of the next generation
of cyber manufacturing workers, while ensuring a diverse manufacturing
workforce. This project supports the national priorities of semiconductor
manufacturing and renewable energy.

The research objective of this FMRG research is to understand, model, and
control the process-structure-property relationships during halide perovskite
(HP) semiconductor manufacturing using a novel lamination approach that enables
new device architectures and material combinations that are currently
inaccessible using traditional sequential deposition processing. In this
approach, device half-stacks can be independently processed in parallel with
relaxed process constraints, and subsequently integrated using a continuous
lamination platform with controlled alignment. By integrating in-line metrology
with physics-informed data-driven models, the project develops a fundamental
understanding of the thermo-chemo-mechanical mechanisms that guide the HP
lamination process, which enables closed-loop process control. Algorithms are
developed that bridge high-throughput, low-fidelity in-line metrology data
streams with low-throughput, high-fidelity ex situ characterization methods,
which are prohibitive in an industrial manufacturing setting. Physics-informed
process control is enabled through development of reduced-order models and
process parameter optimization using federated learning approaches. The cyber
manufacturing platform enables automated generation of a database of process-
structure-property relationships under diverse (and non-idealized) manufacturing
environments, which enables predictive modeling and process optimization through
a shared cyberinfrastructure.

This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the Divisions of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) and by the National NanotechnologyÂ Initiative (NNI) Special
Studies Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.