* 2328867
* Conference: Motivic and non-commutative aspects of enumerative geometry, Homotopy theory, K-theory, and trace methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Michael Hill, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for the travel and local expenses of early-career
U.S.-based mathematicians to attend the conferences "Motivic and non-commutative
aspects of enumerative geometry" and "Homotopy theory, K-theory, and trace
methods" in Nijmegen, the Netherlands, held from July 3-7th, 2023. The
conferences focuses on exciting, interconnected areas of mathematics which
broadly study foundational questions in algebraic K-theory. The events aim to
connect U.S.-based mathematicians with European researchers and provide
opportunities to build new collaborations. In addition to the interaction with
more established researchers in the field, sessions of short presentations are
designed to allow graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and early career
faculty to share their own work.

Algebraic K-theory records important and subtle invariants of a ring or scheme.
Unfortunately, computing these K-groups outside of a handful of examples is
notoriously difficult. Two dominant approaches have arisen to tackle this
problem: motivic homotopy, which builds in algebraic geometry many classical
constructions from stable homotopy theory, and trace methods, which approximate
the algebraic K-groups by constructions in classical and equivariant stable
homotopy. These conferences will bring together experts representing all of
these areas and several related fields in mathematics, building on exciting
recent developments and providing a forum to expose early-career mathematicians
in algebraic geometry and homotopy theory to these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.