* 2328510
* I-Corps:  Process to transform low-value agricultural wastes into high-value, biodegradable cellulose nanofibers
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Renata Bura, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a conversion process to transform low-value agricultural wastes
into high-value, biodegradable cellulose nanofibers. Sustainable alternatives to
petroleum-based materials are needed to help combat climate change and reduce
the environmental impact of greenhouse gasses. Cellulose nanofibers are
considered a versatile biomaterial for high-performance and more sustainable
products across industries. The proposed process employs green chemistry
principles and may generate nanofibers that are 10 times cheaper than
conventional nanofibers found in the market today. Affordable nanofibers may
provide a tangible substitute for petroleum-based ingredients in products such
as paints and coatings, automotive, and performance apparel and textiles.
Biodegradable cellulose nanofibers may help these industries achieve their
performance targets while decreasing their environmental footprint. Replacing
petroleum-based materials may reduce the CO₂ emissions associated with their
production and disposal and help reduce waste accumulation. In addition, by
using agricultural wastes as feedstock, the process will convert the atmospheric
CO₂ captured by those plants into long-lasting, valuable biomaterials,
supporting a circular bioeconomy.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a process to produce
cellulose nanofibers from low-value agricultural plant wastes. The proposed
technology utilizes low-cost renewable feedstocks such as agricultural and
forestry residues, harvested invasive plants, and wastes from other industries
to produce the nano-sized fibrils. The conversion process is based on mild
conditions to ensure preservation of most of the starting material’s components
and maximum yields. In addition, the process is energy efficient as the
reactions are carried out at atmospheric pressure, and employs biodegradable
chemicals that do not accumulate in the environment. Cellulose nanofibers are
natural biopolymers that can replace petroleum-based materials in many
applications due to their unique properties including high strength,
lightweight, large surface area, oxygen barrier, thermal stability, and
biodegradability. The proposed conversion technology has been established
successfully at laboratory scale and was proven robust and reproducible with a
variety of feedstocks. Nanofibers produced from this process were applied in
product testing by mixing with biodegradable plastic resins, which resulted in
an outstanding mechanical property enhancement of the plastic material.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.