* 2328362
* FMSG: Cyber: 3D Printing of Holographic Optical Processors
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Ragu Athinarayanan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2025
* USD 497,765.00

Optical processors are computing devices that use light, rather than
electricity, for sensing and processing images. Layers of gratings mimic the
structure of neural networks, guide the paths of light through these layers via
diffraction, and achieve low-latency and low-power computation. This technology
provides a promising alternative to the existing computer vision methods, which
are subject to delays caused by massive computations (billions of parameters) at
high frame rates. This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project will
investigate the additive manufacturing of holographic optical processors and
enable computer vision with minimal or no computational time. If successful,
this project will generate new knowledge about high-resolution manufacturing,
and lead to more affordable next-generation computing devices. The increased
computation capability will potentially transform multiple fields, from
artificial intelligence to quantum computing, cybersecurity to next-generation
communications. This project will stimulate the interest in STEM education at
the interface of future manufacturing and artificial intelligence, and
contribute to workforce development in both areas.

This project aims to establish a holographically-assisted Vat
Photopolymerization (H-VPP) process, by combining high-throughput microscale VPP
with the nanoscale holographic recording process. H-VPP fabricates billions of
volumetric diffractive gratings, in place of interference-patterned refractive
indices, allowing for high-resolution optical structures with a large number of
layers to form complex optical pathways. Several fundamental research questions
to be addressed include: (1) elucidating how transparent photocurable resins can
be used for printing holographic devices, (2) investigating how nanoscale
refractive index modulation can be achieved by adding extra laser beams to
interfere with the projected mask-images, and (3) inversely designing the mask
image patterns using the back-propagation algorithm in deep learning. This
research will gain new knowledge about the relationship among the holographic
process, optical structure, and processor performance. Though this project
focuses on VPP, the resulting science will advance the understanding of other
polymer-based high-resolution manufacturing processes. This Future Manufacturing
award was supported by Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.