* 2328395
* FMRG: Cyber: Manufacturing USA: Material-on-demand manufacturing through convergence of manufacturing, AI and materials science
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Yu Ding, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Recent advances in AI are driving an industrial revolution, leading to the
emergence of intelligent, autonomous systems. This Future CyberManufacturing
research grant reimagines autonomy for a new generation of manufacturing
machines, capable the manufacture of advanced alloy products with unprecedented
performance affordably. The project brings together a diverse team of pioneers
from academia and the industry in AI (including machine learning, adaptive
control, and data science), materials science, and smart manufacturing, towards
addressing the foundational research and skill development. The team includes
Texas A&M University/Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station, Brown University,
Texas A&M University Kingsville, Prairie View A&M University, Houston Community
College, and multiple industry, regional government, and academic partners.
These foundations allow a new approach and demonstration platforms to harness
recent advances in 3D printing, materials genomics, and sensor technologies to
control the production processes and to mix multiple materials to obtain the
desired properties. These products provide a critical competitive edge for the
US economy and effective solutions for the national critical material challenges
in the strategic hypersonic systems and energy conversion sectors. It will also
provide students and industry professionals with opportunities for valuable
education and skill development.

The project tackles scientific challenges of realizing futuristic manufacturing
machines endowed with a deep level of autonomy to make tailored materials-on-
demand manufacturing. The autonomous manufacturing machine platforms are
envisioned to generate process plans adaptively (fusing information from diverse
data and knowledge sources) – to control material microstructure and composition
beyond just geometry and morphology – to yield bulk-scale tailored material
components with dramatically enhanced functional performance. The following four
foundational contributions to autonomy principles would emerge from this effort:
(1) Shape-constrained machine learning. The key idea in this novel form of
physics-informed machine learning is to introduce constraints on the shape/sign
of the underlying functional relationship to model incomplete physical and
experiential knowledge. (2) Harness surprise observations. A surprise outcome
from an experiment or a process has historically led to new discoveries and
insights. Dealing with surprising observations differentiates an autonomous
system from an automated one. (3) Safeguarding extrapolation using digital
twins. The principles of fusing physical systems with multiple digital twins
would be developed, each capturing certain physics with a specified fidelity.
(4) Knowledge expansion. New approaches would be studied to capture experiential
and deep knowledge in the public manufacturing literature/databases on process
chains and the dynamic process-material relationships via innovative graph
neural networks. These approaches will be validated to discover innovate new
pathways to manufacture high-entropy alloys that retain strengths above 1400°C,
demonstrating improved machinability and reduced use of expensive and scarce
materials. The project would provide hands-on training and education, leveraging
their expertise and collaborations with national Manufacturing USA, industry,
and education networks.

This Future Manufacturing research is supported by the Computer and Information
Science and Engineering Directorate's Division of Computer and Network Systems
(CISE/CNS), the Engineering Directorate's Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation (ENG/CMMI), the Engineering Directorate's Division
Engineering Education and Centers (ENG/EEC), the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate's Division of Mathematical Sciences (MPS/DMS), and the
Technology, Innovation and Partnerships Directorate's Translational Impacts
Division (TIP/TI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.