* 2328250
* FMSG: Bio: Interface-Directed Manufacturing of Piezoelectric Biocrystal Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Sudipta Seal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Environmental stewardship and sustainability are major considerations for future
manufacturing. Renewable, biocompatible, degradable, and nature-derived
biomaterials are beginning to show great promise in a wide range of energy- and
electronics-related areas. Among many material candidates, amino acids, the most
basic building blocks of life, have shown intriguing properties which could make
them suitable for application in semiconductor devices, energy conversion, and
sustainable electronics. To realize these promises, new methods are needed to
enable continuous growth of amino acid films in a manufacturing-ready system. A
recent breakthrough by the team suggests that high-quality amino acid biocrystal
films may be continuously produced when guided by a special interface between a
polymer and a water solution. Therefore, this Future Manufacturing Seed Grant
(FMSG) project seeks fundamental understanding of the interactions of the mixed
materials in order to understand what controls the polymer-water interfaces in a
continuous polymer extrusion system, and how the mixture in turn controls amino
acid crystal formation and its properties. Knowledge obtained from this project
may be transformative to the manufacturing of biocrystal thin films from amino
acids and their derivatives and allow creation of structures which are otherwise
unachievable by existing manufacturing techniques. Discoveries and innovations
from this project will catalyze a new interface-guided manufacturing technique
for biocrystal thin films, enabling a novel material paradigm for eco-friendly
and biocompatible electronics and energy devices.

The objective of this project is to obtain fundamental knowledge that enables
transition from a static interface-guided crystallization of amino acids to a
dynamic and continuous precipitation process in a manufacturing-ready system. To
achieve this objective, the team will develop a new apparatus for continuously
producing polymer-water bi-phase films. Experimental and computational methods
will be combined to understand and predict the dynamic conditions of the water-
polymer system during continuous cooling. These conditions will be used to study
the continuous crystallization kinetics of amino acid crystals and explain the
role of the water-polymer interface as a key controlling factor. In addition,
the piezoelectric properties of amino acid crystal films, which allow conversion
of mechanical energy into electricity, will be quantified as a benchmark for
film quality evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.