* 2328671
* Robust Multi-Robot Path Planning and Execution on a Large Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Maxim Likhachev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cang Ye
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Coordinating a large team of robots to perform navigation tasks in a congested
environment is a critical problem in many settings such as automated warehouses.
An increasing number of Artificial Intelligence (AI) researchers have been
attracted to study an abstract model of this problem, called Multi-Agent Path
Finding (MAPF), and made significant progress in the past decade. State-of-the-
art MAPF solvers can generate paths in seconds for hundreds of mobile agents
(which are simplified versions of robots) in highly congested environments and
yet provide important theoretical guarantees such as soundness and even
optimality. Yet, these solvers cannot be directly applied to real robots. They
ignore constraints on robot dynamics such as limits on acceleration and do not
account for the uncertainty in execution such as potential slippage, latency in
coordination, and delays in trajectory following. Consequently, in practice,
engineers commonly ignore these advanced MAPF solvers and instead opt for much
simpler techniques that can often generate poor-quality solutions but are easy
to adapt. This project aims to close this gap by investigating how to provide a
safe and effective multi-robot path planning and execution framework that
enables hundreds of heterogeneous robots to move to their desired locations in
the presence of complex obstacles, non-holonomic dynamics, actuation limits, and
disturbances while minimizing their travel times and communication efforts.

This project builds on the recent work on Temporal Plan Graphs (TPGs), which
relaxes an MAPF plan by allowing arbitrary modifications to the robot speeds as
long as the ordering with which each robot visits each location is preserved.
This project leverages some insights behind TPG but aims to develop a
coordination-aware algorithmic framework that interleaves multi-robot planning
with coordination and control. The first thrust focuses on handling robot
dynamics and temporal tracking errors by developing relaxed and adaptive TPGs
that enforce only critical precedence constraints and allow for the re-
optimization of TPGs on the fly. The second thrust extends the first one by
further considering spatial tracking errors and integrating reachability
analysis and controller optimization into MAPF and TPG algorithms. The third
thrust aims at developing MAPF algorithms that provide provably fast planning
and re-planning times by extending a recently introduced concept of Provably
Constant-Time Motion Planning to the domain of multi-agent planning. The last
thrust develops an open-source platform for testing MAPF algorithms in a more
realistic setting that includes constraints on robot dynamics and uncertainty in
execution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.