* 2328800
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Harnessing a scalable platform to demonstrate multipartite quantum effects under strict conditions
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Peter Bierhorst, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum entanglement is a fascinating phenomenon whereby
quantum particles can be separated by great distances and demonstrate
correlations that go beyond what is possible with classical physics.
Entanglement holds great promise to revolutionize communication in network
settings where multiple separated users will someday possess and share entangled
quantum particles: the "quantum internet" of the future. The objective of this
project is to harness a novel experimental platform being built in Boulder,
Colorado to demonstrate entangled effects such as entangled measurements and
multi-party entangled states. Through a partnership with the University of New
Orleans, this work will serve as a training platform to build expertise among
undergraduate and graduate students, providing a critical boost to the emergence
of a quantum-trained workforce capable of tackling the problems of tomorrow.
Technical Abstract: This projectâ€™s approach to quantum networking is based on
heralded path-entangled photonic states. Heralded entangled states generated by
multiple parties can be used to create genuine multipartite entanglement through
appropriate measurements and operations at a central node. Heralding avoids
post-selection analysis, which becomes necessary when attempting to witness
multipartite entanglement by interfering multiple sources that generate
entangled particle pairs only probabilistically, such as in spontaneous
parametric down-conversion. The heralded setup is thus well suited for the
central scientific problem of this project: to definitively demonstrate, with
minimal auxiliary assumptions, multi-party entangled effects that go beyond two-
party entanglement alone, such as entangled measurements and multi-party
entangled states. This project supports research on how to best measure and
characterize the resulting multipartite correlations, and how to perform careful
statistical analysis to test constraints whose violation indicate the presence
of more sophisticated entangled states and measurements, extending methods that
were developed for first generation of 2-party Bell experiments.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.