* 2328628
* NSF-BSF: Dynamics of flowing particles in soft confined systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Bhargav Rallabandi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2026
* USD 335,976.00

This award will investigate how particles flow in complex compliant microscale
systems, in which deformation of either the particles or the confining
environment affects particle transport. Many biological and engineered
structures at the microscale, such as cell membranes, biofilms, and microfluidic
devices, are soft and thus easily deformed by fluid flow. Red blood cells deform
when flowing in narrow capillaries, and swimming microbes and flowing
microparticles can cause cell membranes to bend and deform. These deformations
modify the motion of the suspended entities (e.g., cells or microorganisms) as a
result of interactions with the carrying fluid. The project will quantify these
interaction mechanisms, which are important to understand microscale biological
transport, and to build biomimetic systems that use compliant structures to
manipulate suspensions of particles or cells for biomedical applications.
Furthermore, this award will foster education and outreach activities by
engaging, or exposing undergraduate and graduate students, as well as middle and
high-school teachers, to its research. As a collaboration between the University
of California, Riverside and Tel Aviv University, it will also serve to enhance
the participation of under-represented groups, including women, in both
Riverside County and Tel Aviv (Israel).

This award will investigate the dynamics of particulate suspensions confined by
flexible elastic membranes, which are ubiquitous in biological environments at
the microscale. The researchers will develop a fundamental understanding of
hydroelastic mechanisms of suspension transport in microscale systems, using a
combination of analytic theory, numerical simulations, and experiments. Over the
course of the project, the international team will develop (i) novel theoretical
and reduced-order models of hydroelastic interactions between particles near
membranes, (ii) a new nonlinear hydroelastic mobility framework, complemented by
numerical simulations, of many-particle dynamics in proximity to membranes, and
(iii) new experimental studies to visualize, characterize, and quantify
particle-membrane interactions in macroscopic and microscopic settings. Finally,
the fundamental insights obtained from these studies will be used to develop a
microfluidic device to manipulate and sort vesicles and soft particles based on
their mechanical and geometric properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.