* 2328145
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Scalable Redox Reactions in Biomanufacturing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Feng Qiao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2026
* USD 940,000.00

Biomanufacturing, the biosynthesis of commodity chemicals, fuels, and medicines,
represents a fast-growing industry with over $150 billion in revenue in the US.
To continue to grow in scale and economic viability, biomanufacturing must
increase its carbon and energy efficiency. However, biosynthetic logics that
exist in Nature often do not operate at maximal carbon or energy efficiency.
This is the case because release of carbon is required as carbon dioxide and
energy has to be wasted as heat to afford a robust thermodynamic driving force.
One way to overcome this challenge is to introduce unnatural thermodynamic
driving forces. This project contributes a suite of unnatural, chemical tools to
deploy stronger-than-Nature thermodynamic driving forces in the form of low
reduction-potential reducing equivalents. These tools augment the natural
capability of biological systems and lead to the conversion of renewable
resources into valuable products. Through the integrated research and outreach
activities, the project improves biomanufacturing to better meet the Nation's
needs for energy, food, commodities, and medicine and concomitantly contributes
to undergraduate and graduate education in STEM. The project plans activities to
motivate K-12 students to pursue a career in STEM by participating in hands-on
experiences in practical science.

Current biomanufacturing processes face a fundamental challenge: biosynthetic
logics that exist in Nature often do not operate at maximal carbon or energy
efficiency, because carbon needs to be released as carbon dioxide and energy
needs to be wasted as heat to afford a robust thermodynamic driving force. To
overcome this challenge, unnatural thermodynamic driving forces are introduced.
This proposal develops unnatural cofactors to deploy stronger-than-Nature
thermodynamic driving forces. The overall objectives are to introduce unnatural
redox cofactors that are more potent reducing reagents than NAD(P) into
Escherichia coli metabolism and use them to power carbon-efficient
biomanufacturing of commodity chemicals. This is achieved by engineering key
enzymes to utilize these unnatural cofactors through an integrated Design-Build-
Test-Learn workflow spanning genome mining, high-throughput enzyme discovery
with directed evolution, structural and biophysical study of the engineered
enzymes, as well as machine learning-based data interpretation to distill
general design principles that govern protein-cofactor interactions. A better
overall understanding of how structural plasticity of the cofactors is tolerated
by enzymes, advances capability beyond what Nature selected for during evolution
and opens new design space for proteins.

This award is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Cellular and Biochemical
Engineering program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental
and Transport Systems

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.