* 2328991
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Prairie View A&amp;M University - Virginia Tech Partnership in Quantum Science &amp; Engineering Research and Education
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mohamed Chouikha, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: The emerging field of Quantum Information Sciences and
Engineering (QISE) will harness the power of quantum physics and advances in
information technology to revolutionize the future information landscape through
innovations in quantum communications, computing, sensing, simulation, and
materials which are critical to economic prosperity and national security. With
the rapidly growing interest and investment in QISE, this project seeks to
address the critical talent gap for a diverse, skilled workforce in this new and
strongly technology-oriented field through the establishment of a QISE research
and education program at Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU) while leveraging
existing significant QISE expertise at Virginia Tech (VT) through research
mentoring and collaborations. The project activities will include: (1)
conducting cutting-edge research in quantum communications and cryptography; (2)
QISE curriculum development at both undergraduate and graduate levels with an
emphasis on the hands-on and project-based learning modules; and (3) outreach
activities through faculty development workshops and summer internships for
underrepresented students in QISE.

Technical Abstract: One of the greatest threats to the connected world is the
security vulnerability of digital communication. The advent of quantum computers
and its ability to quickly factor large numbers will be disruptive to current
cryptography standards which in turn warrants the search for new approaches for
secure communication. Quantum key distribution (QKD) utilizes properties found
in quantum physics to exchange cryptographic keys between shared parties in such
a way that guarantees perfect secrecy. This project will establish quantum
optics (QuED) and QKD testbeds at PVAMU to facilitate research mentoring and
collaboration community between PVAMU and VT in the fields of quantum
communications and cryptography. The collaborative team’s research will focus
on: (1) performing feasibility studies of different quantum cryptographic
protocols for satellite-based QKD by coupling network emulation environment with
laboratory experiments based on photon entanglement demonstrators; (2)
understanding the impact of noise on quantum algorithms; and (3) exploring non-
entanglement based QKD approaches over fiber. The project outcomes will
contribute to the security enhancements in critical applications such as
financial, energy, health, education, and defense sectors. The collaborative
project will also create a sustainable partnership between a Historically Black
University and a majority institution to expand and diversify the QISE workforce
through the curriculum development, student/faculty professional development
opportunities, and connection to industry partners. The combination of research
in collaboration with leading experts in the nation, high-quality teaching
content, and experiential and project based learning paradigms will ensure
success of the project.

This project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA), the Directorate of Engineering (ENG), and the Technology
Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.