* 2328521
* Conference: 7th Pan American Plant Membrane Biology Workshop, Merida, Mexico, June 18-21 2023
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Guillaume Pilot, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support travel awards for trainees to the 7th Pan-American Plant
Membrane Biology Workshop, to be held June 18th-21st, 2023 at the Hotel Reef in
Merida, Yucatan, Mexico.

This meeting will be attended by undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, as well as by senior researchers to discuss current
understanding of all aspects of the structure, function, and dynamics of the
complicated membranes of plant cells and organelles, including the surfaces at
which photosynthesis takes place. Talks will be presented on topics such as how
metals and sugars and chemical signals cross membranes, how membrane structures
move from one part of the cell to another, the structure and function of
membranes in photosynthesis, and how plant membranes respond to stress such as
heat and drought. In addition to formal talks, engagement will be facilitated by
two extended poster sessions to stimulate interactions between researchers. NSF
support will be used to defray travel and registration costs in order to allow
attendance of participants from early stages of their careers, especially for
members of groups underrepresented in this field.

Membranes in plant cells are central to understanding photosynthesis, water
transport, and stress responses. Recent advances in the field, including new
technological capabilities, will be highlighted at the 7th Pan-American Plant
Membrane Biology Workshop. The meeting will bring together seasoned
investigators with students and early-career scientists in both formal talks and
discussion sessions to encourage informal discussion and sharing of latest
research results, including sessions on membrane organization, transport across
membranes, the role of membranes in biotic and abiotic stress responses,
membrane trafficking throughout the cell vacuole, and new techniques for
studying plant membranes including cryoEM/nanodiscs, optogenetics,
bioinformatics, and lipid analysis techniques.

This award is funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.