* 2328752
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Quantum@MTSU: Building QISE Research and Education in Middle Tennessee
* MPS,OMA
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Herbert Fotso, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 10/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: The project aims to establish a comprehensive Quantum
Information Science and Engineering (QISE) program at Middle Tennessee State
University (MTSU). This initiative focuses on research, education, and
broadening participation in quantum technologies. Partnering with the University
at Buffalo SUNY, the project aims to optimize qubit-photon interactions crucial
for efficient quantum information processing (QIP). The research focuses on
controlling quantum emitters using external field protocols, enhancing essential
QIP operations like two-photon interference and quantum memory. Integration of
these control protocols into quantum network simulations will showcase improved
network performance. To foster a quantum-smart workforce and promote diversity,
the project team will develop a specialized QISE undergraduate curriculum and
offer research opportunities for students. Workshops for teachers and summer
camps for high school students inspire early involvement in quantum sciences. To
broaden participation, the project team will actively engage in diverse
mentoring and form partnerships with regional academic institutions, including
HBCU Fisk and PUI Southern Adventist Universities. The project will provide
faculty learning opportunities to enhance QISE training for interested faculty
members. Collaborating with local, regional, and national companies and labs
ensures broader impacts and sustainability. The diverse program aims to
establish MTSU as a thriving QISE research and education center in the region.
By establishing a replicable methodology for expanding QISE efforts, the project
team hopes to serve as a blueprint for other US R2 universities interested in
establishing their QISE programs.

Technical Abstract: Realizing efficient photon-mediated interfaces between
various qubit systems poses a significant challenge in achieving scalable
quantum technologies. The primary objective of this project is to provide
theoretical modeling and analysis to facilitate precise control of the spectral
properties of various quantum emitters. Using external field protocols, the
project team can overcome limiting spectral behaviors like spectral diffusion,
essential for enhancing quantum information processing (QIP) operations that
require spectral overlap between distinct qubits. Building on the project team's
recent successes in modifying qubit emission spectra with external field
protocols, the project team aims to improve the efficiency of two-photon
interference between quantum emitters in different environments. This project
will expand on the team's previous efforts to develop alternative protocols for
two-level and three-level systems, quantifying their impact on specific QIP
operations such as two-photon interference, state transfer, transduction, and
quantum memories. These protocols hold significant potential to enhance the
efficiency of essential photon-mediated QIP tasks. The project team's ultimate
goal is to integrate these control protocols into quantum network simulators,
demonstrating tangible improvements in network performance. Through educational
and outreach activities, this project aims to foster a diverse skilled QISE
workforce in Middle Tennessee. The project offers a wide range of learning
opportunities, providing access to the undergraduate QISE curriculum, early
research training, specialized workshops for underrepresented groups, and
mentoring opportunities. The project team will also conduct teacher training in
QISE and engaging summer camps for high-school students, igniting early
awareness and interest in quantum science. As a nucleus for QISE initiatives,
this project strives to establish sustainable research and education at Middle
Tennessee State University, contributing to the advancement of quantum workforce
development in the Middle Tennessee region.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.