* 2328173
* Travel: RI: Small: Student Travel Grant for 20th International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning and Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Marcello Balduccini, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports student for select students participating in the 20th
International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning
(KRR) and Doctoral Consortium (DC) that will be held in Rhodes, Greece September
2--8, 2023. This is a well-established international conference that facilitates
interactions between researchers and practitioners interested in the areas of
knowledge representation and reasoning. This activity will bring together a
broad community of researchers in the field and support junior researchers at
this critical early-career stage. The DC creates the opportunity to bring in
participants who might not have attended an AI conference due to lack of
resources. This is especially true for those at smaller institutions and those
which have less developed AI programs. Engaging such participants has the
potential to draw more talent into AI research, improve research ideas in their
formative stage, and engender collaborations across the breadth of disciplines.
This event provides students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on
their work at a critical time in their research and enables them to explore
their career objectives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.