* 2328479
* CC* NPEO: The Research and Science Engagement Center: A Production Platform for Operations, Applied Training, Monitoring, and R&amp;E Support
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Schopf, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 971,739.00

The scientific community has experienced an unprecedented shift in the way
research is performed and how discoveries are made. Highly sophisticated
experimental instruments are creating massive datasets for diverse scientific
communities and hold the potential for new insights that will have long-lasting
impacts on society. However, scientists cannot make effective use of this data
if they are unable to move, store, and analyze it. This project establishes the
Research and Science Engagement Center (ReSEC) as a collaborative focal point
for operational expertise and analysis. This project will assist scientists in
routinely, reliably, and robustly transferring their data. ReSEC will deliver
end-to-end user support and network engineering solutions, and become a central
community hub ready to provide personalized expertise and assistance on an
ongoing basis.

ReSEC proposes four primary execution thrusts: 1) a Roadside Assistance center
to reactively respond to immediate problems with science data transfers; 2)
proactive network observation using tools such as perfSONAR and NetSage; 3)
assistance with design & deployment of campus networking assets such as Science
DMZs; and 4) training for campus network administrators. ReSEC will scale
operations broadly by relying on Regional Network, Infrastructure and Science
Community partners. ReSEC will deliver expertise and assistance on a
sustainable, ongoing basis, with a particular emphasis on serving educational
institutions with relatively limited local network administrative resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.