* 2328281
* ASCENT: Heterogeneously Integrated and AI-Empowered Millimeter-Wave Wide-Bandgap Transmitter Array towards Energy- and Spectrum-Efficient Next-G Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Zheng Zhang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

Due to the advent of data-intensive applications and rapid growth of
communication networks, the energy consumption of wireless ecosystem has been
ever-increasing. Currently, the total electricity consumption of all
communication networks in the world is estimated to be a few thousand terawatt-
hours per year, and this number is projected to be multiplied in the coming
decades. Nevertheless, the millimeter-wave (mmW) radio systems newly adopted in
wireless communications to increase the bandwidth are much less energy-efficient
than the traditional radio systems operating at lower frequency bands. This
project aims to fundamentally improve the energy efficiency of mmW systems by
exploiting the highly efficient wide-bandgap (WBG) semiconductor technologies
through heterogeneous integration (HI) and advanced packaging, which will be
further enhanced by artificial intelligence (AI) for real-time efficiency
optimization. By reducing the energy consumption, the ubiquitous deployment of
high-efficiency WBG-based mmW systems will mitigate the massive carbon emission
of wireless networks and eventually contribute to the evolution of wireless
industry towards 'Net-Zero' emission. Moreover, this project will promote the
capitalization of mmW frequency bands and ease the congestion of the sub-6-GHz
spectrum to address the emergent need of spectrum sustainability in our nation.
The impact of this program will be further expanded through integrated
educational efforts and outreach activities.

This project aims to vastly enhance the energy efficiency of mmW array system
through advanced heterogeneous integration of high-power WBG power amplifier
(PA) circuits in conjunction with AI-assisted dynamic optimization from
individual elements to the array system level. First, multi-chip assembly and
packaging integration will be developed to seamlessly embed WBG chips with the
package substrate and interconnect them with other functional blocks and
antennas. The developed HI process will also involve compatible cooling
solutions based on a "shower-type" microfabricated nozzle structure to
effectively manage the thermal condition of the WBG layer during system
operation. Moreover, high-resolution thermal test structures will be co-
integrated to provide real-time temperature sensing data for AI training.
Second, a novel WBG mmW PA architecture, called hybrid asymmetrical load-
modulated balanced amplifier (H-ALMBA), is proposed. This novel architecture
offers unparalleled efficiency as well as high linearity. The H-ALMBA is also
equipped with a powerful intrinsic varactor-less reconfigurability, enabling
self-healing of the PA against severe environmental fluctuations in the highly
compact mmW system in package, including antenna scan impedance, temperature,
mechanical deformation, and process variation. Third, an AI-assisted controller
will be developed to dynamically tune the operation parameters of the PA array,
in which the control loop is closed via an over-the-air observation link for
acquisition of the main-beam data. In this control scheme, operator-learning and
multi-modal data fusion will be investigated to learn the control policy by
considering the different impacts of various observation parameters. To achieve
low-power and low-latency implementation of the AI engine, a hardware-friendly
training framework will be developed to automatically compress and quantize the
AI-assisted controller with high accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.