* 2328663
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Scalable Quantum Gravimeters with Large-Momentum-Transfer Atom Interferometry
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Holger Mueller, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 799,989.00

Non-technical Abstract: In recent years, quantum mechanics have enabled
breakthroughs in computing, communication, and sensing. Gravimeters based on
free-fall wave-like cold atoms and matter-wave interferometry demonstrated
competitive short-term sensitivity and unprecedented long-term stability.
Transportable quantum gravimeters measuring the absolute gravity value or the
gravity gradient have recently been used in out-of-laboratory surveys. However,
compact and versatile quantum gravimeters with simultaneous sensitivity to the
gravity field and its higher-order derivatives have yet to be demonstrated. The
third-order derivative of the gravitational potential, the so-called curvature,
represents the change rate of the gravity gradient and is sensitive to local
mass density changes. Measuring the gravity curvature would open the door for
providing horizontal resolutions in mining exploration and detecting near
subsurface shallow density structures. In this project, the collaborative team
from Rutgers-Newark and UC Berkeley aims to advance state-of-the-art quantum
gravimeters with scalable atom-cooling structures and enhanced light-atom
interactions. The team aims to not only develop the methods for efficient
cooling atoms and manipulating their quantum superposition states but also build
a prototype quantum gravimeter that can simultaneously measure gravity and its
vertical second and third-order derivatives. In addition, the team implements a
plan to broaden participation in quantum information science and engineering
with unrepresented students in STEM majors, including developing a certificate
program in optics, developing new quantum sensing courses, and building a cold-
atom educational kit. Technical Abstract: Nowadays, gravimeters based on atom
interferometry are one of the leading quantum sensors transferring from
laboratories to the field. The state-of-the-art compact quantum gravimeters can
measure the absolute gravity value using a single vertical atom interferometer
and the gravity gradient using differential geometry. Due to the complexity of
adding extra atom interferometers, compact quantum gravimeters that can measure
the third-order gravity derivative have yet to be developed. In this project,
the team at Rutgers-Newark and at UC Berkeley aims to develop scalable large-
moment-transfer atom interferometry to simultaneously measure absolute gravity
and its vertical second and third-order derivatives. Centered around advancing
atom interferometry with compact magneto-optical traps (MOTs) and efficient
large moment transfer, the team aims to achieve three research goals: (1)
Demonstrating three vertically-separated single-beam MOTs in diamond-shaped
mirrors; (2) Demonstrating atom interferometers using a single Raman beam to
measure gravity at three heights; (3) Improving the sensitivity with large
momentum transfer based on spin-depend kicks and adiabatic rapid passage. To
expand participation and train students in quantum information science and
engineering, the team plans educational activities to inspire students,
particularly students from underrepresented groups in STEM, to participate in
this project and further expose them to broader quantum sensing and computing
topics.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.