* 2328868
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Polymer  SWIR Photodiodes for Focal Plane Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Kenan Gundogdu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,476,000.00

Professors Franky So, Veena Misra, Margaret Blanchard and Kenan Gundogdu of
North Carolina State University and Professor Wei You of University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill are supported by the NSF Future of Semiconductors (FuSe)
Program to develop a co-design approach that involves materials, devices, and
systems technology. Low bandgap conjugated polymers with response in the
shortwave infrared (SWIR) region will be synthesized and used as polymeric
photodiode sensors for infrared imaging applications. Current state-of-the-art
SWIR imaging relies on sensors made from inorganic alloys, which are
incompatible with CMOS chips and suffer from extremely high production costs and
limited image resolution. The polymeric systems, which will be fabricated using
processing techniques fully compatible with CMOS technology, are posed to
deliver higher image resolution and performance at a much-reduced production
cost. Success in developing a SWIR imaging systems will result in a paradigm
shift in imaging systems that is not possible with currently available imaging
technologies. The research team is teaming with an industrial partner, SWIR
Vision Systems, to demonstrate a low-cost SWIR prototype camera. In addition to
advancing imaging technology, the project outcomes will be broadly impactful on
other practical applications, including medical diagnostics, security, and
communications. During the course of conducting the proposed research a diverse
group of undergraduate students from North Carolina State University and local
community colleges will be recruited as “FuSe Fellows” to be trained for future
careers in microchip manufacturing and a number of outreach activities geared
towards local high schools, including lab tours and special demonstrations, will
be conducted.

The goal of this project is to develop organic polymer-based photodiodes for
short-wave infrared (SWIR) imaging applications. Current state-of-the-art SWIR
imaging requires sensors made with InGaAs heterogeneously integrated with CMOS
readout chips. While the current sensor is a proven technology, the
incompatibility of InGaAs with silicon leads to high production costs and
limited camera resolution. To mitigate these challenges, low-bandgap conjugated
polymers will be used to fabricate photodiodes through simple solution
processing and vacuum deposition. As the processing of these photodiode arrays
is fully compatible with silicon in a standard silicon fabrication facility,
heterogeneous integration of the resulting SWIR focal plane arrays with the
silicon backplane will be straightforward. The project involves: 1) the design
and synthesis of conjugated polymers with SWIR absorption bands; photophysical
characterization of photocarrier generation and dynamics in single component and
donor polymer/molecular acceptor systems; 3) photodiode design, fabrication and
characterization of optical and electrical properties; 4) heterogeneous
fabrication and characterization of devices compatible with Si backplane process
and development of a process to fabricate focal plane array for SWIR camera
prototypes; and DFT and ML computational calculations to inform the experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.