* 2328830
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Spin Gapless Semiconductors and Effective Spin Injection Design for Spin-Orbit Logic
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Adam Hauser, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2026
* USD 127,356.00

Non-technical Description: Modern life has been transformed by electronics based
on moving electrons through nanoscale semiconductor devices. Spintronics combine
electronics with spin, an intrinsic property of elementary particles, making
possible even smaller devices that operate at higher speeds and consume less
energy. Spintronics could thus revolutionize electronics for data processing,
communication, and storage. This project spans design and synthesis of novel
materials to fabrication and characterization of advanced spintronic devices.
The team will synthesize custom-designed semiconducting alloys to read data more
efficiently in a spintronic logic circuit. A fundamental understanding of the
structural-performance relationship for spintronic materials will be gained
through characterization of structure and materials properties. Collectively,
the outcome of this project is expected to be information on how to manufacture
a highly efficient spintronic device. The teamâ€™s workforce development plan has
a central theme of technology communication. The approach seeks to educate and
develop faculty, students, and the future workforce to be leaders in the
semiconductor industry. Undergraduate and graduate students from five
institutions will be trained to better communicate and identify transferable
skills to make themselves marketable to semiconductor industry employers. This
training will serve as a blueprint for the launch of a micro-credential in
technology communication with integrated Industry-Recognized Credentials, and
this project will support 75 students to receive this credential. Outreach
events will target both undergraduate and K-12 audiences to raise awareness of
jobs in the semiconductor industry. These activities will be reinforced by
workforce development activities and industry partnerships. Technical
Description: Spin gapless semiconductors (SGS) are a new class of spintronic
materials that have a finite bandgap in their electronic band structure for
electrons with one spin and a zero bandgap for electrons with the other spin,
which is advantageous for spintronic applications. Current SGS compounds often
display atomic defects and disordering, crucial elements for the material's spin
polarization and injection capabilities. In order to harness the unique
advantage of SGS as efficient spin injectors, which is indispensable for spin
logic devices such as the magneto-electric spin-orbit (MESO) logic, the team is
using Mn2CoAl as a platform to develop a strategy that stabilizes the near-SGS
behavior through understanding and manipulation of influences from composition,
processing, and interfaces. This is a collaborative material-process-device co-
design project. At the materials level, the team is determining the relationship
between chemical composition, phases, atomic ordering, and resultant electric
and magnetic transport properties. On the thin film synthesis level, the team is
performing low-energetic, epitaxial-quality film growth with sputter beam
epitaxy. Lessons learned from the fundamental materials research will be used to
avoid deleterious defects via composition and processing control. At the device
level, the team is nanopatterning thin SGS layers into local spin injection
junctions for the spin-to-charge readout side of the MESO device. Overall, this
research will not only develop a strategy to use SGS materials for spintronic
devices but also deepen current understanding on how materials composition,
processing, and interfaces collectively impact the performance of a spin
injector.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.