* 2328260
* FMRG: Cyber: Manufacturing USA: NextG-Enabled Manufacturing of the Future (NextGEM)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2024,05/31/2028
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2028
* USD 2,999,632.00

Future smart manufacturing should be flexible, versatile, scalable, modular, and
plug-and-play in contrast to the conventional static sequential manufacturing
paradigm. This future manufacturing paradigm has stringent requirements of
ultra-low latency, highly flexible connectivity, high reliability, and high
computing intelligence. However, the current long end-to-end latency, limited
flexibility, and the lack of computational intelligence in shop floors impose
critical barriers to achieve such a future manufacturing paradigm. The advent of
5G and future 6G (NextG) wireless communication holds the key to overcome these
challenging barriers and reshape future manufacturing fundamentally because
NextG provides unique wireless communication capabilities of high flexibility,
ultra-low latency, high speed, and high reliability to meet the demanding
requirements in latency-critical manufacturing. This project will develop a
NextG-enabled manufacturing (NextGEM) research framework, an open-access NextGEM
cyberinfrastructure, and use-inspired testbeds to enable and demonstrate
transformative manufacturing capabilities. The outcome of this project will not
only advance the knowledge base of ultra-low latency manufacturing but also
translate the enabling technologies into broad practice. The created knowledge,
methods, and tools will transform a wide spectrum of latency-critical
manufacturing sectors and other industries with similar challenges to realize
significant business values such as improved operation efficiencies, reduced
defects, and emerging new business models to drive growth. This project will
also serve as a platform to broaden the participation of diverse groups
including those from underrepresented minority groups in STEM to create the next
generation of the digital manufacturing workforce. This is critical to ensure
American manufacturing leadership at the forefront of Industry 4.0 economic
growth and prosperity.

The overarching goal of the proposed NextGEM is to empower latency-critical
manufacturing by leveraging NextG wireless communication technologies. Building
upon a trial 5G-enabled manufacturing platform at Rutgers, the project will: (1)
create a NextGEM research framework to generate the knowledge of future
manufacturing enabled by the new capabilities of NextG-enabled real-time sensing
and communication, dynamics-informed meta-learning, and plug-and-play edge
control; (2) create an open-access NextGEM cyberinfrastructure to provide the
testbed, data, and software services for the end-user community to access,
interoperate, and reuse; (3) facilitate education and workforce development to
nurture and grow the next generation of talent to strengthen the global U.S.
leadership in Industry 4.0; and (4) engage the diverse stakeholders to form a
public-private innovation ecosystem to advance the knowledge base and develop
enabling technologies for NextGEM. The project will help shape the future
manufacturing landscape with the essence of intelligence, flexibility, mobility,
versatility, and scalability.

This Future Manufacturing award is supported by the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG), the Directorate for Technology, Innovation and Partnerships (TIP), and
the Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.