* 2328552
* EAGER: Low-temperature Coupling of Methane Surrogates over Single Atom Catalysts: Elucidation of Elementary Reactions for C-C Bond Formation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Robert Rioux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas and the chief component of natural gas.
Presently, most natural gas is combusted resulting in emissions of carbon
dioxide (CO2) – also a greenhouse gas. The project investigates an alternative
approach to methane utilization employing a reaction known as non-oxidative
coupling of methane (NOCM). NOCM avoids the formation of CO2 by converting the
methane primarily to ethylene and aromatic compounds – important precursors to a
wide range of chemical products. While the reaction is not new, its potential
application has been limited by incomplete understanding of the complex reaction
chemistry which, in turn, complicates the design effective NOCM catalysts. To
overcome those limitations, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project examines the elementary reactions that occur during NOCM over a
novel class of catalysts known as single-atom catalysts (SACs) using alkyl
halide methane surrogate molecules. The potential of NOCM to produce alkenes and
aromatics from fossil-derived and biological methane resources represents a
stop-gap solution to fully carbon-neutral approaches to the manufacture of
chemicals and fuels.

NOCM is a highly endothermic reaction, necessitating the use of high
temperatures, which leads to a significant impact of gas-phase chemistry on the
observed product distribution of the surface-catalyzed reaction. The project
will investigate reactions of alkyl halide molecular surrogates of methane. The
surrogates allow for low temperature reactivity, thus eliminating complications
associated with gas-phase chemistry contributions. The project examines the
impact of SAC structure and composition on the ability to form carbon-carbon
bonds to produce alkenes of varying size and aromatics. Specifically, three
aspects of C-C bond formation chemistry on SACs will be investigated at moderate
temperatures (200 to 400 degrees Celsius) where surface reactions prevail: (i)
coupling between -CH3(ads) and =CH2(ads) surface fragments; (ii) coupling
between -CH3(ads) surface fragments and C2 species (either -C2H5(ads) or
C2H4(g), a product of NOCM) and (iii) surface-catalyzed aromatic formation
through cyclotrimerization chemistry. The three experimental tasks will focus on
quantifying reaction rates, selectivity, and mechanistic details of C-C coupling
using isotopically labeled substrates. A fourth aim will focus on density
functional theory-based discovery of SACs for C-C bond formation, and the
development of microkinetic models for promising SAC candidates. The catalysts
will be characterized before and after reaction by complementary techniques to
assess the single atom nature of the catalysts and the impact of NOCM chemistry
on the catalyst structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.