* 2328040
* CAREER:Sound Production by Flow Induced Elastic Wave with Application to Human Phonation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Xudong Zheng, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 21,407.00

This research aims to understand the role of the movement of waves through the
mucosa of the larynx (voice box) during phonation (the formation of sounds). The
mucosal wave is the flow-induced elastic wave that propagates in the superficial
layer of the vocal fold. Through the wave motion, it controls the glottal air
pulses, which form the primary sound source of the voice. Yet, the fundamental
questions of how vocal fold biomechanics and flow loading determine the mucosal
wave properties, how the mucosal wave properties affect the glottal flow
dynamics, and how the flow dynamics determine the voice outcome, remain elusive.
This research aims to answer these questions through an integrated computational
study. A high fidelity computational model will be developed that describes
voice production in all its complexity, including neuro-muscular stimulation,
glottal aerodynamics, flow induced vocal fold vibrations, acoustics and their
highly complex nonlinear interactions. The computer model will be validated
against experimental data that has previously been collected from in vivo canine
specimens. The cause-effect relationship between the mucosal wave properties,
glottal flow dynamics and voice outcome will be systematically and
quantitatively studied through parametric studies. This research will greatly
advance the current state of knowledge regarding voice production, including how
voice is controlled. This knowledge will allow better understand how we use and
control our voice. It will also enable development of diagnosis metrics for
mucosal wave related voice diseases, determine the adjustments to the vocal
folds to restore or improve a damaged voice, and predict the outcome of the
adjustment. It can also help people who use their voices excessively (e.g.
teachers, telemarketers) by providing them with the knowledge for how to
efficiently use and control their voices, with the goal of avoiding damage.
Strong collaborations with the University of Maine Communications & Speech
Disorders Department will include the development of multidisciplinary courses
focusing on speech and the introduction of the developed voice simulator into
the educational and training program for future practitioners in speech
pathology as well as education for speech disorder patients.

The mucosal wave propagates through the superficial layers of the vocal fold. It
is induced by flow and controls the movement of air through the glottis, which
then produces the sound during speech and other forms of phonation. More
importantly, its strong interaction of this elastic wave with the glottal flow
generates complex flow patterns and morphologies, such as dynamic flow
separation, intraglottal vortices, vortex shedding, shear layer instabilities
and transitions to turbulence. All of these factors significantly enhance the
complexity inherent to the voice. The foundational questions that will be
addressed focus on vocal fold biomechanics, glottal flow dynamics, and how the
dynamics of the wave affect the production of the voice. This will be addressed
through an integrated multiphysics computational study. The integrated
educational component involves strong collaboration with the Department of
Communication and Speech Disorders. A multidisciplinary course will be developed
to educate both speech pathologists and engineers on the underlying biomechanics
of speech. In addition, the simulation system developed will be directly
employed in the training of speech pathologists and in the education of
individuals suffering from speech disorders.