* 2328593
* I-Corps: Commercialization of a Microscale Power Generator Driven by Bacterial Flagellar Motors
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is focused on a
microscale power supply that combines environmentally friendly materials to
generate electrical current to power portable electronics such as cell phones,
laptops, and mobile chargers. Drawing upon NSF-funded research in compact
microfluidic systems that integrate biological cells with microchips, this
project will explore the feasibility of establishing a small business venture to
manufacture and sell the proposed power supply as a commercial product. At
present, most of the small power supplies used in portable electronics contain
exotic materials that are not environmentally friendly and can pose a public
health risk when disposed of incorrectly. In addition, some of these materials
are often in short supply which can impact the future design and manufacturing
of portable electronics. The raw materials of the proposed power supply are
environmentally friendly and abundant in nature.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a compact system that
consist of three major elements: a single biological cell, small magnetic
particles, and a custom-designed microchip. The manufacturing process of the
system combines these elements in a unique sequence and manner, resulting in a
compact power generator that converts the rotational power of the integrated
cell into an electrical current in the microchip. Integration of the biological
cell and the microchip at high precision is very challenging. While past work
has demonstrated successful immobilization of biological materials on
microchips, the integration process of the proposed power supply is unique
because the integrated cell must rotate continuously after integration in order
to generate an electrical current. Further, like all biological materials, the
integrated cell will age within the system, and this can significantly limit the
shelf life of the power supply. A key focus of the project is to evaluate the
potential need of the proposed power supply by the commercial market while
maintaining a proper balance between the cost and manufacturability of the
system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.