* 2328701
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: GeSnO2 Alloys for Next-Generation Semiconductor Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* John Heron, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2026
* USD 374,953.00

Non-technical Description: This project brings together a team of scientists in
physics, chemistry, materials science, and electrical engineering at the
University of Michigan and the University of Minnesota to co-design electronic
materials and devices based on oxides of the elements tin and germanium. It
answers fundamental scientific questions to understand how these materials can
be grown with sufficiently high quality and how their electrical conductivity
can be controlled by modifications to their composition. The project has the
potential to transform the development of fast, compact, and energy-efficient
electronic devices manufactured with non-toxic elements, to catalyze
applications such as electric vehicles and smart electricity grids, and to
stimulate economic growth in the US. The principal investigators promote
diversity and expand graduate education opportunities through initiatives such
as developing curricula, mentoring undergraduate and PhD students, hosting
summer schools, and collaborating with programs that support undergraduate
research.

Technical Description: This project supports research activities on the co-
design of ultra-wide-band-gap semiconductor materials and electronic devices
based on alloys of germanium dioxide with tin dioxide in the rutile structure.
The research activities combine theory, thin-film growth, structural and
electrical characterization, and device fabrication, and focus on (1) the
development of high-quality thin films, (2) the demonstration of n-type and
p-type doping, (3) the development of high-quality electrical contacts, (4) the
understanding of low- and high- field electrical transport, and (5) the
fabrication of prototype power devices. The research aims to advance the science
and engineering of oxide semiconductor materials in order to co-design prototype
devices and accelerate the manufacturing of energy-efficient electronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.