* 2328254
* Maneuvering over Deformable Terrain: Long-horizon Task and Motion Planning of Bipedal Locomotion via Contact Sensing and Terrain Adaptation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Seth Hutchinson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 956,439.00

The main aim of this grant is to enhance the planning abilities of robots with
legs. Specifically, the team will equip robots with the necessary tools to walk
on challenging and ever-changing surfaces, like construction sites filled with
loose rocks and debris. This task is quite difficult because robots with legs
have many moving parts, and they struggle to plan their movements for such
complex terrain. It becomes even more challenging when the ground is soft or
unstable, as the robot must maintain its balance and control how it interacts
with the surface. To achieve this goal, the PIs aim to enable robots to plan
their actions in advance and adjust in real-time while walking on demanding
surfaces. They are taking inspiration from biology to design better robots while
bringing together different fields of study, such as understanding the dynamics
of robots with legs and how they make contact with surfaces, as well as planning
tasks and movements. This research will train a diverse group of students,
including undergraduate students through the Georgia Tech Vertically Integrated
Program, and underrepresented high-school students via the Engaging New
Generation at Georgia Tech through Engineering & Science (ENGAGES) program. In
addition, this award will support the inclusion of a graduate-level curriculum
initiative integrated into a cross-disciplinary class to train PhD students at
the interface of physics and robotics and broaden participation in computing,
engineering, and science disciplines. If successful, the outcomes of this
research could lead to the deployment of legged robots in various fields,
including construction, agriculture, and urban environments. Ultimately, the
project's overarching goal is to enhance the capabilities of bipedal robots,
enabling them to navigate challenging terrains and contribute to various real-
world applications, thereby making our lives easier and safer.

Long-horizon, real-time, versatile bipedal robot locomotion over highly complex
and deformable terrain is largely underexplored. This research aims to integrate
deformable terrain physics, adaptive contact mechanism design, and multi-modal
contact sensing into a unified task and motion planning framework and enable
bipedal legged machines to maneuver over various harsh terrain. Particularly,
this award will employ a convergent approach including: (i) multi-modal terrain
contact mechanism for austere terrain classification and adaptation, (ii)
physics-based granular terrain dynamics modeling and deformable patch contact
modeling, and (iii) long-horizon planning algorithms solving terrain-adaptive
distributed trajectory optimization while symbolically reasoning about versatile
gaits and contact decisions. The PIs will uncover fundamental locomotion
principles through extensive and representative robot-terrain interaction
experiments at various spatiotemporal scales. This research will enable
breakthroughs in the understanding of integrating complex terrain dynamics and
rich contact sensing into bipedal locomotion planning and decision-making in a
principled manner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.