* 2328805
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Efficient Situation-Aware AI Processing in Advanced 2-Terminal SOT-MRAM
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Yiran Chen, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 214,916.00

The amount of data required to be analyzed by computing systems has been
increasing drastically to exascale (i.e., billions of gigabytes) and beyond.
Meanwhile, owing to the boom in artificial intelligence (AI), especially Deep
Neural Network (DNN), there is a need for high performance, efficient, fast, and
adaptive AI-based big data processing systems. However, those requirements are
not sufficiently met by existing computing solutions due to the power-wall in
silicon-based semiconductor devices, memory-wall in traditional Von-Neuman
computing architecture, and ultra computation- and memory-intensive DNN-based AI
algorithms. This project brings together an interdisciplinary group of
researchers, with expertise spanning from material science, device fabrication,
integrated circuit design, computer architecture, and AI algorithms to undertake
innovative device-circuit-algorithm co-design for developing an AI Processing-
In-Memory (AI-PIM) system that could leverage the emerging non-volatile magnetic
memory technology to implement efficient AI data processing, as well as
situation-aware on-chip continual learning. This project targets to
significantly improve the AI data processing energy efficiency, with 100X higher
efficiency than that of state-of-the-art Graph Processing Units (GPUs). The
project will greatly benefit various application areas, such as autonomous
driving, robotics, personalized cognitive speech, and smart connected health,
etc. This project will also involve education and workforce development
activities, including K-12 STEM outreach, undergraduate/graduate training,
curriculum development in semiconductor, semiconductor industry internship
mentoring, cleanroom fab internships, advance integrated circuit design courses.
It will also encourage broader participation of female and under-represented
minorities in the microelectronics and semiconductor chip industry.

This project will advance knowledge and conduct cross-layer research spanning
from emerging Spin-Orbit Torque Magnetic Random Access Memory (SOT-MRAM)
material, device, circuit, architecture, to AI algorithm exploration with three
main interweaved thrusts. Thrust 1 will explore unconventional spins in SOT
materials, e.g., MnPd3, and novel device geometry to fabricate a new design of
2-terminal SOT-MRAM, which simultaneously delivers unlimited endurance, nano-
seconds programming time, very high cell density, deterministic programming
without external magnetic field, zero leakage, and non-volatility. Leveraging
the developed 2-terminal SOT-MRAM, Thrust 2 will design and tape-out an AI
Processing-in-Memory (PIM) chip to implement fully digital ‘in-memory sparse
multiplication-and-accumulation (MAC)’ operations that support both forward and
backward computations of neural networks. Following a co-design methodology,
Thrust 3 will first investigate automated network architecture search methods to
construct AI model best suitable for given situation while considering our AI-
PIM system constraint. This thrust will further develop novel PIM-friendly,
compute- and memory-efficient, situation-aware continual learning algorithms
that could minimize the power-hungry on-chip weight update (i.e., memory write)
complexity, while learning new situation- and user-specific data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.