* 2328137
* ASCENT: Reducing greenhouse emissions with ultra-efficient High-Voltage Monolithic Bidirectional Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Chirag Gupta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,499,996.00

Greenhouse gas emissions are the primary contributors for the change in global
climate dynamics. According to the U.S. Environment and Protection Agency, >50%
of the total greenhouse gas emissions sources are tied to electricity generation
(25%) and transportation (27%), respectively. This places an urgent need for
efficient utilization of available electric power, considering 80% of the total
generated electric power is expected to flow through power electronics by 2030.
With the rising electrification of the modern grid and transportation, ultra-
efficient bidirectional power flow is fast becoming an emerging requirement.
Bidirectional power flow can be witnessed in a grid (for example, solar energy
from consumer to grid and from grid to consumer, consumer as storage and
distribution element), electric car (for example, from car to grid and grid to
car, car to another car, car as a source and consumer of electric power),
industrial motor drives, solid-state transformers, data center power supplies,
elevator drives, DC microgrids, energy storage, etc. All these applications
drive the rapid expansion of power electronics across all forms of electrical
power consumption and production; thus, it is critical that their construction
is sustainable, compact, and they operate efficiently. However, incumbent
circuit solutions as well as semiconductor devices that support bidirectional
power flow result in large footprint, reduced efficiency, and low fault
tolerance. This NSF proposal aims to take a materials, devices, and circuit co-
design approach to tackle both semiconductor device and circuit challenges
simultaneously. We propose to utilize circuit architectures such as matrix
converters (MCs) and current source inverters (CSIs) with suitably designed
semiconductor transistors, i.e., bidirectional transistors, to present a
cohesive solution. Bidirectional transistors have the capability to block
voltage and conduct current in both directions. Through our multi-abstraction
level collaborative research, novel material and bidirectional device synthesis
and fabrication steps will be developed, device and circuit level understanding
of bidirectional transistor operation will be gained and the performance of
these devices in MC and CSI inverter topologies will be demonstrated and
benchmarked. This research effort will be complemented with efforts for
education and workforce development activities as well as broadening
participation amongst K-12, pre-college, and college students.

The key objective of this proposal is to leverage wide bandgap materials (WBG)
and ultra-wide-bandgap (UWBG) materials to develop ultra-efficient, high-voltage
monolithic bidirectional transistor (MBDT) to be utilized in efficient
bidirectional power flow enabling circuits. This project will focus on these
research goals. 1) Demonstration of the first UWBG based monolithic
bidirectional transistors (MBDT). 2) Enhancing the performance of GaN Monolithic
Bidirectional Transistor and manufacturability simultaneously by material-device
co-design. 3) Development of a unique high-conductivity multi-channel UWBG
(AlGaN) material development which can lead to < 10x conduction losses compared
to incumbent solutions. 4) Develop comprehensive understanding of physical
phenomenon electron-trapping, hysteresis, breakdown mechanisms, current
collapse, thermal limits, robustness, and reliability in monolithic
bidirectional transistors. 5) Demonstration of converter topologies and
benchmarking efficiency with the introduction of monolithic bidirectional
transistors compared to incumbent solutions. Our workforce education, training,
and development efforts will include fostering student-industry collaboration by
facilitating internship opportunities, lunch seminar networking, and curriculum
redesign. Additionally, we will work with industry and local Madison area
technical colleges to design courses to meet rising technician and operator
needs. We will broaden participation by performing outreach activities with
under-represented and underprivileged pre-college students and increase
awareness at the K-12 level on smart energy choice and their impact on the
environment with a new activity at the Wisconsin Science Festival and
Engineering Expo.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.