* 2328221
* ASCENT: Ultra-Compact PV Microinverters with Integrated Active Power Decoupling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Amir Shooshtari, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This NSF project aims to investigate a new family of energy conversion systems
for residential and commercial solar photovoltaic systems. This project is
focused on clean energy and energy efficiency for climate change mitigation. The
project will bring transformative changes to the size and weight of solar energy
conversions systems. This will be achieved by innovative circuit topologies,
unique control, novel sensors, and optimized electro-thermal co-design. The
intellectual merits of the project include fundamental research for scientific
understanding of proposed innovative solar micro-inverters with substantially
higher power densities and specific powers. The broader impacts of the project
include high quality integration of research and education in power electronics
to meet the emerging workforce and educational needs of the U.S. energy industry
by educating young and talented students in strategic fields of renewable energy
conversion systems. The team plans to recruit and train a diverse group of
talented students including female and minority students in this research
project. The results will be disseminated through professional conferences and
reputable journals to enhance scientific and educational achievements. The
project will also facilitate widespread adoption of solar energy systems.

This project aims at introducing transformative solar micro-inverters enabled by
novel single-stage, dual-active-bridge structures, and integrated active power
decoupling control enhanced by unique high bandwidth sensors and innovative
machine learning. Theoretical advancements in ultra-compact and highly efficient
wide bandgap Gallium Nitride power electronic interfaces will be achieved.
Innovative high bandwidth isolated current sensors capable of handling high
slew-rate common mode voltage in a switch-node will be introduced. The work will
result in novel machine learning, neural network control, and modulation
techniques for wide bandgap-based converters. This project involves
multidisciplinary research in power electronics, sensing circuits, thermal
management, electro-thermal co-design, machine learning, neural network control,
reliability, and design for manufacturing. The results are envisioned to lead to
major breakthroughs in control, modeling, sensing, design, and reliability of
power electronic interfaces for solar energy conversion systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.