* 2328698
* I-Corps: Flow regulated nasal oxygen delivery device
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Umar Sofi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a medical device for monitoring the ventilation of patients
receiving oxygen therapy by nasal cannula, and for autonomously adjusting
ventilator settings based on the measurements of the monitor. Currently, nasal
cannula patients in many hospitals are checked infrequently due to their
relative non-severity compared to patients treated with positive pressure
ventilation, and current cannula devices have no way to monitor patient
ventilation. Taken together, this leads to delayed care due to staffing
shortages and worsening outcomes due to the lack of an early warning system or
any quantifiable patient data. A device that is designed to monitor the oxygen
demands of cannula patients and autonomously react to increases/decreases in
patient oxygen demands may improve outcomes in hospitals and enable hospitals to
improve patient outcomes in the face of respiratory therapist staffing
shortages.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a method for noninvasively
estimating the flowrate of air through a patientâ€™s nasal passage based on
pressure measurements taken inside the nose during respiration. Using a
specially designed cannula capable of taking these measurements during
operation, the method may be used to estimate the volumes of air inspired by the
patient during oxygen therapy. Successful estimation of these volumes requires
careful data processing and detailed information about the relationship between
air pressure and flow in the human nasal passage. A prototype device was shown
to measure the inspired volumes of air in a mannequin with precision in the
order of milliliters and accuracy in the order of 5%. These results indicate
that the proposed technology may be implemented into a commercial medical device
capable of monitoring and reacting to changes in the respiratory status of
patients receiving oxygen therapy via nasal cannula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.