* 2328626
* I-Corps: Accelerating recombinant protein screening
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Danielle Tullman Ercek, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a bacterial
protein expression system that can fully secrete proteins as a platform to
produce high-purity, low-cost proteins for several industries that use
recombinant proteins as ingredients for their products or as a therapeutic drug
itself. Manufacturers of cosmetics, food products, biomaterials, and
biopharmaceuticals may be interested. These industries require large quantities
of high-quality recombinant proteins for various purposes such as drug
development, cosmetic formulation, food production, and biomaterial fabrication.
The use of a recombinant protein expression system that can fully secrete
proteins could provide significant advantages in terms of scalability,
reproducibility, and cost-effectiveness compared to traditional protein
production methods. Therefore, this technology can help them streamline their
production processes and improve the quality of their products. The industries
supported are creating products that improve sustainability and human health and
thus a platform that can allow companies to produce these products faster and
more economically would benefit all of society.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a bacterial protein
expression platform that can fully secrete recombinant proteins. Engineering
successes have been able to produce secreted proteins at commercially relevant
titers. Purity levels of the system far exceed those of legacy protein
expression systems and some applications may not require any additional protein
purification to reach commercially required purity levels. Recovering a soluble
product from the culture medium also avoids refolding or solubilizing proteins
which can often result in loss of protein yields but is required when
manufacturing proteins using other bacterial production hosts. These
improvements will decrease overall production costs of protein-based products or
products that use protein or enzyme precursors. The platform combines the fast
growth, simple engineering, and low cost of traditional bacterial protein
production systems with the simpler purification and product recovery of other,
more complex, production hosts. This allows for fast production of high purity,
soluble proteins while reducing costs of goods and speeding development
timelines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.