* 2328276
* FMRG: Bio: Enabling Technologies for Biomanufacturing Extracellular Vesicle-Based Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Alissa Weaver, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are sacs of fluid surrounded by a membrane. Cells
create these to exchange material and information with other cells. Using EVs to
act as drug carriers is possible. By modifying the molecules on the vesicle
surface, they can be targeted to specific cells or cell types. The technology to
mass-produce purified EVs with tunable and well-defined properties is
developing. The long-term goal of this Future BioManufacturing research is to
develop scalable manufacturing of designer EVs. A diverse cohort of
undergraduate and high school students will be recruited to the project. They
will participate in mentored research and the development of instructional
modules that introduce digital fabrication and cell-based manufacturing concepts
to undergraduates and students in the Metro Nashville Public Schools district.

The overall objective is to harness cellular processes that control the
production, content, and cellular uptake of EVs. The central hypothesis is that
the combination of 3D culture of tissue-specific producer cells and biomolecular
engineering will maximize the product yield of therapeutic EVs. EVs will be
engineered for efficient loading and intracellular delivery of RNA. A scalable
workflow will be developed for producing EVs from differentiated human induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). A biomanufacturing platform that produces EVs
from adherent cells will be scaled-up. By addressing outstanding knowledge and
technology gaps, the research is expected to pioneer new strategies for scalable
manufacturing of designer, tissue specific EVs that have broad potential for
clinical applications. In addition, this work will provide fundamental insights
into the cellular phenotypes that control EV biosynthesis, RNA loading,
secretion, cellular uptake, and delivery.

This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division in ENG, the Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) Division in ENG, and the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division in BIO.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.