* 2328095
* CDS&amp;E: Simulation- and Data-driven Peptide Antibody Design Targeting RBD and non-RBD Epitopes of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Baofu Qiao, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 549,351.00

Drugs interact with proteins to disrupt bacterial and viral infections.
Effective drugs are usually discovered rather than designed. Antibodies are
protein complexes generated by the immune system to bind to and inactivate
viruses. Peptides are short strings of amino acids that are being designed to
mimic the protein binding activity of antibodies. Many aspects of protein-
protein and protein-peptide interactions are not clearly understood. This
project will apply an artificial intelligence approach to understand those
interactions. The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein will be the model system for study.
The resulting model for therapeutic peptide design will be provided to the
research community on a variety of software platforms. The project will also
support outreach to K-12 students regarding the SARS-CoV-2 virus and viral
infections.

The overall objective is to develop a hybrid machine learning-simulation (MLSim)
platform that allows us to better understand the molecular interaction between
peptide drugs and viral proteins. The model viral protein system will be the
SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins at both the receptor-binding domain (RBD) and the non-
RBD. Transfer learning techniques for existing data models for protein-peptide
interactions will be implemented. Online learning techniques will allow for the
timely update of the predictive models with newly available data. The multiscale
simulation component aids the machine learning part by supplying high-fidelity
input data and cross-validating the predictions These efforts should result in
molecular-level insight into viral protein-antibody interactions. There are two
key outcomes anticipated from this project. First, a simulation- and data-
enabled platform that integrates a high-throughput, customizable machine
learning pipeline for fast screening and filtering peptide candidates, with
high-fidelity all-atom explicit-solvent molecular dynamics simulation and free
energy calculations. The second is fundamental insight into viral protein-
peptide interactions and how those influence the design of neutralizing
peptides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.