* 2328822
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Understanding and controlling decoherence in hybrid spin qubit-magnon systems for advancing education and building workforce in emerging quantum technologies
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Abdelghani Laraoui, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum technologies are expected to become integral to
the future sustained economic well-being of the country. Quantum computing and
quantum sensing are essential parts of evolving quantum technologies. While many
quantum technologies, such as quantum computers based on superconducting qubits,
are already available to do advanced calculations, the need for ultra-low (<
0.1K) temperatures makes them challenging and less accessible. The team focuses
on studying and controlling the quantum decoherence in hybrid diamond spin
qubit-magnetic excitation (magnon) systems that could potentially serve as
scalable quantum information processing platforms operating at higher
temperatures (â‰¥ 1 K) than superconducting qubits. The project's goals are to
design, fabricate, characterize, and model hybrid architectures where diamond
spin qubits and their interactions are controlled by magnons and spin current
effects using heterostructures of thin-film or two-dimensional magnetic
materials. The principal investigators at Wichita State University benefit from
extending the capabilities in advanced nanofabrication of quantum materials and
cryogenic quantum sensing from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The project
also aims to advance education and build a workforce in emerging quantum
technologies by training a postdoc, several graduate/undergraduate/K-12
(abbreviating Kindergarten through 12th grade) students, and four K-12 teachers.

Technical Abstract: The realization of chip-integrated, spin-based quantum
information processing (QIP) devices depends on the ability to controllably link
distant spin qubits via a coherent quantum bus. To achieve direct spin-spin
qubits coupling, architectures based on linear chains of spin defects positioned
on the surface of wide-bandgap semiconductors have been proposed, but the short
range (~ 10 nm) of the dipolar interaction between neighbors and disorder in
their relative positions impose engineering challenges that are currently
difficult to overcome. The goals of the project are to design, fabricate,
characterize, and model hybrid architectures where diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV)
spin qubits (SQs) and their interactions are controlled by magnonics and
spintronics effects using heterostructures of thin-film and two-dimensional (2D)
magnetic materials. The project seeks to study SQ-magnon couplings in magnetic
nanowires, 2D flakes, and cavities with different shapes and compositions and at
a wide range of temperatures (0.3-350 K) and magnetic fields (up to 3 T) with
the goal to identify the physical mechanisms of the rich magnetic excitation
modes in magnetic materials at the nanoscale, the origin of decoherence in
hybrid diamond SQ-magnon systems, and the optimal working parameters for using
(classical and quantum) magnons to couple distant SQs without affecting their
coherence. The proposed research activities include: (i) growth of magnetic
materials (thin film, 2D) and nanofabrication of spintronic devices for
generating and controlling magnons, (ii) perform static and dynamic magnetic,
optical, and magneto-transport measurements, (iii) perform quantum sensing of
magnons in thin-film and 2D magnets at ambient and cryogenic conditions to study
the rich physics of spin excitations and explore quantum magnons, (iv) and
finally establish theoretically and experimentally the strong coherent coupling
between NV SQs and magnons relevant to QIP. The principal investigator at
University of Nebraska Lincoln (UNL) helps the principal investigators at
Wichita State University to extend UNL's quantum capabilities in advanced
nanofabrication of quantum materials (diamond membranes doped with NVs, magnetic
waveguides/devices) and cryogenic quantum sensing. The workforce development
goal of this project is to train and mentor students in quantum information
science (QIS) and technologies. As a new field with distinct knowledge and
skills required to be competitive in the emerging quantum workforce, an
opportunity exists to design innovative curricula for training graduate and
undergraduate students and to create new education and outreach activities that
integrate quantum concepts to recruit first-generation quantum scientists and
engineers. The workforce development plans include: (1) design an applied
learning module for quantum technologies course, (2) design traditional and
animation-based course modules for emerging QIS technologies, (3) education,
training, and mentoring Plans for K-12 Teachers and K-12 Students, and (4)
promote inclusive and equitable research plan.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.