* 2328159
* FMSG: Eco: Microalgae-based Biomanufacturing of Methionine for Organic Poultry Diets
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

The project explores the feasibility of developing future manufacturing
processes for renewable and resilient conversion of microalgae to chemical
products that are currently produced from fossil resources through traditional
chemical synthesis. Specifically, the project will address an urgent and unmet
need for supplying bio-based Methionine (Met), an amino acid widely used in
poultry diets. Met is the only chemically synthesized amino acid still allowed
in organic poultry diets due to the absence of a bio-based alternative. The
project deviates from traditional (i.e. open pond) microalgae production by
utilizing photobioreactors (PBRs) within greenhouses, thus expanding
opportunities to manufacture algae-derived products in cold-climate locations
via alternative energy and renewable bio-sources. Although the exploratory seed
grant project focuses on Met production, it also includes novel synthesis
methods for greenhouse-based microalgae cultivation and process control that may
be applicable to a wide range of bio-based products. The project also
incorporates educational activities that will equip a diverse range of students
and workforce participants with future manufacturing skills that will promote
economic and workforce development as well as benefit the environment and
society at many levels.

The overall objective of the seed project is to develop energy-efficient oxygen-
balanced mixotrophic (OBM) microalgae cultivation in combination with artificial
intelligence (AI)-enabled system optimization and control to maximize the cost
reduction potential of operating in colder-climate environments. To that end, a
team of multidisciplinary experts will 1) investigate and manipulate Met yield
within Chlorella sorokiniana (UTEX 1230); 2) design, assemble, and test various
PBR designs and process configurations; 3) develop and integrate AI tools for
process optimization and control; and 4) perform techno-economic analysis.
Although the initial work will focus on the potential for commercialization in
Connecticut, the anticipated results will set the stage for further research
enabling energy-efficient, near-zero or negative CO2 emission manufacturing of a
wide array of microalgae based products across cold-climate regions. Educational
and outreach aspects of the seed project include training students in bioreactor
design and operation, developing and running a pilot bootcamp for AI
applications for future biomanufacturing, and recruiting students from
underrepresented communities for biomanufacturing workforce development.

This Future Manufacturing award was supported by the NSF divisions of Chemistry
(CHE) and Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET)

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.