* 2328080
* Conference: INCLUDES: Culturewise Pathways to Indigenous STEM Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Sharon Nelson-Barber, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

With support from the NSF INCLUDES Program, this project aims to address the
significant and persistent lack of integration of local ecological knowledge
with western STEM education. Neglecting Indigenous perspectives limits
opportunities for Indigenous learners to pursue STEM courses and careers and
creates broadening participation challenges in STEM education. To address this
challenge, the project will convene a group of Indigenous academic, community,
and education leaders. Over three conference phases, this group will share
authentic, culturally specific examples of what works and does not work in STEM
education for Indigenous learners. These discussions will help establish a
vision for inclusive Indigenous education. The project will produce a compendium
of learnings for dissemination in-person, in print, and online. The evaluation
may reveal how conference participants and educators approach and deliver
culturally responsive STEM education.

The goal of the project is to gather exemplary community-driven STEM education
designed for Indigenous students. During Phase I, conference participants will
facilitate knowledge sharing and identify innovative strategies. In Phase II,
participants will work in small groups using learnings to develop
recommendations and action plans for broadening Indigenous participation in
STEM. The project team hypothesizes that the Phase III dissemination of
conference Proceedings can improve educator capacities to envision and enact
culturally appropriate STEM instruction. In addition, these resources can
contribute to systemic improvements in STEM education that foster inclusivity
and broaden participation among Indigenous learners. Through these efforts, the
project aims to bridge the gap between Indigenous knowledge and western STEM
literacy, ultimately paving the way for increased Indigenous representation and
success in STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.