* 2328815
* FuSe: Bio-inspired sensorimotor control for robotic locomotion with neuromorphic architectures using beyond-CMOS materials and devices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Feng Xiong, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 547,398.00

In biology, a key property of mammals is the ability to move efficiently in
complex environments which is enabled through neural networks called Central
Pattern Generators (CPG). CPGs produce rhythmic patterns of control signals for
the limbs using simple environmental cues. A prime example of CPGs in action is
our own ability to navigate around obstacles. While such networks are natural
from the perspective of mammals, there is currently no efficient way to engineer
them using electronic devices and computers. Engineering these networks can
revolutionize our ability to build future generations of robots. Agile robots
that can traverse unknown and complex terrains have the potential to enable
autonomous navigation for commercial transport, enhance disaster response during
floods and earthquakes or to access remote and unsafe areas like malfunctioning
nuclear plants or space exploration. The advances in computer engineering
hardware including circuits, devices, and materials that form the core of this
project will aid the creation of this new technology. The breadth of skillsets
that are required to effectively train a new cadre of workforce in neuromorphic
engineering for robotics makes curriculum design and integration with existing
frameworks incredibly challenging. The proposed NeuRoBots educational consortium
among the partnering institutions will address this issue. The main objective of
this consortium is to collaborate and implement a comprehensive workforce
development plan that incorporates evidence-based best practices to help train a
new generation of engineers and researchers, who are equipped to satisfy the
growing needs of the semiconductor industry.

The goal of this award is to model, design and implement neuromorphic networks
with synapses and neurons using emerging devices to achieve efficient and
adaptive control in miniature robots. The inspiration comes from biological
neural circuitry responsible for agile movement. The technical objectives of
this project are designed to address three components: 1) The materials track
focuses on physics-inspired models to understand the material and device
properties to help engineer the temporal dynamics, 2) the devices track develops
new devices and circuits for implementing bio-inspired neurons and synapses, and
3) the systems track will implement agile miniature robots that demonstrate bio-
inspired locomotion using CPG networks and reinforcement learning. By
incorporating non-linear temporal dynamics at multiple timescales through mixed-
feedback control and instantiating CPG networks on scalable energy-efficient
hardware built using novel devices, the target is to demonstrate a fully
functional quadruped/hexapod robot that can learn to move using principles
informed by neuroscience. This work can lead to transformative advances in
neuromorphic computing, artificial intelligence (AI), robotics, and industrial
automation, while providing deeper insights to the science of neuromodulation
and self-supervised learning. Development of general-purpose neuromorphic
systems that mimic the complex neuromodulatory temporal dynamics seen in
neuroscience experiments offers pathways to build a new class of computing
machines that address the grand challenges of the BRAIN Initiative, and advances
envisioned in the CHIPS Act, benefiting the nation and society at large.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.