* 2328908
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Interconnects with Co-Designed Materials, Topology, and Wire Architecture
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Christopher Hinkle, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2026
* USD 117,187.00

Nontechnical description: This interdisciplinary research project focuses on the
synthesis of new materials which have a high electrical conductivity for small
wires. This is important because more powerful and energy-efficient computers
require smaller wires to connect the switches (transistors) as well as the
memory elements. The key idea is to use a new type of materials for which
electrons cannot be scattered at the wire surfaces. The project discovers such
new materials and develops methods for their synthesis and integration into
computer chip manufacturing, facilitating more powerful and energy-efficient
chips used in devices ranging from smartphones to large data centers. The
project includes a multifaceted education and workforce development initiative,
involving education leaders from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
and Minority Serving Institutions, scientists from research intensive
universities, and development engineers from companies in the semiconductor
industry. These initiatives are designed to increase diversity, quality, and
quantity of the USA-based semiconductor chip manufacturing workforce. Technical
description: This project aims to control the synthesis of new high-conductivity
electrical interconnect materials and to co-design the conductor materials with
the back-end dielectric to achieve a conductivity advantage over existing Cu
technology in future integrated circuits. This involves exploiting scattering-
immune surface transport in topological metals, tuning their Fermi level through
strain and dielectric engineering for maximum topological effects, and achieving
crystal orientation/chirality control for high conductivity in topological and
anisotropic metals. The project uses a tight integration of complementary novel
synthesis methods, high-throughput characterization, ab-initio electron
transport calculations, as well as strain, dielectric and contact engineering.
More specifically, it includes synthesis of topological and directional
interconnect conductors using complementary techniques to prototype several
classes of materials for the future semiconductor industry, co-design crystal
growth orientation and chirality with electron transport to leverage favorable
conduction including scattering-immune unidirectional surface transport in Weyl
semimetals, and tuning of the Fermi level to Weyl nodes by elastic strain.

This project is co-funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to strengthen STEM
undergraduate education and research at HBCUs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.