* 2328692
* Preparing the Next Generation of Biology Education Researchers through Interdisciplinary Co-mentorship and Evidence-based Professional Development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Logan Fiorella, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,249,972.00

The life sciences comprise the largest and most diverse field within STEM higher
education. Biology education programs in colleges and universities across the
country are tasked with preparing a diverse workforce equipped to understand
life on our planet and apply lessons learned to produce societal benefits and
tackle societal challenges. Yet, biology education research, which can be used
to inform and improve biology teaching and learning, is still developing as a
field. Furthermore, biology education research has been critiqued for its
insular approach, limited study designs, and insufficient attention to
principles of measurement. All of these issues compromise the utility of biology
education research findings. This project is designed to address this concern
and build capacity for robust and theory-informed research by developing,
implementing, and evaluating a novel model for postdoctoral training in biology
education research. The project uses a co-mentorship approach that leverages
expertise and ongoing cross-disciplinary research collaborations among life
science and social science faculty members at the University of Georgia.
Participating Postdoctoral Fellows select and carry out a defined research
project to advance their research expertise. In addition, fellows formulate an
independent research project they will take with them into their next position.
Fellows also engage in a tailored suite of professional development activities
that prepare them for a diversity of positions related to higher education. All
aspects of the project are grounded in research on effective ways to recruit,
select, and mentor early career researchers in order to maximize the project’s
success and impact.

This project is designed to prepare a diverse cohort of Postdoctoral Fellows to
carry out biology education research that generates robust empirical findings,
catalyzes theory development, and broadens participation in biology education.
The project is designed to recruit and identify the cohort using a series
evidence-based approaches, including situational interviews and selection
rubrics, to broaden participation and limit potential influences of implicit
biases. Fellows select and carry out a defined research project to advance their
research expertise and formulate an independent research project they will take
with them into their next position. A pair of faculty co-mentors—one in the life
sciences and one in the social sciences support fellows in their research.
Fellows further their professional development through a suite of individual and
cohort-based activities, including literature reading and analysis, seminars and
networking with leading scholars, presenting at national conferences, writing
and submitting manuscripts and grant proposals, and applying for jobs that align
with their career goals. PIs and research mentors work are grounded in
principles of job crafting and effective, culturally aware mentorship such that
each Fellow formulates and enacts an individual development plan tailored to
their needs, interests, and aspirations. Fellows also have a “menu” of other
options from which they can craft their plans, including research-related
courses and workshops, professional certifications, and teaching and mentoring
opportunities. The project goals include increasing diversity of the biology
education research community, building capacity to carry out robust,
theoretically informed, and completing impactful research that leads to
mechanistic understanding of biology education and theory building related to
all levels of the biology education ecosystem (e.g., learning, teaching, policy,
etc.).

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) and the EDU Core Research (EDU ECR)
Programs. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research knowledge,
skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education,
and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental
and applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The IUSE Program
supports projects to improve STEM teaching and learning for undergraduate
students, including studying what works and for whom and how to transform
institutions to adopt successful practices in STEM education. The EDU ECR
Program supports research on STEM education in one or more of three research
areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.