* 2328027
* EAGER: Numerical and Experimental Study of Purcell-Like Locomotion for Microswimmers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Mingjun Wei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 180,866.00

Untethered microswimmers have attracted many interests in recent years due to
their great potential in various applications such as minimally invasive
medicine and active environment monitoring. One of the most famous locomotion by
micro-swimmers is the so-called “Purcell swimmer” which was first proposed by
and later named after Nobel laureate Edward Purcell. The Purcell swimmer
geometrically presents the simplest segmented structure for one-dimensional
locomotion on microscale where the Reynolds number is small. Earlier numerical
and theoretical studies were universally based on the same assumption of Stokes
flow, which neglects the nonlinear and inertial contributions. However, under a
more careful examination, actual flow conditions of many microswimmers do not
satisfy the criterion to ignore those contributions. On the other hand,
experimental demonstrations of untethered Purcell swimmers and associated flow
dynamics were scarce due to the challenge of implementing individually-driven
hinges in a non-invasive manner with existing fabrication methods for
microscale. The success of this study will broaden the understanding of flow
physics in micro-swimmers and experimentally demonstrate a new approach to
fabricate and control untethered micro-swimmers for the study of their
locomotion and flow dynamics. Education components such as graduate education
and class teaching are integrated in this project. Demonstration of microswimmer
locomotion is included in outreach events to promote public interests in STEM.

There are two main goals in this research. First, a unique electromicrofluidic
printing technique will position and assemble multiple droplets containing
cross-linkable prepolymers and particle embedded hydrogels to fabricate micro-
swimmers with individually driven hinges, thus it will allow to manufacture and
optically drive untethered Purcell swimmers for the first time. Second, high-
fidelity numerical simulation solving Navier-Stokes equations will be used to
study Purcell-like locomotion of micro-swimmers to exam the nonlinear and
inertial impact on the involved flow physics at the Reynolds number of
interests. Both parts of the research involve the study of a newly proposed
X-swimmer as a micro-swimmer capable of three-dimensional Purcell-like
locomotion. The outcome of this study for three-dimensional locomotion will
change the scope of Purcell-like locomotion and enable new possibilities in the
study of microswimmer locomotion and flow dynamics. The success of the proposed
research will lead to future interdisciplinary collaborations in a broader
community for research in micro-swimmers and their various applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.