* 2328100
* FMSG: Bio: Merging electrochemistry and metabolic engineering for carbon neutral ammonia production
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ruggero Rossi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Ammonia is a critical component of nitrogen-based fertilizers, crucial in
intensive agriculture to feed a continuously growing world population.
Distributed, sustainable ammonia manufacturing, powered by renewable electricity
and catalyzed by electroactive living microorganisms can have a tremendous
impact on global energy consumption and related carbon emissions. This project
addresses the critical societal need to enable decentralized ammonia
manufacturing at the site of use such as a farm or municipality while
simultaneously lowering carbon emissions. Such innovation will result in more
equitable food production practices and infrastructure across the country,
leading to sustainable agricultural practices across the globe. The outreach
activities will broaden the societal impact of this work and train a future
workforce aware of the impact of a sustainable chemical industry on the
environment. On a K-12 level, this project will create new activities
illustrating the potential of merging biology and electrochemistry for the
sustainable production of fuels and energy. On a community college level, this
project will launch a networking event, connecting students with innovative
startups focusing on sustainability and circularity. On an undergraduate and
graduate students level, this project will integrate new material on
environmental electrochemistry in environmental engineering courses.

Current ammonia manufacturing is dominated by the carbon and energy intensive
Haber-Bosch process, which was responsible for the emission of 600 Mt of CO2 and
the consumption of 2% of the global energy produced in 2021. This future
manufacturing seed grant will support fundamental research on convergent
electrochemistry and metabolic engineering approaches to enable carbon-neutral
production of ammonia, merging the productivity and efficiency of
electrochemical synthesis with the exquisite selectivity and low cost of ammonia
generation by nitrogen-fixing bacteria. This novel approach is based on a looped
zero-gap electrochemical cell, coupling ammonia production from bacteria with
abiotic carbon dioxide reduction to organic acids at the cathode. On the
electrochemistry side, the project will (i) optimize the electron transport
chain and improve nitrogenase activity and selectivity at the anode and (ii)
maximize carbon dioxide reduction selectivity at the cathode. On the metabolic
engineering side, the research will (a) manipulate metabolic and regulatory
pathways to increase ammonia productivity and (b) enhance ammonia excretion. The
successful outcome of this approach will be demonstrated by developing and
testing a bench-scale, high-fidelity reactor for continuous production of
ammonia at commercially relevant conditions that can be further scaled up to be
implemented as an operating unit on an individual farm.

This Future Manufacturing project is jointly funded by the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in
the Directorate for Engineering, and the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.