* 2328215
* FMSG: Bio: Integrated bioprocess and synthetic biology for future biomanufacturing of industrial products
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Marceline Egnin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Future biomanufacturing of industrial products using novel synthetic biology
tools and advanced bioprocesses that convert abundant biomass and waste
resources into value-added products with comparable properties will enable
circular bioeconomy with affordable energy, economic growth, and innovation in
renewable energy and chemicals production. In this project, a multidisciplinary
team will collaborate on the research to understand and mitigate bottlenecks
limiting continuous production in industrial fermentation. The project team will
focus on several non-model microorganisms that are currently used or have
enormous potential as cell factories for producing industrial chemicals. The
results from this project will guide and accelerate future biomanufacturing of
chemicals and fuels and would have large and lasting impacts on the US
biomanufacturing industry. The project will benefit the agricultural/rural
communities by converting abundant low-value agricultural residues such as corn
stover to value-added products and accelerate the growth of a sustainable
bioeconomy. Biomanufacturing can also reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
make a major impact on reducing climate change. This project will also broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups and train a diverse range of
students and workforce participants with skills to engage in future
biomanufacturing.

Microbial lifespan and aging are fundamentally important phenomena that will
impact industrial fermentation for chemicals production but have not been
studied for most microbes including those with important industrial
applications. This project focuses on understanding and modulating microbial
lifespan genes and regulatory pathways in selected non-model but versatile
microbes to produce chemicals and biofuels from renewable resources. This
approach will integrate cell recycling to achieve high cell density and high
volumetric productivity in continuous or semi-continuous (sequential batch/fed-
batch) fermentation. Current production of chemicals and fuels in fermentation
is limited by low product titer, productivity or rate, and yield (TRY), poor
process stability, short production duration (longevity). These processes are
also expensive for industrial application. This project will investigate genes
and factors affecting microbial lifespan and aging, which impact cell viability,
process performance (TRY), and longevity in industrial fermentation. First,
selected microbial strains of industrial interest will be evaluated under
different culture and stress conditions to study their effects on
growth/fermentation kinetics and culture stability/longevity with population and
transcriptomics analyses. The results will be used to identify genes/enzymes
contributing to culture heterogeneity, production variability, and limited
production duration or longevity. Then, novel synthetic biology tools including
recombinase-based state machine (RSM) gene circuits and CRISPR genome
engineering, will be used to engineer strains for attaining prolonged lifespan
and mediated aging via enhanced stress tolerance. The research hypothesis is
that microbial strains with increased lifespan or mitigated aging will be more
productive for a longer duration in industrial fermentation. Such strains can be
developed through the design-build-test-learn (DBTL) cycle and used in advanced
continuous fermentation process with in-situ product recovery, achieving at
least 50% improvements in TRY for an extended continuous production period.This
Future Manufacturing award was supported by the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.