* 2328182
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Supporting Flexible and Safe Disability Representation in Social Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Yuhang Zhao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 11/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Social Virtual Reality (VR) is an emerging social medium, where a user immerses
in a 3D virtual space in the form of an avatar and interacts with others via
speech and body gestures. This technology can improve the social life of people
with disabilities (PWD) since it simulates the real-world "face-to-face" social
experience and can mitigate barriers to interaction that PWD can face in the
physical world. The use of avatars also allows PWD to flexibly express their
identity, curating desired social images that may be more or less connected to
their disabilities. However, current social VR platforms are immature in
supporting inclusive identity representation for PWD, in terms of how well
avatars' appearance, sounds, and behavior can support desired self-
representations. Moreover, even effective tools for identity expression can lead
to stigma and risks for PWD due to the lack of well-established social norms in
social VR and the stigma PWD often suffer. This project promotes inclusion and
equity for PWD by investigating how to support flexible and safe disability
representation in social VR. By studying PWD's experiences and preferences
through close co-design work, the project team will make both theoretical and
technical contributions, including design guidelines for inclusive disability
expression, theoretical models of risks for PWD in social VR, and technologies
and toolkits that mitigate those risks.

This project aims to facilitate an inclusive and harmonious social VR
environment for PWD. To achieve this goal, the team focuses on two main
questions: (1) How to support flexible disability representation without causing
misconceptions or triggering stigma? (2) How to define and mitigate the risks
caused by disability disclosure in social VR? To answer these questions, the
team will follow human-centered computing approaches that deeply engage people
with diverse disabilities across the research process. First, the team will
conduct interview studies to build an in-depth understanding of the identity
representation preferences and needs of PWD from both avatar and voice
perspectives. Second, the team will conduct a diary study to identify the social
dynamics caused by disability disclosure in social VR, resulting in a
theoretical risk model that characterizes the types and severity of risks PWD
may experience. Last, the team will design, implement, and evaluate a set of
risk mitigation mechanisms via participatory design workshops. The validated
mechanisms will be disseminated as an open source Unity toolkit for researchers
and developers to build upon; meanwhile, the methods and technologies developed
should be adaptable to other questions around inclusion and safety in social VR.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.