* 2328543
* CAREER: The Exocompiler: Decoupling Algorithms from the Organization of Computation and Data
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 448,421.00

The performance of many important algorithms is dominated by the way their
computations and data are organized for execution on specific hardware.
Traditional ways of programming conflate algorithms and their organization such
that a straightforward implementation is unacceptably slow. At the same time,
neither one can be written or optimized independently, which limits the
productivity of programmers and the portability of programs to future hardware.
Optimized organizations are often an order of magnitude faster and more complex
since they necessarily take a global, rather than per-operation, view of the
algorithm to exploit parallelism and locality. This project's novelty is in
creating a new kind of programming language in which the algorithm and its
organization are decoupled from one another. Programming systems are the tool
through which computation is applied to human problems. The project's impact
will be transforming the way major classes of software are written, enabling a
wider range of people to more productively write new algorithms which are both
high-performance and portable to future computing hardware. This project
explores a programming model that decouples algorithms from their organization,
represented explicitly in the language as a "schedule." It extends this paradigm
from multidimensional arrays to more general computations and data structures,
including sparse matrices and graphs, and builds a machine-learning system to
automatically find schedules competitive with human experts. To realize this
vision, it pursues four major research directions: (a) combining tree search
with neural networks in a reinforcement learning system to automatically find
expert-quality schedules; (b) broadening the class of expressible computations
and schedules to include general loops and program gradients; (c) broadening the
class of data structures and schedules with a relational model to process sparse
and linked data; and (d) creating a comprehensive performance benchmark suite to
serve as our evaluation testbed, and also be shared broadly to foster new
research in systems, compilers, and architecture. The resulting language and
compiler enables productive high-performance programming and provides a powerful
foundation for easily building new domain-specific programming systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.