* 2329323
* IUCRC Planning Grant, Pennsylvania State University: Center for CO2 Storage Modeling, Analytics, and Risk Reduction Technologies (CO2-SMART)
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Tieyuan Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Geologic CO2 storage is a critical technology with enormous economic impact that
can enable the global energy industry to meet their environmental, governance,
and societal responsibilities. It will also help address climate change
challenges while transitioning to renewable sources of energy. The magnitude of
the economic impact of CO2 sequestration is unprecedented and there is strong
buy-in from the federal government and the energy and other industrial sectors.
This National Science Foundation Industry-University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC) planning grant combines the expertise and power of talent and
infrastructure of the University of Southern California and the Pennsylvania
State University (Penn State) to create a 2-Site IUCRC. This combination of
universities brings together geoscientists, data scientists, engineers,
educators, and industry stakeholders to create a multi-sponsored research
program designed to accelerate the development, adaptation, and deployment of
novel technologies for improved modeling, continuous monitoring, imaging,
analytics and risk assessment and mitigation for subsurface CO2 sequestration.
Broader impacts of the activity will be to develop synergistic activities that
address the highest priorities of the private sector in carbon sequestration to
help them overcome hurdles preventing them from offering new and improved
products and services. A major contribution of any Center that comes from this
meeting will be workforce training in carbon sequestration and public outreach
to local primary teachers and schools.

The role of the Penn State Site in the planned IUCRC is to integrate advances in
geophysics/geochemical technologies and data science algorithms to improve
characterization of reservoir and caprock response to CO2. It will also
investigate effective energy economics and policies to propose best-practices
that companies can readily adopt to ensure the economic success of future GCS
projects. The specific research areas to the Penn State Site include: real-time
seismic monitoring from the lab to the field, CO2-fluid-rock interactions and
transport dynamics in confined pore spaces, and fluid permeability/porosity
imaging of CO2â€“induced permeability evolution. It will also apply Machine
Learning enabled multi-physics modeling to upscaling and data assimilation and
determine economic drivers for Geologic CO2 Storage. Penn State workforce
training efforts will be to develop a diverse and inclusive educational and
outreach program for training the next generation of engineers and scientists to
generate a technical workforce with essential skillsets to successfully deploy
and operate long-term geologic CO2 sequestration projects. Penn State will
recruit students from Fort Valley State University and Lincoln University, two
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, to bring diverse perspectives into
the carbon sequestration workforce. Additional outreach will include providing
field trips for fourth graders in Centre County, PA to the Minerals Museum at
Penn State.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.