* 2329338
* Conference: 2023 Nucleic Acids Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Ananthanarayana Kumar, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2024
* USD 10,735.00

The 2023 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Nucleic Acids will be held on June
17th and 18th at the Grand Summit Hotel at Sunday River in Maine, USA. The GRS
will be themed “Nucleic Acids: Mechanism meets Medicine” and will occur just
prior to the associated Gordon Research Conference on “Structural, Functional
and Mechanistic Behavior of DNA, RNA and Nucleic Acid Processing Enzymes”. The
GRS participants will be graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and other
early career scientists. The two-day meeting will have three oral presentation
sessions, two poster sessions, and one panel discussion on “career pathways
after PhD”, which will offer the participants many opportunities to share
science, network, and learn about various career development paths within and
outside of academia. The GRS is organized and chaired by a postdoctoral fellow
and will serve as an exemplary professional development activity.

The scientific exchanges at the GRS will cover both fundamental biology
questions involving mechanisms of gene expression and regulation, and medically
relevant subjects related to nucleic acid therapeutics. The oral presentations
will include topics such as DNA replication and repair, mechanisms of
transcription and translation, RNA structure and function, RNA processing,
nucleic acid modifications, CRISPR technologies, and therapeutics. A dedicated
session on method development in nucleic acid biology will bring participants up
to date on new technologies and protocols, and how these can be adapted to
solving their own research questions. GRS participants are encouraged to present
unpublished and ongoing research work, helping push the frontiers of knowledge
in the field of nucleic acid biology. In addition to being a platform for open
exchange of bold ideas, the meeting will catalyze the participation of junior
investigators from traditionally underrepresented communities. The meeting
outcomes are expected to advance fundamental biological research and development
of innovative solutions for critical global challenges, including healthcare,
food security and climate change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.