* 2329854
* Collaborative Research: Conference: New England Algebraic Topology and Mathematical Physics Seminar (NEAT MAPS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Benjamin Knudsen, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/28/2025
* USD 21,400.00

The New England Algebraic Topology and Mathematical Physics Seminar (NEAT MAPS)
is a series of short conferences designed to bring together researchers in
topology, mathematical physics and related subjects working within New England
and the surrounding area. This award provides support for two conference
meetings, that will take place at Boston University, November 11-12, 2023, and
Amherst College, April 6-7, 2024. The goal of these events is to take advantage
of the expanding discourse between the research areas of mathematical physics,
particularly quantum field theory, and algebraic topology in the contemporary
research environment. The conferences will provide a venue for mathematicians in
different subfields and different career stages to come together to discuss
current trends in these research areas and foster an intellectual community
across institutions. Participants will include leading researchers as well as
graduate students and post-doctoral scholars. Researchers with expertise
spanning a combination of the fields of algebraic topology and mathematical
physics have been making substantial advances in a range of areas over the last
decade, particularly by exporting and importing techniques across and between
these disciplines. This mini-conference series will present lectures from local
experts in New England addressing these new developments, including, for
instance, the theory of factorization algebras, factorization homology, and the
theory of configuration spaces; functorial TQFT and higher categorical
techniques and their applications to knot and manifold invariants; geometric
representation theory, including versions of the geometric Langlands
correspondence as it relates to four-dimensional supersymmetric gauge theory;
low dimensional topology and operadic algebra; characteristic classes of
manifold bundles and gauge theories; Poisson-sigma models and the integrability
problem for Lie algebroids. More information will be available at the conference
website: https://brianrwilliams.github.io/neatmaps/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.