* 2329712
* I-Corps:  Quasi-Persistent Luminescent Material
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* William Hollerman, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of forms of tracer ammunition and a new kind of shooting range. The
proposed technology is designed to use the “cold light” of luminescence to
provide the desirable “trace effect” without the use of chemically hazardous and
energetic materials that are both difficult to manufacture and are primary
contributors to human-started wildfires. More broadly, the proposed technology
may be used to replace incandescent forms of lighting where the necessary
duration of light is in the timeframe of single-digit seconds. The most
immediate commercial opportunity is in ammunition, and other possibilities
include fireworks with incendiary materials and new forms of safety lighting.
This I-Corps project is based on the development of quasi-persistent luminescent
material. The proposed technology provides new forms of persistent luminescent
phosphor (not phosphorous) "glow-in-the-dark" materials. Whereas short duration
emission lifetime (microseconds, milliseconds) phosphors are common and long
duration emission lifetime phosphors are common (many minutes, hours), "short-
duration persistent" emission lifetime phosphors (single-digit seconds, 10-20
seconds) have not yet been developed. The development of short duration
persistent luminescence may serve to further the understanding of photonically
stimulated electron excitation, as well as the distribution of electron trap
energies required for short duration emission. The design of these short
duration persistent luminescent materials may leverage advances in materials
science development, including new modeling techniques, crystal structure
designs, and novel dopant chemistries. The proposed persistent luminescent
materials may stimulate research in luminescence emission lifetimes and may lead
to the development of new crystal formulations to serve as the basis for follow-
on photonics research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.