* 2329819
* Research Infrastructure: Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): Creating an Offshore Subduction Zone Observatory in Cascadia with the Ocean Observatories Initiative Regional Cabled Array
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Deborah Kelley, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2027
* USD 10,652,162.00

Earth’s greatest geological hazards are concentrated in its subduction zones,
the places where two tectonic plates converge and collide. All known earthquakes
with magnitudes ≥8.8 have taken place at subduction zones, as have the most
devastating tsunamis. The Cascadia subduction zone, spanning the offshore coasts
from northern California to British Columbia, hosts earthquakes up to magnitude
9 every few hundred years, the last of which was in 1700. While there are dense
seismic and geodetic sensor networks today on land in the Pacific Northwest, the
offshore region, where almost all the locked plate boundary and expected
earthquake slip will occur, is largely devoid of such instruments in US waters.
This project will take advantage of the existing NSF-funded Regional Cabled
Observatory that brings power and the internet into the oceans on the margin
offshore Newport, Oregon. Instruments, including seismic sensors and seafloor
pressure gauges, will be added to the cabled infrastructure. Real-time data
streaming from the resulting subduction zone observatory will help answer
fundamental questions about how subduction zone faults work and can be used to
enhance existing systems for earthquake and tsunami warning. A fundamental
“Grand Challenge” in the geosciences today is to improve understanding of how
subduction zone plate interface faults work. This requires sustained offshore
observations in multiple subduction zones with contrasting properties to
characterize how deformation is partitioned among large earthquakes, slow slip,
and aseismic creep. The Cascadia subduction zone is a global endmember, owing to
the young age of the subducting plate and thick sediment cover. The Ocean
Observatories Initiative Regional Cabled Array includes a southern cable located
on the slope and shelf of the Cascadia subduction zone off Newport, Oregon. This
array has great potential for subduction zone studies because it is in an ideal
central location in Cascadia where the gradient in megathrust coupling extends
well offshore and there are ongoing clusters of seismicity and low frequency
earthquakes beneath the shelf. This project will add cabled seafloor science
junction boxes to each of three Primary Nodes on the continental slope and
shelf, none of which are presently instrumented for geophysics. Each junction
box will host a suite of geophysical sensors, comprising a buried broadband
seismometer, a low-frequency hydrophone, strong motion accelerometers,
calibrated pressure gauges and a current meter, with room for future expansion.
In conjunction with nodes that already have geophysical sensors, this will
create a world class offshore geophysical observatory to study fault coupling
and deformation of the Cascadia megathrust and the overlying accretionary prism
across a ~100 km section offshore. The observatory can address the following
questions: (1) How does the locking of the Cascadia megathrust transition
between the deformation front and the coastline off central Oregon? (2) Is there
transient slip behavior – slow slip, tremor, and/or very low frequency
earthquakes – offshore spanning the locked zone and its downdip transition? (3)
How are the clusters of shallow earthquakes offshore linked to the megathrust?
(4) What is the baseline deformation rate and fault slip behavior of the
accretionary prism? Because the submarine cable streams data to shore at the
speed of light, this observatory can provide the nation’s first offshore real-
time earthquake and tsunami early warning detector, adding to and complementing
the USGS’s ShakeAlert earthquake warning system and NOAA’s tsunami buoys. It can
also support research into new warning technologies. Both undergraduate summer
interns and graduate students will be trained on cabled geophysical
observatories, including at-sea experiential learning programs prior to and
during installation of the observatory. A workshop will introduce early career
researchers to the scientific goals and infrastructure, provide hands-on
experience with the tools for accessing and visualizing the data streams, and
explore ideas for future analysis. Because the submarine cable streams data to
shore at the speed of light, this observatory can provide the nation’s first
offshore real-time earthquake and tsunami early warning detector, adding to and
complementing the USGS’s ShakeAlert earthquake warning system and NOAA’s tsunami
buoys. It can also support research into new warning technologies. Both
undergraduate summer interns and graduate students will be trained on cabled
geophysical observatories, including at-sea experiential learning programs prior
to and during installation of the observatory. A workshop will introduce early
career researchers to the scientific goals and infrastructure, provide hands-on
experience with the tools for accessing and visualizing the data streams, and
explore ideas for future analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.