* 2329490
* Postdoctoral Research Opportunities for Greater Retention, Engagement, Scholarship, and Success (PROGRESS) in Broadening STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Bridget Hilbig, Weber State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 12/31/2026
* USD 662,808.00

The teacher-scholar model for higher education is common among faculty at
regional colleges and universities and primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs), yet most faculty have spent their immediate time after graduate school
as postdoctoral researchers advancing scholarship at larger research
institutions. Because of this, the approximately 66,000 current postdoctoral
scholars have minimal opportunities to improve their teaching and to learn to
manage the teaching and research expectations at regional institutions and PUIs,
schools that the vast majority of students attend. The teacher-scholar model may
provide postdoctoral scholars with better training for the diverse type of
positions available for those with a Ph.D., especially in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and STEM education disciplines. This type of
training can also be of significance in increasing the diversity of tenure-track
faculty because persons excluded due to ethnicity and race (PEERs) are those
most likely to pursue non-STEM jobs after obtaining a STEM degree. The project
involves a multifaceted approach to transform STEM postdoctoral training for a
cohort of four postdoctoral Fellows. Through the program, Fellows become
independent scholars who have obtained skills in pedagogy, teaching, writing,
and mentorship, all of which can later translate to positions at regional
institutions, PUIs, larger research institutions, and industry.

Through a teacher-scholar model, PROGRESS Fellows engage in ongoing STEM
education research at a regional PUI and develop their own, independent research
program building their research expertise, skills, and competencies to engage in
impactful STEM and STEM education scholarship. Additionally, PROGRESS includes a
multitiered approach to mentorship to help appropriately develop postdoctoral
Fellows. Using qualitative and quantitative surveys, self-assessments and annual
reviews, and teaching evaluations, the program goals include the generation of
novel data on 1) factors that contribute to a sense of belonging in academia for
postdoctoral scholars that identify as women and PEERs, 2) professional
development activities that contribute to PEERs’ career decision self-efficacy,
and 3) the role of the teacher-scholar model for postdoctoral training.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.