* 2329684
* Conference: 2023 NSF FW-HTF PI Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; 31 August to 1 September 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Taskin Padir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,593.00

This grant provides funds to organize the annual meeting of Principal
Investigators of the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF)
program. The team of investigators will design, manage and execute the 2023 NSF
FW-HTF PI Meeting at Northeastern University’s Boston campus from August 31 to
September 1, 2023. The convening will provide a platform for sharing progress,
exchanging ideas, and facilitating further collaborations. Intellectual merit
stems from convening interdisciplinary researchers, stakeholders, and public,
private, and government representatives to exchange updates on their projects,
innovations, and discoveries linked to the future of work at the human-
technology frontier. The two-day program will provide opportunities to highlight
progress on active projects funded by NSF. Panel sessions on industry
perspectives, research convergence, diversity, equity, and inclusion, and
measuring impact will create a forum for realizing the future of work,
especially during disruptive global and local events, such as pandemics,
disasters, and conflicts.

The 2023 FW-HTF PI meeting will invite the principal investigators, selected
graduate students, and industry and community stakeholders. This event will be
the first in-person PI meeting since the COVID-19 Pandemic. Hence it will
provide an opportunity for this community to have overdue discussions and create
new collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.