* 2329857
* PFI-RP:  Converting waste gas into clean hydrogen for sustainable steel production
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Fanxing Li, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2026
* USD 333,227.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the efficient production of carbon
free hydrogen along with the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S.
iron and steel industry. Iron and steel manufacturing produces large amounts of
fuel-rich gases that are currently wasted. Applying the proposed technology to
iron and steel manufacturing can use this wasted resource with high energy
efficiency, with the potential to eliminate more than 500 million tons/year of
CO2 emissions worldwide. Furthermore, the technology will improve the economic
attractiveness for greener iron and steel production. For instance, it can
produce $26 million/year worth of H2 in a single plant we identified. Moreover,
the proposed technology is applicable to utilize a variety of industrial waste
gases, biogas, and/or landfill gas feedstocks with zero or even negative net CO2
emissions. Successful completion of the proposed project will lead to
significant economic benefits for U.S. iron/steel production while advancing
U.S. industry towards a carbon-free future. In addition to its technological
impacts, the proposed project offers an exceptional opportunity to educate a new
generation of engineers in academic research skills and leadership, innovation,
and entrepreneurship in process intensification and sustainable energy
technologies.

The proposed project will address the inefficient use of “waste” gases that come
from state-of-the-art iron production processes. These gases often contain
significant amounts of fuels such as methane, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen
diluted with carbon dioxide. While conventional technologies exist to convert
these gases into hydrogen fuel and carbon dioxide, they are complex and
inefficient, particularly given the mixed nature of the waste gas. We have
developed a new technology that efficiently converts the waste gas into separate
streams of sequestrable carbon dioxide and hydrogen, in two interconnected
steps. Our preliminary results support the viability and attractiveness of the
proposed technology. The proposed project is designed to specifically address
the remaining technological gaps including further optimization of the redox
catalysts, large-scale catalyst production, data-driven improvement of reactor
operation, demonstration of the process with a real waste gas stream from the
plant, and detailed economic and environmental analyses. This will be achieved
through the deployment of a small pilot unit at an iron/steel production site,
demonstrating the viability of producing hydrogen from the waste gas. The
project will pave the way for commercialization after the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.