* 2329416
* RCN: GOLD-EN: Virtual Ice Community Engagement
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Leigh Stearns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

Despite significant growth over the past decade, the cryosphere community, like
the broader geosciences, has failed to diversify. To address this lack of
diversity in cryosphere sciences, this effort offers an intervention designed to
foster a more inclusive community with shared values, norms, and a sense of
belonging that can serve as both support and refugium for marginalized scholars
and allies within the cryosphere community. Because the impacts of climate
change, including sea-level rise, are acutely felt at the community level with
the most vulnerable either not consulted or excluded from key decisions, the
lack of diversity limits our ability to build a workforce of future educators
and researchers necessary to address local to global challenges of climate
change. This project is aimed directly at workforce development to ensure the
cryosphere community is able to meet current and forthcoming challenges.

The overarching project goal is to provide structural support for an inclusive
cryosphere community that is supportive of marginalized scholars at all career
stages and better positioned to facilitate inter-and-multidisciplinary research
needed to advance the cryosphere sciences. To do this, virtual networks of
cryosphere science scholars will be created, referred to as Virtual Ice
Community Engagement Squads. These Squads will be organized around topics of
interest to the community or by geographic region with the aim of supporting and
fostering collaboration between scholars. The Squads will be key nodes in
supporting a more cohesive cryosphere community through objectives that include
1) establishing community norms and articulating evidence-based DEI best
practices, 2) providing professional development and inclusive leadership
training to scholars across career stages, and 3) developing a resource hub for
the cryosphere community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.