* 2329343
* CREST-PRP: Ecohydrology in the Anthropocene: Hydrometeorological Controls of Physical and Biogeochemical Processes in Chronically Stressed Ecosystems
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Solimar Pinto-Pacheco, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 338,255.00

The CREST Postdoctoral Research Program (CREST-PRP) provides two years of
support for research, training, and mentoring experiences for individual early
career scientists at active CREST Centers. The goal of the CREST-PRP awards is
to increase the STEM workforce presence of individuals who are members of groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. CREST-PRP awards recognize investigators with
significant potential and support their research experiences to broaden their
perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and prepare CREST-PRP
scholars for positions of leadership within the scientific community. The
research project, " CREST-PRP: Ecohydrology in the Anthropocene:
Hydrometeorological Controls of Physical and Biogeochemical Processes in
Chronically Stressed Ecosystems", is in direct alignment with the CREST-PRP
goals. Submitted by a researcher affiliated with the CREST Center for
Innovation, Research, and Education in Environmental Nanotechnology at the
University of Puerto Rico, the project is designed to study impacts on
ecosystems due to the combined effects of human-induced changes in land use and
changing weather and climate patterns. Two sites located in the Puerto Rico
archipelago with a common semi-arid climate but contrasting land use will be the
sites for this study: Mosquito Bay, a world-renowned touristic bioluminescent
bay with mangrove vegetation where agriculture and military operations were
carried out during the last three centuries, and Finca Atabey, a multi-cropping
farm with a previous history of sugar cane production. Combining hydrology,
ecology, plant ecophysiology and meteorological components, the research will
aim to answer complex questions related to changing climate conditions,
assessing ecosystems’ adaptability to present and future stressors. Research
outcomes include a model framework that can be used for studying the effects of
anthropogenic and climate stressors at other sites in the Caribbean Basin and
the Tropics. Findings from this type of work will also assist communities in
developing informed public policies related to environmental conservation
practices, benefitting local economies, and supporting food sovereignty as
communities work to restore and develop environmentally sustainable ecosystems.

The Caribbean region is vulnerable to climate change-related factors and
anthropic disturbances which are testing the environmental sustainability of
ecosystems. Biophysical quantification of the system is crucial for a
conservation approach to adaptive sustainability. This research study is based
on an integrated, transdisciplinary ecohydrological-ecophysiology research
framework within a terrestrial-aquatic-marine connectivity-based matrix. The
project will seek to answer the following overarching questions: 1) How does
spatiotemporal variability and recurrent climate change impact ecophysiology
plant responses and their tolerance to shifting climatic conditions? 2) How does
weather and climate variability affect water source distribution and
availability in the Puerto Rican semi-arid regions? 3) What are the past and
present sources of soil organic matter and how spatiotemporal variability
affects organic matter origin and distribution? 4) What are the spatiotemporal
dynamics of anthropogenic N inputs in ecosystems with history of anthropogenic
use? The research will assess hydrometeorological effects on the biogeochemical
processes and plant tolerance in two contrasting ecosystems located in semi-arid
regions in the Puerto Rico archipelago, where freshwater availability is the
main stressor. The study will use an ecohydrological and hydrometeorological
approach where natural abundance of isotopes (δD, δ18O, δ15N and δ13C) will be
indicators of environmental stressors and plant response. Structural (area,
weight, Specific Leaf Area) and eco-physiological leaf functional traits
(stomatal conductance, osmolarity, osmotic potential, elements) will be measured
to assess plant physiological responses to hydric and salinity stress. Soil and
water will be sampled for biogeochemical analyses (Organic Carbon, SOM light
fraction and heavy fraction, natural abundance of δ15N and δ13C for organic
matter origin and nitrogen sources, pH, salinity, conductivity, volumetric water
content, elemental analyses). A variety of water sources will be sampled to
determine the natural abundance of δD and δ18O. Plants will be sampled for
natural abundance of δD and δ18O determinations. Water use efficiency (based on
δ13C and δ18O) will be determined bi-monthly. An R-based Bayesian mixing model
will be used to determine the relative proportions of the water sources in the
plants. Differences in plant water source, water availability, and physical and
physiological plant characteristics between dry and wet weather are to be
expected to reflect seasonal weather variability as well as climate change
related to pulsing events in the Caribbean region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.