* 2329761
* PFI-TT:  Immuno-Dx: A Biomedical Platform Technology for Personalized Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Umer Hassan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 09/30/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is on developing a biomedical device
capable of detecting and monitoring patient's ability to combat infections. The
proposed technology addresses the unmet need in emergency department settings of
the hospitals where it can be used to monitor patients’ response to therapeutic
treatments and identify high-risk patients. A minimal viable prototype (MVP)
will be developed from proof-of-concept biosensing technology (called Immuno-
Dx), which is centered around monitoring natural ability of blood cells to kill
pathogens. Immuno-Dx can have applications in areas (i) to better understand
immune system responses of patients to pathogenic infections, (ii) to develop
new immunotherapy drugs by pharmaceutical companies, and (iii) to strategize
patient treatments by physicians. Biosensing device will be able to provide
information regarding patients’ ability to combat infection within 30 min from a
drop of whole blood. This PFI-TT project will enable workforce development in
spirit with the NSF mission of training next generation of scientists and
engineers in technical and entrepreneurial skills, while creating a direct
impact on national healthcare and aiding the US economy.

The proposed project’ primary objective is to develop an MVP with integrated
electronics, data processing, user interface, and onchip sample processing to
perform the phagocytosis assay within 30 min from a drop of whole blood. Value
proposition of proposed technology lies in its ability to provide vital
information about patients’ immune response to infections and therapeutics, to
fulfil unmet need for personalized monitoring of patients in emergency
department settings of the hospitals. The key innovative features include
automated sensing of patient’s ability to combat infections from a drop of whole
blood within 30 min, integration of machine learning (ML) models for improved
accuracy, automation of manual sample processing steps, and developing a user-
inspired 3D printed reader with integrated electronics, data processing and
touch controlled user interface. Current key attributes and value proposition of
Immuno-Dx can also be leveraged in other areas e.g., infectious diseases,
autoimmune disorders, and cancer and can be used by researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, clinicians, healthcare providers, and biotech companies. The
potential outcome of PFI-TT proposal will be the transition of Immuno-Dx
technology from investigator research laboratory to a commercial startup
company.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.