* 2329067
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: A Quantum Science Education and Research Program for HBCUs: Exotic Physics and Applications of Solid-State Qubits
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Arun Bansil, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,250,583.00

Non-Technical description: Quantum information science and engineering (QISE) is
widely recognized as a key driver for realizing game-changing scientific
breakthroughs and transformative new quantum computing, sensing, and
communication technologies for ensuring national security and maintaining the
economic competitiveness of the U.S. It is necessary to build partnerships
between academia, national laboratories, and industry in order to effectively
advance the QISE forefront by engaging a diverse workforce. Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), however, lack the needed faculty strength and
laboratory infrastructure for QISE training of students. This five-year project
aims to fill this critical gap by establishing an expansive QISE research and
training program at Howard University (HU) in close partnership with
Northeastern University, where quantum research and education programs are well-
established. Collaborating national laboratories and industries are: National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (NREL), IBM, Quantum Design, and Qnami. The scientific focus of the
project is on modeling, discovery, understanding, and applications of quantum
bits or qubits, which are the key components of the QISE ecosystem, much as the
classical bits underlie the modern electronics revolution. This effort will also
provide a roadmap for other HBCUs and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs)
throughout the U.S. to propel themselves toward leadership roles in QISE.

Technical description: This project is pursuing a vibrant QISE research and
training program at HU in close partnership with Northeastern University and
collaborations involving national laboratories (NIST and NREL), and industry
(IBM, Quantum Design, and Qnami). The research and training activities are
centered around three highly interlinked thrusts. (1) Investigation of hybrid
structures of qubits interacting with electromagnetic fields, spins, ions,
quantum dots, and other systems to gain a deeper understanding and advancement
of quantum sensing and transduction technologies. (2) Rational design and in-
depth evaluation of defect qubits in two-dimensional host materials, including
effects of spin-orbit couplings, phonons, nuclear spins, and temperature. And
(3), low-temperature nanoscale mapping and exploration of quantum systems using
a commercial cryogenic scanning diamond-Nitrogen-vacancy magnetometer (SNVM) -
the first of its kind at an MSI in the US—with unprecedented resolution and
sensitivity for unraveling the fundamentals of exotic charge and spin phenomena
and achieving improved qubit designs. Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students and faculty at HU are participating vigorously in experimental and
theoretical research and training activities, cutting across all three thrusts
in the project. QISE workforce development efforts include: workshops involving
HU students and faculty to ignite awareness about various QISE training programs
at the national labs and R1 universities; opportunities to collaborate with
national and industry partners, including access to IBM Cloud for quantum
computing and Northeastern University’s integrated EQUAL platform for hands-on
training in growing, fabricating, and characterizing qubit materials and
devices; and, development of new QISE courses to support a professional QISE
master’s degree program at HU. Outreach activities include the creation of a web
portal to highlight recent QISE discoveries and video recordings of monthly
project seminars and e-summer schools to educate and engage the public in QISE
topics.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA) and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.