* 2329587
* The Pacific Northwest Open Extended Reality Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ron Austin, Bellevue College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 749,543.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a regional training
and resource network for educators in the Pacific Northwest to explore and
implement virtual, augmented, and mixed reality (collectively referred to as
Extended Reality or XR) modules. The goal of this project is to increase access,
familiarity, and adoption of XR for teaching and learning to promote educational
equity across diverse student populations. This project represents a first step
towards expanding access to XR in two-year colleges. To achieve this goal,
Bellevue College will: 1) Create an XR Educational Exchange network of Community
and Technical Colleges; 2) Develop foundational XR educational resources for
educators; 3) Implement a project-based collaboration process to design custom
XR resources and train future XR professionals; and 4) Launch an open access XR
educational archive for dissemination throughout the network.

Creating a vibrant, high-quality, digital learning environment that supports
experiential learning through XR educational resources, and building faculty
capacity to provide immersive XR facilitated learning strategies across the
curriculum in two-year colleges has the potential to expand access, improve
learning outcomes, and promote educational equity. This project will create a
highly compelling learning experience for students in technology specializations
through the XR development course. A minimum of ten XR classroom resources will
be developed and implemented in two-year college classrooms. This project will
also provide faculty with professional development opportunities, workshops, and
events that explore XR technology as a teaching tool and that build proficiency
with using this technology. Faculty outreach will incorporate guidance in XR
adoption, integrative experiential learning, and curricular innovation that
extends beyond the lifetime of the project. The NSF program description on
Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year
Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM education
initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes innovative
and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year
colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.