* 2329786
* PFI-TT: High-Power Electronic Chip Devices Using Novel Materials and Innovative Strategies
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Adel Nasiri, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 277,406.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is related to the development of an
electronic chip device based on a relatively new material system. These devices
can offer much higher efficiencies, operating voltages, switching frequencies,
and operation at higher temperatures. These devices are essential for the
flexible and efficient electrification of industry. The target applications for
the developed devices include the transportation industry such as motor
vehicles, trains, ships, planes, electrical power grids, heavy industry, and
power conversion in harsh environments. The project will impact every industry
segment related to power conversion, storage, and transmission – which are
linked to every activity of human life. The new material employed for this
project has many advantages over the existing materials but there are technical
challenges in fabricating these devices. The project will use innovative
strategies to exploit the advantages and diminish the disadvantages that will
result in devices with size reduction, faster operation, and reduced power
consumption. The efforts in this project will be geared towards the
commercialization of the final product that will result in energy efficiency.
The other aspect of this project is the training of future leaders to ensure the
technical dominance of the USA in the world.

The proposed project will help commercialize high-power electronic devices based
on a newly developed growth method for producing semiconductor materials for
high-power devices. Although the material system investigated in this proposal
is ideal for high power/temperature applications but has very poor thermal
conductivity and is harder to produce cohesively for the dimensions required to
produce the devices. Thus, if these problems are not taken care of, they will
result in catastrophic heating of the devices and poor device performance. To
solve these problems, it is proposed to produce these materials and associated
devices on a thermally conducting base. Thus, the heat generated during the
device operation will be removed through the thermally conducting base that scan
open applications in many industry segments as indicated above. The second
problem is solved by a patent-pending approach that allows the production of
high-power devices in a cohesive manner, which will result in low power loss and
high efficiency. The use of new material production processes and growth on
conducting base will result in devices that will have strong commercialization
potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.