* 2329629
* NSF/BIO-DFG: Cytochrome c oxidase adaptation to hypoxia in systemic vascular cells - From structure to function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Maik Huttemann, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,225,175.00

All cells in oxygen-breathing creatures must react to changes in oxygen levels.
This project will examine how stress caused by low oxygen levels causes a key
enzyme, COX, to change its protein composition to be able to function more
efficiently under that stress. This will be done by determining how the subunits
change after short or continuously low levels of oxygen, and the consequences of
these changes on the function of energy usage and function of parts of the cell
such as mitochondria. Finally, these results will be compared to those caused by
other kinds of stress such as heat or changes of temperature. This project will
also offer excellent opportunities to engage future scientists at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate student levels. The PIs will especially
encourage undergraduate researchers from underfunded communities in the Detroit
area who have not participated in research before. Knowledge of how oxygen
levels are sensed holds potential for future medical research to provide
treatments for diseases and conditions in which cells are compromised due to low
oxygen levels caused by stress, pollution, or disease, thereby promoting the
well-being of individuals in society. Changes in oxygen levels pose major
threats to aerobic organisms, and they accordingly devote considerable resources
to counteracting and minimizing the consequent damage. One such recently
uncovered mechanism is the reconfiguration of cytochrome c oxidase (COX or
complex IV), the final and regulatory electron donor to oxygen of the
mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC). Low oxygen levels induce changing
expression of some of the 14 COX subunits, although much remains unknown about
this process. This project will investigate the cause and consequences of
hypoxia-induced COX remodeling with a focus on previously identified key oxygen-
dependent COX subunits in primary cells, and will establish a link of these
subunits to redox sensing and signaling. The project will involve: (1)
characterization of the dynamic regulation of COX subunit isoform composition in
systemic pericytes in response to chronic hypoxia, and comparison to that of
systemic vascular cells; (2) characterization of structural consequences of COX
remodeling upon chronic hypoxia; (3) characterization of functional consequences
of COX remodeling on mitochondrial and cellular health; and (4) comparison of
key findings of COX remodeling to responses to other stress stimuli. The project
will thus uncover and identify fundamental regulatory mechanisms of
mitochondrial oxygen and redox signaling mediated by COX subunit expression.

This collaborative US/Germany project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungemeinschaft).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.