* 2329826
* PFI-RP: BioSPACE: Biosensing Surveillance of Pathogens in Aquaculture and Coastal Environments
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Hongwei Sun, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to enhance public safety and the
economic resilience of our aquaculture industry in the face of ongoing exposures
to disease-causing pathogens. Waterborne pathogens cost billions in annual
healthcare costs and aquaculture losses in the United States and globally. This
project will accelerate the development and application of an easy-to-use and
low-cost technological platform offering excellent portability, sensitivity, and
speed to detect pathogens from water sources. The anticipated societal and
commercial benefits include early warning signals to local and state agencies
about the presence of pathogens in coastal waters, preventing human contact and
disease spread, an accessible technology that can minimize the economic impacts
of pathogens on aquaculture, low-cost and continuous pathogen surveillance for
public safety and ecosystem health, and interdisciplinary learning opportunities
for students from underrepresented communities in STEM to enrich their
entrepreneurship experience and leadership in a business development setting.

The proposed project advances the application of a novel biosensing-based data
analytics platform for aquaculture and water-based environmental monitoring.
Regular monitoring for pathogens is critical in safeguarding public and
ecosystem health, and in supporting aquaculture sustainability and market
growth. However, there is a strong need for low-cost yet sensitive surveillance
systems for farmers and environmental agencies for source-tracking and rapid
detection of disease-causing pathogens before outbreaks occur. The project will
adapt the patented biosensing technology for real-time detection and
quantification of aquatic pathogens and forecasting of outbreak risks. The
objectives of the research are to evaluate the sensitivity, specificity, and
stability of the biosensor when deployed in various environmental settings. This
will involve field tests to optimize the performance of the biosensor, and the
integration of machine learning methods for interpreting sensor data to maintain
accuracy in challenging aquatic environments. These developments will
substantially improve our ability to monitor waterborne pathogens in coastal
environments and in the aquaculture industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.