* 2329133
* FuSe: Precise Sequence Specific Block Copolymers for Directed Self-Assembly - Co-Design of Lithographic Materials for Pattern Quality, Scaling, and Manufacturing
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Paul Nealey, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 10/31/2026
* USD 641,663.00

With the support of the Future of Semiconductors (FuSe) Program, Professors Paul
Nealey and Juan de Pablo at the University of Chicago, Professor Christopher
Ober at Cornell University, and Professor Whitney Loo at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison will design, synthesize and investigate new materials and
processes for high-volume high-resolution patterning in the context of
semiconductor manufacturing. Lithography or patterning is the enabling
technology for semiconductor manufacturing. Recently the light used for the
highest resolution lithography has changed from a wavelength of 193 nano meter
to a more energetic extreme ultra-violet (EUV) light with a wavelength of 13.5
nano meter. This disruptive advance enabled patterning at smaller dimensions to
manufacture ever more powerful and faster semiconductor devices. This project
will capitalize on the concept of co-design of materials and processes to
enhance the EUV lithographic process through a strategy known as EUV plus
directed self-assembly (DSA). Tools that were developed in the biological and
medical sciences will be used here to synthesize polypeptoid containing BCPs for
high precision and uniformity of augmented material properties for EUV plus DSA
applications. Coupled to the advancement of patterning science and US
semiconductor manufacturing competitiveness, an internship program will provide
hands-on training in cleanroom operations to 2-year community college students
in university cleanrooms in order to propel them into careers as high-level
semiconductor manufacturing technicians .

The project is focused on the design and synthesis of new block copolymer (BCP)
materials and their use for high-volume high-resolution EUV-based patterning for
semiconductor manufacturing. The research team will capitalize on the concept of
co-design of materials and processes to enhance the EUV lithographic process
through a strategy known as EUV plus directed self-assembly (DSA). An issue in
designing BCPs for EUV plus DSA is the need for a comprehensive materials
platform to: 1) understand the fundamental new physics governing high chi low N
systems, 2) engineer multiple optimized covarying attributes into different BCP
chemistries at each target resolution, and 3) ensure a robust materials supply
chain for commercialization. A-block-(B-random-C) architectures will be employed
to decouple thermodynamic properties (chi, chiN) from surface and interfacial
properties and to allow for optimized or engineered covarying properties such as
BCP lamellar period (resolution), block surface energies (perpendicular
orientation of through film domains), sharp interfaces between domains (low line
edge roughness), and pattern transfer capabilities. The research is focused on
the development of BCPs based on polypeptoids. Importantly, polypeptoid-based
block copolymers provide opportunities to engineer sequence specificity in the
B-r-C block to co-design key EUV plus DSA properties, surface energy, width of
interfaces between blocks, and pattern transfer. High chi and low N systems do
not obey traditional BCP theory and scaling laws, and new physics of the
polypeptoid systems will be discovered and exploited to optimize materials for
the lithographic applications. The polypeptoid platform is ideally suited for
machine learning approaches to optimize properties and to understand the new
physics of these systems. Sequence and composition specific BCPs with zero
dispersity made in quantity using solid-phase synthesis will enable
unprecedented integration of experiment, theory, and computation, including
machine learning to understand and exploit emergent behavior for patterning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.