* 2329108
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Heterogeneous Integration of III-Nitride and Boron Arsenide for Enhanced Thermal and Electronic Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Siddharth Rajan, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2026
* USD 131,125.00

Non-technical Description: Semiconductor devices are critical components in
contemporary information, transportation, and energy technologies. One of the
grand challenges faced by the semiconductor industry is the conversion of a
large amount of electrical energy consumption by semiconductor devices into
heating, which causes local hot spots and degrades the device performance and
reliability. Enabled by recent advances in the growth of bulk semiconducting
boron arsenide (BAs) crystals that conduct heat much more efficiently than
current-generation semiconductor materials, this research project pursues
heterogeneous integration of BAs substrates with other semiconductor components
to address the challenge in heat management and energy efficiency. A specific
goal of this project is to realize functional integration of two types of
semiconductors, BAs and gallium nitride (GaN), into a platform that utilizes
their complementary properties to enhance performance and energy efficiency of
semiconductor devices. Besides impacting semiconductor technologies, the
research is integrated with a set of education and workforce development
activities, including creating course materials and new courses on semiconductor
materials and devices, annual Semiconductor Day with Industry, and Woman in
Semiconductors Club, to provide training to students from diverse background and
prepare them for the future-generation workforce of the semiconductor industry.

Technical Description: This project pursues heterogeneous integration of BAs
substrates and III-nitride semiconductors, creating a platform to combine the
high thermal conductivity and hole transport of BAs with the excellent electron
transport and breakdown properties of the III-nitride semiconductor system. This
research project employs electro-thermal codesign to realize functional
integration of BAs with GaN devices for complementary radio-frequency (RF)
circuits, especially power amplifier where thermal management of local hot spots
is a limiting factor for performance and reliability. Several different types of
BAs/GaN device designs are designed and fabricated based on fundamental
investigations of melt growth and Bridgman growth of semi-insulating BAs
substrates, transfer bonding of GaN-based layers on BAs substrates, and
epitaxial growth of InGaN thin films on BAs. Theoretical models of coupled heat
and charge transport are employed for electro-thermal codesign of the hybrid
device structures. The fabricated devices are evaluated with both established RF
circuit performance tests and high-spatial resolution thermal imaging. Besides
complementary logic integrated with RF III-nitride devices on the same BAs
substrate to enable switching and modulation schemes needed in high-performance
power and communication systems, the research aims to lay the foundation for
integrating BAs into different types of semiconductor device systems to enhance
thermal management and energy efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.