* 2329655
* Restoring ecological function to industrial barrens via manipulation of soil chemical environments
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Nina Goodey, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 10/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Anthropogenic industrial activities release toxic pollutants into the
environment that contaminate air, water, and soil systems. Soil contamination
adversely impacts soil microbiomes and lower microbial function, including
enzyme production, rendering some soils barren and inactive. Barren soils do not
grow plants and fail to provide ecosystem services to their environment.
Previous research by the Principal Investigator’s research group has shown that
the addition of artificial root exudates (AREs) to soils can significantly
increase microbial metabolism and respiration rates in uncontaminated, vegetated
soils. However, very limited data and fundamental knowledge are available about
the impact of ARE addition on microbial activity in contaminated and barren
soils. The overarching goal of this project is to investigate changes in soil
microbial respiration, enzyme activity, plant productivity, and microbial
contaminant degradation potential that result from the addition of AREs to
contaminated and barren soils. To advance this goal, the project research team
will investigate the addition and impact of ARE solutions consisting of mixtures
of compounds that are found in natural root exudates. The successful completion
of this project will benefit society through the generation of new data and
fundamental knowledge that could be used to guide the design and implementation
of more sustainable and cost-effective solutions from the remediation and
restoration of contaminated and barren soils. Additional benefits to society
will be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring
of one post-doctoral fellow, one graduate student, and two undergraduate
students at Montclair State University, an R2-rated Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI).

Soils provide vital ecological services that include nutrient cycling and carbon
storage. Soil contaminants interfere with these ecological services, decreasing
microbial function and rendering some soils barren. Previous research has shown
that artificial root exudates (AREs) can increase microbial metabolism and
respiration rates in uncontaminated, vegetated soils, but their effects on
contaminated, barren soils are not known. The goal of this project is to
investigate changes in soil microbial respiration, enzyme activity, and plant
productivity that result from the addition AREs to contaminated (post-
industrial) and barren soils. The proposed AREs will consist of mixtures of
compounds that are found in natural root exudates. The specific objectives of
the research are to 1) quantify the optimal doses and effects of artificial ARE
addition on microbial respiration and function in model contaminated and barren
soils from 3 post-industrial sites in New Jersey; 2) compare the effectiveness
of easy-to-implement single - versus labor-intensive repeated artificial root
exudates addition schedules in revitalizing contaminated soils; and 3) evaluate
the potential of ARE additions to stimulate microbial degradation of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in contaminated soils. The successful completion of
this project has the potential for transformative impact though the generation
of new data and fundamental knowledge on the restoration and maintenance of
microbial activity following the addition of AREs to contaminated and baren
soils including microbial awakening from dormancy, changes in extracellular
enzyme activity, and/or soil organic matter availability. To implement the
education and training goals of the project, the Principal Investigator (PI)
proposes to leverage existing programs at Montclair State University such as the
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) to recruit and mentor
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the project. In
addition, the research team plans to communicate and share the project research
findings with local and state administrators and stakeholders that are
interested in the implementation of novel strategies/solutions to revitalize
contaminated (post-industrial) and barren soils in New Jersey.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.