* 2329523
* Field-based Undergraduate Training: Utilizing Research for Equity (FUTURE) in Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Robin Dunkin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,248,757.00

Undergraduate field courses can be used as pedagogical tools in the curriculum
to increase persistence in biology majors, especially for marginalized students.
However, it is unclear how field courses should be designed and when they should
be offered in the undergraduate curriculum to provide the most benefits to
students. This project will recruit a cohort of 3 postdoctoral fellows who will
lead qualitative and quantitative research on the benefits of field course
design elements in three existing departmental initiatives at University of
California- Santa Cruz (UCSC), a Hispanic-Serving Research Institution. Fellows’
discoveries will connect pieces of the puzzle to improve retention, equity, and
student success in STEM, especially among marginalized students, through
refinement and implementation of courses and internships during strategic
curricular time points. Fellows will benefit intellectually, professionally, and
socially in preparation for education research careers, and will provide role
models for hundreds of graduate students who seek similar opportunities. By
providing cohort- and community-based support for the fellows and building
capacity for biology education research, this work will be of significance in
empowering STEM talent and knowledge creation in higher education research.

A major priority in higher education is to improve retention of students from
marginalized groups and support them through admission to graduate school and
employment in the expanding STEM workforce. Although field courses show promise
for recruitment and persistence of marginalized undergraduate students, many
questions remain about which design components are important to generate desired
outcomes, and when in the undergraduate curriculum these opportunities should be
offered. This project will build on existing strengths in equitable field-based
teaching and diverse leadership to support 3 fellows to undertake research to
improve field-based undergraduate training in the life sciences. This
comprehensive support program for the Postdoc Fellows has the four goals: 1)
Targeted recruitment, selection, and retention strategies including a
professional development plan and identification of impactful, feasible
projects; 2) Cultivating a community of practice in field teaching, education
research, and diversity, equity, and inclusion to support success and
networking; 3) Fostering connections outside the department and institution; and
4) Assessing and disseminating the program outcomes to turn knowledge into
scalable solutions. By collaboratively designing and delivering a new field
teaching program based on equity, safety, and cultural responsibility, the
postdoc Fellows will transform the experiences of hundreds of undergraduate
students and dozens of field course instructors.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The
HSI Program supports projects that improve undergraduate STEM education and
increase the rates of recruitment, retention and graduation of undergraduate
STEM students at Hispanic-serving institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.