* 2329096
* FuSe: Co-designing Continual-Learning Edge Architectures with Hetero-Integrated Silicon-CMOS and Electrochemical Random-Access Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 668,168.00

The transformative changes brought by machine learning and artificial
intelligence are accompanied by immense financial and environmental costs. This
has inspired more specialized computer hardware and computing paradigms, such as
in-memory-computing where the data processing and data storage are carried out
by the same device, to perform such data-intensive calculations more
efficiently, especially for mobile devices and robots where the space and energy
supply are typically limited. However, despite recent advances in the field, it
is still a daunting challenge to realize autonomous mobile devices capable of
continuously learning their environment and adjusting their behaviors
accordingly without connection to centralized servers. This project will address
this limitation by co-designing the core memory and information-processing
devices, the computer architecture, and the learning algorithms by an
interdisciplinary combination of research by material scientists, device
engineers, circuit designers, and computer scientists. Successful completion of
the project will be a significant step toward a transformative computing system
enabling robots and other mobile devices to perform learning by themselves with
unprecedented energy and chip-area efficiencies. This project will also
integrate research with education to grow the semiconductor research and
development talent pool, through close collaborations among the research
university, minority-serving institution, and two-year community college.

In this project, a holistic co-design approach will be adopted to realize a
hybrid platform, composed of silicon circuits heterogeneously integrated with
advanced analog electrochemical random-access memory (ECRAM) hardware. It
functions as a robust, compact, energy-efficient, and cost-effective in-memory-
computing architecture that renders the edge-learning capability to robots
navigating in complicated and evolving environments. To accomplish this target,
the team will develop high-speed ECRAM devices and arrays incorporating novel
nano-structured solid-state protonic electrolytes. Physics-based and
experimentally verified device models will be established to correlate the
material properties with ECRAM performances as part of the process design kit.
ECRAMs will then be integrated with silicon peripheral circuits to form crossbar
micro-architectures, which can mitigate impacts from ECRAM device non-idealities
through the adoption of numerical format and precision scaling techniques.
Meanwhile, custom simultaneous localization and mapping algorithms will be co-
designed with the unique hardware attributes in consideration. Finally, the team
will build a hybrid system composed of the ECRAM edge-learning accelerator and
auxiliary silicon chips integrated on a circuit board for robot self-navigation.
The goal is to achieve >20x higher energy and area efficiency compared to
solutions based on conventional silicon technologies and von Neumann
architecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.