* 2329312
* CREST-PRP: Effects of Metals on Reproduction in a Molluscan Model System
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jonathan Crooke Rosado, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 338,834.00

The CREST Postdoctoral Research Program (CREST-PRP) provides two years of
support for research, training, and mentoring experiences for individual early
career scientists at active CREST Centers. The goal of the CREST-PRP awards is
to increase the STEM workforce presence of individuals who are members of groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. CREST-PRP awards recognize investigators with
significant potential and support their research experiences to broaden their
perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and prepare CREST-PRP
scholars for positions of leadership within the scientific community. The
research project “CREST-PRP: Effects of Metals on Reproduction in a Molluscan
Model System” is in direct alignment with the CREST-PRP goals. Submitted by a
researcher affiliated with the CREST Puerto Rico Center for Environmental
Neuroscience, the project will investigate the effects of heavy metal
contaminant runoff from agricultural and industrial applications on the
neurophysiology of snails. This interdisciplinary research study will focus on
and advance understanding of the effects of contaminants on individual snail
neurons that activate reproductive behaviors. In addition, through active
mentoring from scientific experts and participation in other professional
development opportunities afforded by this experience, the postdoctoral
researcher will further his preparation for a successful STEM research career.
He will also engage in several outreach activities, allowing him to serve as a
role model for students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields,
motivating and inspiring broader participation in the next generation of
environmental neuroscientists.

The long-term goal of this project is to introduce and explore the Biomphalaria
nervous system as a model for understanding ecotoxicological impacts at the
level of single identified neurons. Effects of exposure to cadmium and manganese
on production of viable eggs will provide a measure of their impact on
fecundity. Effects of contaminant exposure on expression of neuropeptides that
control the male and female behaviors of this hermaphroditic snail will be
measured at the protein and mRNA levels, using immunohistochemistry and a novel
in situ hybridization method. The contributions of individual peptidergic
systems to reproductive physiology and behavior will be examined using
CRISPR/Cas9 knockout and knock-down approaches. A neural transcriptome will be
used to examine whether exposure to cadmium and manganese alters expression of
peptides that control both male and female reproductive behaviors. In-situ
hybridizations will be performed using the HCR (Hybridization Chain Reaction)
protocol to measure mRNA expression of these peptides at the level of
transcription before and after exposure to contaminants. Finally, CRISPR/Cas9
mediated genome modifications will be conducted on specific neural genes that
regulate the reproductive behavior. Increased understanding of the effects of
contaminants on B. glabrata neuropeptides and reproductive behavior resulting
from this work could lead to improved strategies for environmental protection,
human health, disease control, and conservation efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.