* 2329818
* PFI-TT: New metal scavengers for metal recycling and sustainable chemical manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Steven Diver, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes sustainable chemical synthesis
and more cost-effective chemical manufacturing. Recovery of metals will have a
direct impact in the pharmaceutical sector by assisting compliance with
regulatory requirements related to trace metals in pharmaceutical ingredients.
This new approach will help lower the cost of the drug development process.
Furthermore, entrepreneurship training for the next generation of leaders in
commercialization of technologies is proposed, through the grant activity and a
formal training program. This broader impact will enhance human resources for
future technology transfer by helping chemistry graduate students envision an
entrepreneurial career. Lastly, metals play a vital role in the US economy and
in defense. The declaration of certain essential metals needed by the federal
government is expected to increase the demand for sustainable practices in the
recovery, recycling, and reuse of these metals. Since isocyanides are strong
binding ligands, they have the potential to affect other markets such as
commodity chemicals and metal recycling, where current scavengers have limited
impact due to their ineffectiveness and high cost. This project has the
potential to impact a larger market segment of the economy, and result in a more
efficient and sustainable chemical manufacturing.

The proposed project develops isocyanide-based scavengers for sustainable
chemical synthesis. Scavengers allow precious metals to be recovered and
recycled. Metals are widely used in the chemical industry as catalysts for cost
effective chemical production. In this proposal, five new solid supported
isocyanide scavengers will be produced in large scale and sold in the market,
with emphasis on the pharmaceutical industry. A streamlined two step synthesis
was validated and allowed the estimation of a significantly reduced cost on
production scale. This cost decrease is projected to allow the new scavengers to
be cost-competitive with existing technology, stimulating market uptake. In
addition to the polystyrene-based and silica gel-based isocyanides, a cartridge
will be developed to aid in the rapid screening of scavengers, facilitating
comparisons by a validated practice. Preliminary data show that the currently
developed gel-supported isocyanide proposed in this project was superior to
existing technologies, suggesting that this technology will be highly
competitive in the marketplace.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.