* 2329242
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Micron Scale Solid State Quantum Sensors Optimized through Machine Learning
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Birol Ozturk, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum sensing is a disruptive technology that has
already found applications in various research fields. Quantum sensing with
defects is one of the leading approaches owing its success mostly to the room
temperature operation capability of nitrogen vacancy (NV) color center defects
in diamond. The project aims to expand the current research capabilities on
quantum sensing with defects at Morgan State University (MSU). The outcomes of
this project will accelerate the development of products that benefit the
broader community directly. This project will also contribute to the diversity
of Quantum Information Science and Engineering (QISE) workforce by training
minority students in quantum sensing experimental projects. More minority
students will be trained on QISE concepts and applications through new quantum
science courses at MSU. Two weeks long summer workshops will be organized to
train at least eight minority serving K12 teachers each year on how to teach
quantum science to their students. A QISE certificate program will be
established. Over a thousand K-12 students and parents will be exposed to
quantum science concepts at the annual MSU STEM Expo via lectures and hands-on
demonstrations.

Technical Abstract: Quantum sensing of extremely small changes in temperature,
host material strain, magnetic and electric fields was successfully demonstrated
with NV defects in diamond, where optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR)
method is a key component. However, current sensitivities of solid-state defect-
based quantum sensors are orders of magnitude less than the predicted
theoretical limits. A range of continuous wave (CW) and pulsed ODMR protocols
were developed for improving detection limits of quantum sensing experiments
with defects. Machine learning (ML) algorithms have the potential to enhance the
sensitivities of these quantum sensors. In addition, there are numerous aspects
of NV physics, including charge dynamics in ensembles, that are still not well
understood and thus require further research and exploration. Furthermore,
current experimental solid-state defect-based quantum sensor setups are bulky
and small footprint versions are yet to be demonstrated. There is also an
increasing interest in other defects in wide bandgap semiconductors for their
use in quantum sensing applications as alternatives to NV defects in diamond.
The project team will collaborate with an expert in solid-state defect-based
quantum sensors at the University of Chicago/Argonne National Laboratory to
improve the existing setups by implementing pulsed, AC, and resonant coupling
ODMR protocols and other hardware additions. New ML algorithms will pave the way
to demonstrate enhanced sensitivities approaching predicted theoretical limits.
Diamond growth and treatment methods will be established to obtain high-quality
diamond samples with high NV concentrations. Micron-scale solid-state defect-
based integrated circuit quantum sensors will be demonstrated for the first
time. Extending the improved capabilities for characterization and device
fabrication to other defects in wide bandgap semiconductors will advance the
understanding of their properties and will facilitate their application in a
wide range of quantum sensing applications.

This project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.