* 2329293
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Ecological Adaptation in a  Long Term Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Peter Sinelli, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 37,693.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the animal management practices of a
past island society of the past. Specifically, the project explores the cultural
mechanisms of transportation and management of the hutia rodent (genus
Geocapromys) in a late prehistoric period. Archaeology exists to discover the
ancient lifeways and cultural practices of past societies, and to document
incompletely understood historic and prehistoric patterns. In this context, this
research explores the cultural aspects of animal resource management within
13th-16th century subsistence strategies and illuminates the potentially
complexity of indigenous animal husbandry practices throughout the region. The
unique array of analytical methodologies combined in this project, once
integrated with culturally appropriate historical and modern sources, serves to
explain the evolution and complexity of animal management in pre-European
society. This interdisciplinary dataset produces new insights into past human
behavior for the scientific community and general public, and concomitantly
develops a more holistic account of their cultural heritage to contemporary
descendants. It also generates multi-disciplinary STEM training opportunities
for undergraduate students, particularly those from historically
underrepresented groups, including those to which the doctoral student awardee
herself belongs.

This project investigates hutia management practices before European arrival.
Hutia skeletal remains are found at many regional archaeological sites,
including those of species which are not endemic to the island upon which they
were recovered. This indicates a practice of transportation of hutia beyond
their native location and suggests that a culture of animal management was well
established. Recently, the researchers have recovered nearly two thousand hutia
bones from the study site. This number far exceeds the total recovered from all
other sites combined and presents an unprecedented opportunity to document the
uniquely local aspects of hutia management. Faunal samples are submitted to a
multivariate analysis. ZooMS DNA species identification serves to reconstruct
hutia origins and transportation patterns, isotope ratio analysis to document
their biological and dietary life history, and AMS radiocarbon dating to develop
a timeline for the evolution of animal management activity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.