* 2329377
* Conference: 2024 CS for All PI and Community Meeting at the Computer Science Teachers Association Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Jake Baskin, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2024
* USD 362,056.00

SageFox Consulting, in collaboration with the Computer Science Teachers
Association (CSTA), will support the 2024 Computer Science for All (CSforAll)
Principal Investigator (PI) and Community Meeting. The CSforAll program supports
partnerships and research that helps equip high school teachers to teach
computer science, K-8 teachers to incorporate computer science and computational
thinking in their classes, and school districts to create computing pathways
across all grades. This convening will provide opportunities for the principal
investigators of projects funded by the CSforAll program to share their research
outcomes, promising practices, and lessons learned. The PI meeting is
intentionally co-located with the 2024 CSTA Conference, to leverage the premier
venue for sharing PreK-12 computer science practitioner research and practice.

The 2023 CSforAll PI and Community Meeting will support cross-project learning
among active CSforAll grant awardees. The goals are to (1) inform CS for All
projects through exposure to the most current research and practice perspectives
of the CS teacher community; (2) provide a venue for disseminating CS for All
research outcomes, promising practices and lessons learned with an audience
ready to improve the CS educational experience; (3) create opportunities for
collaboration and networking among researchers and practitioners committed to
broadening participation in computing; and (4) bring evaluators together to
support the program evaluation of the CS for All program. For this event, there
is a pressing need to meticulously plan and organize agenda, venue and
conference logistics. This grant provides funding for the venue and logistics,
including conference registration, audio visual, and meeting space for the
CSforAll PI and Community meeting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.