* 2329192
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Monolithic 3D Integration (M3D) of 2D Materials-Based CFET Logic Elements towards Advanced Microelectronics
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 09/30/2026
* USD 446,250.00

Non-Technical: Electronic integration has proven foundational to modern
information society. Specifically, the up-scaling in semiconductor industry is
one of the most critical steps towards reduced production cost, enhanced
performance, and integration density. In this project, a potential
transformative technique for developing next-generation semiconductor computing
processor is proposed. By prototyping novel integrated electronic devices based
on two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors with atomic thickness, ultrathin
microelectronic logic element is studied, leading to not only fundamental
physics advancements in low-dimensional materials community, but also major
advances in semiconductor technologies synergizing vital research areas of
materials, electronic devices, and novel circuity architecture. College students
will be trained and involved for workforce upgrade and knowledge dissemination.
Workshops, symposiums, and tutorials are planned, as well as technical exchange
at international conferences to enhance the impact and findings of this project.
Collaborations and technical discussions are also planned with semiconductor
companies to foster technological translation workforce alignment.

Technical: An interdisciplinary study on the three-dimensional (3D) integration
of complementary-field effect transistors (C-FET) made by 2D material is
proposed for the ultimate solution for the next-generation computing processors.
Despite the recent advancement using multi-dimensional gate control technology,
the current material and device architectures still encounter fundamental
limitation on integration density and multifunctionality. A groundbreaking
paradigm leap synergizing the material- and device- and circuit- level has thus
attracted enormous interest from both academia and industry. Three significant
breakthroughs will be made: (i) Single-crystalline 2D materials have atomic
thickness and self-confine nature, it maintains excellent electrical property
even under sub-nanometer scale, securing ultimate scalability. (ii) C-FETs are
based on the concept of 3D heterogeneous integration of CMOS devices, allowing
aggressive cell scaling to realize compact logic circuity. (iii) C-FET based
monolithic 3D integration with image sensors will be achieved to explore the
possibility of various integration capability based on the C-FET-based circuits.
Four objectives will be implemented to promote the suggested breakthroughs: (1)
Using the geometrically confined growth method that has recently proven
groundbreaking success, high-quality single-crystal 2D materials can be
manufactured at large-scale with high yield. (2) Single-crystalline 2D material-
based C-FETs will be fabricated with competitive state-of-the-art performance.
(3) Enabled with such C-FETs, circuit design of logic cells can be implemented
including a full adder and a full substractor. (4) Ultimately, a novel encoder
can be realized leveraging this new type of microprocessor, which is a main
component of analog-to-digital converters (ADC). Through this, M3D integration
with image sensors will be demonstrated to explore integration possibility of
the C-FETs circuits. The next-generation computing processor proposed in this
project will provide detailed understanding on how to demonstrate high-quality
2D materials, C-FETs, and C-FET based circuits that are key to maximizing their
full potential, ultimate scalability and gate-controllability, for semiconductor
technologies and industries. The successful achievement of these objectives will
pave a new avenue for the next-generation computing processor that can meet the
computational demands in the era of data explosion with less power consumption,
leading to a considerable surge of interest in the science and application of 2D
semiconductors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.