* 2329410
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Aditya Devarakonda, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 18,000.00

The goal of this project is to broaden graduate student participation at the
International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP 2023) conference (to be
held in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA) by providing travel awards to help pay for
travel to and from the conference venue, lodging, and conference registration
fees. Funding of this proposal will not only enhance scientific discovery in
areas of parallel processing, but also broaden the impact of the parallel
processing field by increasing graduate student participation. ICPP has a
history of attracting high quality submissions from researchers around the
world. Travel awards will provide graduate students the opportunity to engage
with leading experts in parallel computing by presenting their results at the
conference proceedings, workshop proceedings and poster sessions. In addition,
attendance will create opportunities to network with their peers and solicit
feedback from senior members of the research community. This networking may lead
to future research collaborations and career advancement opportunities.

The International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP) is one of the oldest
continuously running computer science conferences in parallel computing in the
world. ICPP 2023 will be the 52nd year of this conference series and will be
soliciting refereed conference papers, posters, and workshops along six tracks,
including, Algorithms, Applications, Architecture, Multidisciplinary,
Performance and Software. This travel award will prioritize graduate students
who are coauthors of an accepted paper or poster at ICPP 2023, who are members
of underrepresented groups, and who do not have alternative funding sources to
attend ICPP 2023. We will use travel award application materials to gauge
relevance of current and future research work to the conference topics,
importance of attending the conference, and career plans related to parallel
processing. Each travel award application will be reviewed by a selection
committee of at least three members. This selection committee will be led by the
ICPP 2023 Poster and Student Program Chairs and will include additional members
invited from the ICPP 2023 organizing and program committees and senior members
of the parallel processing community. To further broaden participation at the
conference, we will engage with societies and institutes which serve and support
students from underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.