* 2329871
* PFI-TT: Highly Efficient, Scalable, and Stable Carbon-based Perovskite Solar Modules
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Zhengshan Yu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in developing an innovative solar
power solution using carbon-based perovskite solar cell technology. The primary
focus of the project is to address the challenges associated with stability,
scalability, and commercial viability of low-cost carbon electrode-based
perovskite solar modules. Through a combination of cutting-edge research,
advanced manufacturing techniques, and strategic partnerships, the project aims
to accelerate the availability of such solar modules in the market. By
harnessing the power of these materials, this project seeks to unlock new
possibilities for solar energy generation and make it more accessible to a wider
audience. The project team will undertake extensive research to enhance the
efficiency and stability of these solar modules. This project will explore novel
materials and solar module design approaches to maximize power conversion
efficiency and ensure long-term performance. This project represents a
significant step towards a sustainable and clean energy future. The graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers involved in the project will gain
entrepreneurial education and explore the commercialization pathway for the
newly developed technology.

The proposed project aims to develop carbon-based perovskite solar cells and
modules through a scalable solution-based blade coating approach. This approach
has the potential to significantly reduce production time, cost, and weight. By
tailoring the interface and surface passivation during the coating process, the
project expects to improve the quality, uniformity, stability, and reliability
of large-scale blade-coated perovskite thin films. The conductivity of the
carbon electrode will be optimized by adjusting its composition, resulting in
increased efficiency. Engineered interfaces between the carbon and perovskite
layers will facilitate more efficient carrier transport. The project will also
focus on optimizing the module design by manipulating laser scribing on the
carbon electrode. Through large-scale manufacturing demonstrations, the project
will showcase the feasibility of commercial production. Additionally, long-term
stability testing will be conducted to validate the durability and reliability
of the carbon-based perovskite solar modules. Overall, this project aims to
significantly improve the performance, efficiency, and reliability of carbon-
based perovskite solar technology, making it a viable and sustainable option for
the renewable energy industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.