* 2329716
* Conference: A Proposal to Provide Technical Assistance to Increase the Research Competitiveness of MSIs, Community Colleges, and URM Faculty to BIO-wide Programs
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Mercy Mugo, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,535.00

In order to build an inclusive STEM workforce, the United States must assist in
building the research capacity at institutions and in geographical areas that
produce the highest number of minorities in STEM, which includes MSIs and
community colleges located within EPSCOR states. These institutions are
important and effective incubators of STEM professionals. However, they face
institutional challenges that can undermine best efforts to recruit, retain and
prepare underrepresented students. This project will conduct a 3-day
grantsmanship development workshop, with post-workshop assistance, to support 30
Minority-serving institution (MSI), community college (CC), and underrepresented
bioscience faculty in order to nurture their proposal development skills. This
proposal development assistance is necessary to cultivate a more informed and
competitive submission of proposals to a broad range of programs within the
National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO).

Faculty from local Atlanta, GA, EPSCOR states (LA, MS, AL) and southeastern
regional MSIs and CCs interested in gaining knowledge about funding
opportunities in selected NSF BIO programs, will be encouraged to participate.
Priority will be given to those faculty that have not previously submitted to
the BIO Directorate and those from EPSCOR States. This workshop will be designed
to aid these faculty with knowledge necessary to compete for grant funding
needed to support their research, teaching, and training of their
underrepresented minority students. The project’s goals are to: (1) increase
institutional awareness of competitive funding resources to build biology
research training capacity of faculty serving at MSIs and CCs; (2) broaden
participation of faculty at MSIs and CCs in biological science research; and (3)
promote their collaborative grant-writing efforts. This project will assess the
impact of the training and will track the submissions of proposals by the
participants. This project is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.