* 2329910
* 2023 Quadrennial Review of the National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 725,000.00

This award supports the next Quadrennial Review of the National Nanotechnology
Initiative (NNI) as specified in the law, Section 5 of Public Law 108-153 and
Section 201 of the American Innovation and Competitiveness Act (P.L. 114-329).
This National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine (NASEM) study
focuses on the analysis of the nation's nanotechnology research and development
(R&D) infrastructure and its impact on nanotechnology R&D. It determines the
trends and opportunities for future nanotech research, the metrics used to track
and evaluate success, and the improvements needed to achieve equitable and
impactful national engagement in existing and future nanotechnology
infrastructure. The outcomes of this study are critical feedback to Federal
Agencies, Academia, and Industry. They learn how the community is currently
being served by the nation's nanotechnology R&D infrastructure and what barriers
remain. This study also provides important feedback to the wider NNI community
and interested stakeholders. The resulting study report is beneficial to
nanotechnology researchers in the US as well as industrial companies involved
with current and future applications of various nanotechnologies. The report
also benefits education and workforce development. It is disseminated to the
technical community and public through briefings, presentations, reports and on-
line at nap.nationalacademies.org.

Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology have spurred innovations in many
areas of science, engineering, technology, and medicine including materials and
chemicals, electronics and photonics, biotechnology and healthcare, and others.
These advances have pushed interdisciplinary and convergent research bringing
together scientists and engineers from diverse fields and of diverse backgrounds
towards common goals of ensuring that the US remains a leader in nanotechnology
R&D and that the benefits of nanotechnology are shared by all Americans. This
study examines the composition of the science and engineering community
currently being served by the nation's nanotechnology R&D infrastructure;
explores trends, opportunities, and emerging use-cases for nanoscience and
nanotechnology research; examines how well positioned nanotechnology-relevant
infrastructure is to be impactful; and identifies barriers to use for
communities who are not fully engaging with nanotechnology R&D infrastructure.
The review recommendations are designed to improve the value of the NNI's
research and development strategy, portfolio, and infrastructure investments to
enhance the economic prosperity and national security of the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.