* 2329821
* CAREER: Pore-Scale Multiphase Mass Transfer in Porous Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xianglin Li, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 249,999.00

The rapidly growing markets for electric vehicle and unmanned aerial vehicle
present a pressing need of high-power and high-energy electric supplies. While
the lithium-ion battery is reaching its theoretical energy density limit, other
technologies such as lithium-air battery, fuel cells, and super capacitors have
great potential as the next generation energy storage and energy conversion
technologies. The power density and energy density of these electrochemical
technologies are often limited by the supply of reactants within porous
electrodes. Clear understanding of transport phenomena within the pores is
required to rationally design and engineer high-performance electrodes and
devices. This project will apply advanced imaging technologies, customized
electrode materials, and computational approaches to visualize and reconstruct
pore-scale geometries of electrodes and develop new theories and tools to
understand multiphase transport phenomena in porous electrodes. Results from
this project will advance the development of environmentally friendly electric
storage and conversion technologies. Research outcomes will be incorporated into
summer camps, local STEM education platforms, and curriculum developments to
educate and train local students with diverse backgrounds. The partnership with
local industry will also nurture an educated professional workforce in the
Kansas's metropolitan areas.

Porous electrodes with high specific surface area are widely used in a variety
of electrochemical systems such as batteries, fuel cells, super capacitors, flow
batteries, and electrolysis technologies to provide sufficient reaction sites
for electrochemical reactions. The goal of this project is to fundamentally
understand pore-scale multiphase transport phenomena applicable to porous
electrodes of electrochemical devices, considering spatial distributions of the
solid matrix and filling fluids, and directly address key barriers to improved
system-level performance (energy, power, efficiency etc.). In pursuit of the
research goal, this project will integrate experiments and simulations to
elucidate how the spatial distribution of each phase governs the pore-level
multiphase transfer and system-level performance of porous electrodes. The clear
understanding of the spatial phase distributions on transport phenomena is
particularly important for sustaining performance in devices equipped with
electrodes whose pore-size distributions and properties change over time.
Fundamental knowledge on multiphase transport phenomena will fill a significant
knowledge gap in porous-electrode engineering. Results from this project will
directly benefit sustainable electricity production and storage technologies,
including Li-ion batteries, metal-air batteries, fuel cells, super capacitors,
redox flow batteries, and electrolysis technologies, to move the society toward
a more sustainable future.

This project is jointly funded by CBET Electrochemical Systems program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.