* 2329838
* PFT-TT: Using Textile-Based Wearable Sensors Coated with Nanocomposites for Virtual Health and Physical Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sagar Doshi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2025
* USD 549,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project include the development of improved
treatment methodologies for millions of Americans with injuries and movement
difficulties. The innovative wearable sensors developed through this program
have the potential to allow physical therapists and clinicians to provide better
care by monitoring their progress remotely and access to continuous data
collected outside of the clinic setting, in the patient’s natural work/home
environment. The commercial and societal benefits of this technology offer the
potential to reinvigorate segments of the US smart apparel and textile
industries as well as nanomanufacturing and nanomaterial characterization. The
progress achieved through this project will help in advancing the clinical
applications of wearable sensors. Although wearable sensors have made
significant progress in recent years, most application focus on vital signs such
as pulse and activity levels (e.g. number of steps) with very little attention
to human motion, which is a critical unmet need. The sensors developed could lay
the foundation for future assistive devices and prosthetics where sensors are
integrated for active therapy, feedback, and motion assistance.

The proposed project focuses on advancing the technical foundation of textile
based wearable sensors developed using an innovative and scalable
electrophoretic deposition nanomanufacturing process. The ultra-sensitive
wearables have the capability to detect and capture the kinematics and kinetics
of human movement. These sensors can be used by physical therapists and
clinicians to collect vital data about patient progress outside of a
laboratory/clinical setting, which is crucial for providing improved healthcare.
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need to develop new technologies that
facilitate virtual health for the evaluation of patient outcomes remotely. An
interdisciplinary approach, leveraging collaboration between researchers from
materials science, nanomaterials, composite materials, sensing and neuromuscular
biomechanics, will be used to evaluate the sensing response, develop calibration
protocols, and estimate sensor efficacy. The sensors are non-invasive,
comfortable to wear, and low-cost, and the constituent materials used are
commercially available for less than $1/gram. Research and development work on
improving the robustness and durability, and the creation of a framework for
calibration will expand the applications of wearable sensors and potentially
facilitate new treatments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.