* 2329063
* FuSe/Collaborative Research: Heterogeneous Integration in Power Electronics for High-Performance Computing (HIPE-HPC)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Huili (Grace) Xing, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 325,403.00

The energy utilized for computing is more than 2 percent of global energy
consumption, and a substantial fraction of it is wasted in the final stages of
power delivery to microprocessors. Hence, efficiency improvement and size
reduction (to overcome space limitations) are the main objectives for the next
generation of power delivery solutions for high-performance computing. These
require switches and inductors that can support higher voltages, currents, and
frequencies with lower losses. Silicon (Si) complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) technology can provide a high level of integration and
control, but Si CMOS switches have higher switching losses. Wide-bandgap
semiconductor materials enable better switches, but they cannot be easily
integrated with the Si CMOS process. High-performance power delivery solutions
also require compact integrated inductors that can support higher power, higher
frequencies for miniaturization, and lower core losses. This Future of
Semiconductors (FuSe) project uses co-designing and heterogeneous integration of
wide-bandgap semiconductor devices and on-chip ferrite inductors with CMOS
technology and a new power conversion architecture to develop next-generation
integrated power delivery systems for high-performance computing. The project
will have a significant scientific and societal impact by contributing to the
technological foundations of highly efficient backside integrated power delivery
systems for high-performance computing and enhancing US competitiveness in
semiconductor manufacturing. The project will also strengthen the education of
graduate and undergraduate students on essential topics of semiconductors,
magnetics, power electronics, integrated circuits, high-performance computing,
among other core technologies. An extensive workforce development program is
also planned to attract students to the fields related to this project and to
educate people already working in the industry with an emphasis on
underrepresented groups. Outcome evaluation of the project’s research,
education, and workforce development activities will be carried out using
internal and external surveys for qualitative and quantitative data.

The 3D heterogeneous integration of power electronics for high-performance
computing will be realized by leveraging an interposer having integrated
magnetic inductors with new spin spray deposited ferrites, advanced high-voltage
GaN switches, a novel single-stage point-of-load power converter architecture,
and integrated high-voltage constant-frequency phase-shift control circuits in
CMOS. Spin spray deposition of ferrites enables integrated thick ferrite films
on-chip with a high relative permeability of ~3000 from aqueous solutions with
readily tailored compositions at low temperatures of ~90C for integrated
inductors and transformers on Si, printed circuit board, or other substrates for
integrated power electronics. The high-voltage enhancement-mode GaN devices will
utilize 3D sculptured field management to achieve record power figure-of-merits.
The single-stage point-of-load conversion architecture can maintain zero-voltage
and near-zero current switching across wide voltage and power ranges and enables
high power density with high and flat efficiencies. Co-design of the power
conversion architecture, CMOS integrated-circuits-based control, high-
performance GaN switches, interposer with integrated magnetic components, and
magnetic materials will help achieve compact and highly efficient integrated
backside point-of-load power electronics for high-performance computing. This
convergent co-design will be conducted by a qualified team with complementary
expertise, ranging from wide-bandgap semiconductor switches, magnetic materials
and integrated magnetic components, CMOS control circuits, and power conversion
architectures. This activity will also result in new co-design methodologies
leveraging circuit simulation and multi-physics analysis, and design tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.