* 2329124
* FuSe: Electronic-photonic heterogeneous integration for sensing above 1 THz
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Benjamin Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,786,359.00

The goal of this project is to boost the high-frequency operating limit for
conventional silicon-based semiconductor electronic devices and systems so that
they can generate and detect electromagnetic radiation with frequencies above 1
terahertz (THz). Bipolar CMOS (BiCMOS) chips fabricated at silicon foundries
using standard processes have been shown to generate radiation approaching, and
even exceeding 1 THz. However, in general such electronic devices (e.g.
semiconductor transistors, diodes) have difficulty to generate significant
levels of power at such high frequencies, in part because the oscillating
electrons which drive the antennas cannot travel back and forth quickly enough.
However, 1 THz is a natural crossover point between electronic and photonic
devices (e.g. lasers). Photonic devices are not limited by how fast free
electrons move, because they generate radiation based upon a different
principle: the stimulated emission of terahertz photons due to transitions of
electronic between quantized energy levels. This phenomenon will be leveraged to
create quantum-cascade (QC) photonic amplifiers (made of III-V semiconductors)
that will amplify the weak terahertz signals generated by silicon BiCMOS
electronic chips. Towards this end, novel microfabrication techniques will be
used to integrate the BiCMOS electronic chips with the III-V laser chips in
close proximity on a common silicon interconnect fabric. This project will
culminate in the demonstration of a system that uses these terahertz signals to
detect the “spectral fingerprints” of various gasses – including several which
are atmospheric environmental toxins. This research addresses a grand challenge
for semiconductor technology: how to extend integrated circuit semiconductor
technology to fully cover the terahertz range. This application has significant
societal impact, such as in environmental sensing (e.g. residential air quality,
pollutant monitoring), as well as industrial/defense/aero gas sensing (e.g. for
energy, propulsion, and planetary entry), and science (astrophysics, fire
science, combustion). Workforce development will be organized around a robust
undergraduate research program – a well-established strategy for attracting and
retaining students to a discipline. A cohort of paid undergraduate researchers
will be recruited, particularly focusing on incoming transfer students,
underrepresented minority students, and departmental honors students. In
addition to participation in research, they will participate in a robust
professional development program, a semiconductor based academic curriculum
(including microfabrication), and participation in industry internships.

The goal of this project is to extend the reach of high-frequency semiconductor
electronics above 1 THz by (a) developing a system for heterogeneous integration
of silicon BiCMOS chips that generate THz pulses with III-V terahertz quantum-
cascade (QC) laser gain material, (b) using this system to develop a hybrid THz
dual-comb transmitter/receiver for multi-heterodyne spectroscopy above 1.5 THz,
and (c) demonstrating this system for multi-gas sensing with applications in
environmental and industrial monitoring. The approach builds upon specially
designed BiCMOS frequency-comb generator chips that have been shown to emit
signals up to 3 THz (albeit with low output power); these signals will then be
amplified by THz QC travelling-wave power amplifiers. The intellectual merit
lies first in the use of quantum-cascade photonic gain material to extend the
performance of BiCMOS-foundry electronics above 1 THz. The resulting hybrid
systems will exhibit the advantages of CMOS (reduced size and weight, increased
integration and signal processing capability), with the power generation of
III-V quantum-cascade lasers above 1 THz. Second, merit lies in the development
of a terahertz silicon interconnect fabric, which will leverage advanced chiplet
technology to place BiCMOS and III-V chiplets in close proximity with micron-
scale alignment precision for low-loss THz interconnects. This research
addresses three levels on the stack: materials (QC material development),
devices (heterogeneous integration fabric, BiCMOS THz integrated circuits, and
QC-amplifiers), and systems (dual-comb spectroscopy for gas sensing).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.