* 2329834
* PFI-TT:  Development of a Prototype for Rapid Diagnosis of Food-Borne Pathogen
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Ramaraja Pandia Ramasamy, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the development of a new one-
test screening method for identification of food borne bacterial pathogens. It
is currently estimated that food borne pathogens cause 48 million illnesses,
thousands of hospitalizations, and hundreds of deaths every year in the U.S.
alone. Quick identification of the source and severity of the pathogen
contamination in food is critical to avoid outbreaks as well as to ensure food
safety. The proposed rapid diagnostic technology has a competitive edge over
existing methods as it will provide test results under an hour, as opposed to
existing multistep screening tests that can take several hours or days to get a
result. Upon successful development and implementation, this technology will
serve as an important tool for food safety diagnostics, that will enable
identification of contaminated food early in the food supply chain and thereby
helping avoid major food-borne illness outbreaks and expensive food recalls.

The proposed project will focus on addressing an important problem in the food
industry. Most existing methods used by food safety diagnostic labs for pathogen
screening are slow, require expensive instrumentation, demand skilled
technicians and are often not the best choice for rapid screening purposes. The
proposed project will focus on the development of a new rapid screening of
bacterial pathogens in select food matrices that combine both sample
preconditioning and detection steps in a single test and platform. The
experimental tasks include design and development of a prototype platform device
and robust testing and optimization of the diagnostic method using practically
relevant samples. Upon successful development and validation, the technology
could be adopted and modified for other rapid diagnostic applications in the
fields of health care and environmental monitoring.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.