* 2329563
* Using Advanced Technology to Enhance Learning and Teaching in Science Labs at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Scott Donnelly, INSTITUTE FOR FUTURE INTELLIGENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,495,847.00

This project will serve the national interest by enhancing the introductory STEM
laboratory experience for students at eight two-year colleges across the
country. Laboratory experiences are an indispensable part of science education
and provide hands-on opportunities for students to understand the natural world
and develop skills needed for scientific and technical careers. The project will
design, implement, and assess a package of innovations based on using advanced
thermal imaging technology to visualize chemical and physical phenomena. It will
leverage low-cost, easy-to-use thermal cameras to ensure the materials developed
are accessible and affordable. The scientific knowledge and analytical skills
related to thermal imaging will be applicable to students' future work as the
adoption of thermal imaging continues to accelerate in industry. The project
will be led by the Institute for Future Intelligence (IFI), in partnership with
Harold Washington College, Arizona Western College, and Cape Fear Community
College. Five additional two-year colleges from around the country (Johnson
County Community College, San Diego City College, Scottsdale Community College,
Truckee Meadows College, and Wake Technical Community College) will provide
additional field test sites for the study. Ultimately, this project aims to
engage a large number of students and faculty from institutions that serve
highly diverse student populations in high-tech laboratory activities that also
leverage pedagogical strategies aimed at equity and inclusion.

The project goals are to: 1) Design and implement scientific and pedagogical
innovations empowered by advanced technology in the laboratory setting; 2) Build
a community of practice to support continuous faculty professional development
with technology; and 3) Conduct a multipronged research study to improve the
products and generate knowledge significant to the STEM education community.
Iterative improvement of the envisioned innovations over the duration of the
project will be accomplished using a designed-based method. Additionally, this
study will explore how thermal imaging techniques impact students' understanding
and interest in STEM, how the technology developed supports improvement of
laboratory instruction, and how to engage two-year faculty in a successful
community of practice. These questions will be probed using a combination of
qualitative and quantitative instruments based on a mixed-methods approach. A
five-member advisory board will oversee project activities and an external
evaluator will partner with the project team to provide both formative and
summative feedback at regular intervals. The results will be disseminated
broadly via publications, presentations, open-source platforms, and professional
networks. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in
Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education
supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges.
The program description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in
undergraduate STEM education at two-year colleges. This project is also
supported by the NSF IUSE:HSI program, which has the goals of enhancing the
quality of undergraduate STEM education, and increasing the recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing associateâ€™s or
baccalaureate degrees in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.