* 2329736
* I-Corps: Full Arch Device for a Comprehensive Dental Hygiene Routine
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Radi Masri, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
proposed device will disrupt the dental industry. This novel oral hygiene device
will ultimately replace the need to brush teeth. The initial market will be
dental implants and prosthetics in adult patients in the United States. With
epidemiological data projecting an expanding elderly population, this device
will be beneficial for geriatric populations that especially lack access to
cost-effective and quality oral health care. If successful, the envisioned
device will be a high-impact innovation that revolutionizes personalized oral
hygiene care and heightens the standards and quality of care.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a novel comprehensive oral
hygiene device that capitalizes on the science behind fluid dynamics and
sanitization using light therapy. Fluid jet will be used to target high-risk
dental areas at once. The envisioned device will significantly enhance the
effectiveness of fluid-based plaque debridement. Furthermore, by incorporating a
novel light-sensitive fluid, the system will completely disinfect all areas of
the mouth to simplify the dental hygiene routine. This device challenges the
existing oral health paradigm that mechanical action is the most effective mode
of plaque and food debris debridement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.