* 2329537
* Equitable, Accessible Short-Term Science Research for Two-Year College Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Melissa Hicks, SUNY Onondaga Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 189,141.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding access to
undergraduate research experiences across diverse STEM-interested student
populations at two-year colleges. Traditional, eight- to ten- week residential
research experiences that require students to move away from home for weeks at a
time can present a significant challenge to research participation. It is
therefore essential for the success of two-year college STEM students that
alternative research pathways are developed and implemented broadly across the
Nation. This project intends to leverage existing partnerships with nearby four-
year research universities to create paid one- to two-week research experiences
for two-year college students. Participation in short-term research experiences
is hypothesized to increase the number of full-time or part-time two-year
college students that are retained in STEM. Ultimately, this project intends to
build a transferrable model for engaging two-year college students in STEM
research that results in increased sense of belonging, growth mindset, and
perseverance towards transferring and obtaining a bachelor’s degree in STEM.

The goal of this project is to increase the number of STEM students experiencing
authentic science research before transferring to their bachelor’s degree
program. Specifically, the project aims to build on an existing program by
creating new paid research opportunities at local universities for two-year
college students. Four primary objectives will guide this project: 1) Foster
partnerships with four-year universities that will host shorter duration
undergraduate research experiences; 2) Design and implement a home institution
sponsored research experience program for 15-30 students annually; 3) Develop
and implement leadership and mentoring training for four-year college graduate
assistants working with the undergraduate researchers; and 4) Host a research
symposium for student researchers to present their work. The project's success
will demonstrate an increase in retention in STEM majors and increased transfer
rates for student participants. Assessment methods will be geared towards
capturing growth in students’ sense of belonging in the science community,
confidence level in a science laboratory, and the development of a growth
mindset. An external evaluator will partner with the project team to provide
both formative and summative feedback at regular intervals throughout the
project. The results of the project will be disseminated to the two-year college
STEM community via publications, presentations, and professional networks. The
NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that
advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description
promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education
at two-year colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.