* 2329677
* CEDAR: Modeling of Initial Temperature Relaxation and Expansion of Meteor Trails
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Victor Pasko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 12/31/2026
* USD 389,521.00

Many meteor trails are visible to an unaided eye during shower events. Extra-
terrestrial particles entering the Earth’s environment result in these trails
and deposit different kind of metals/ions in the upper regions of the
atmosphere. Although most of these particles have masses of a small fraction of
a gram, their overall daily deposition rates are measured in thousands of tons.
As the meteoroids enter the Earth’s atmosphere, they form approximately
cylindrical plasma trails with considerable enhancements of electron density.
There is a significant spectroscopic evidence of elevated plasma temperatures in
meteor trails, exceeding several thousands of degrees kelvin. This project
promotes the further progress of science by investigating the physical processes
involved in temperature relaxation in these trails. These studies are expected
to be applicable not only to meteor trails but any physical system involving
decaying plasmas. The diffusion processes that will be studied are in operation
in positive column direct current discharges. At lower ionospheric altitudes
this research may bring additional knowledge about plasma inhomogeneities
involved in lightning stimulated transient luminous events. A graduate student
will be supported and trained under this program. This multi-disciplinary
research is co-funded by the Plasma Physics program at the NSF.

The innovative research aims at developing theoretical framework that employs
plasma fluid equations and Monte Carlo kinetic models. The work develops from
the earlier research on the electrical discharge, which has been successfully
implemented for modeling of corona, and transient luminous events (TLEs). One of
the primary goals of the investigation is to gain new knowledge about electron
temperature relaxation in the meteor trails with a focus on diffusion dynamics.
This work seeks information about the electron-neutral collision frequencies,
ambipolar diffusion rates and development of gradient-drift plasma
instabilities. Additionally, the numerical simulation and modeling work will
facilitate: (a) electron heating and cooling rates characterization in meteor
trails with altitude, (b) knowledge about the evolution of meteor trail plasma
under varying geomagnetic field conditions. This has implications on the
existing remote sensing techniques that employ meteor echoes for inferring
temperatures and winds in the upper atmosphere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.