* 2329911
* Global Centers Track 2: Enhanced Wind Turbine Blade Durability
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sara Pryor, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 249,994.00

Wind turbines extract kinetic energy from the wind and convert it into
electricity. The kinetic energy content of the wind is sufficient to supply all
of the world’s electricity needs. Within less than a year of manufacture wind
turbines have generated more electricity than is used in their manufacture and
deployment. For these reasons wind energy is making an increasingly important
contribution to the green energy revolution. Wind turbine blades are carefully
designed for aerodynamic performance to maximize the amount of electricity
generated. However, wind turbines also experience very harsh conditions during
their 25-to-30-year operating lifetimes that can lead to blade damage. This
material loss and roughening of the blades is called leading edge erosion (LEE).
It decreases aerodynamic performance and may require repair or replacement which
both decreases reliability and increases the cost of energy. The goal of this
Global Centers Track 2 Design award is to reduce the cost of energy for wind-
generated electricity and enhance the reliability of wind turbines. Addressing
this topic requires a coherent multi-disciplinary approach as applied here. This
NSF-Global Centers initiative draws partners from academia and practitioners in
the US (Cornell University), the UK (University of Lancaster), Canada (Wind
Energy Institute of Canada), Norway (University of Bergen), Denmark (Technical
University of Denmark and Orsted) and Spain (National Renewable Energy Center of
Spain). Together the international team will develop a strategy to reduce key
sources of uncertainty in LEE projections from different locations in which wind
turbines are, or will be, deployed and to enhance blade durability. Reducing LEE
is a priority for global wind turbine manufacturers and wind farm owner
operators and would improve energy generation. Technical goals of the project
are: (i) Improve forecasting of LEE and optimize abatement strategies for pre-
construction model simulations. (ii) Advance new detection methods to optimize
repair scheduling. (iii) Reduce LEE through materials science advances to reduce
damage. (iv) Reduce damage by improved forecasting/observational detection of
highly damaging events to enable dynamic operation of wind farms to reduce LEE.
The project vision is built around a systems approach and will be addressed
within 4-interlinked themes: Theme 1. Atmospheric drivers, Theme 2. Damage
detection and quantification, Theme 3. Materials response and redesign, and
Theme 4. Aerodynamic implications of LEE. In this planning phase project, the
researchers will perform a series of Phenomena Identification and Ranking Tables
(PIRT) analyses, and advance fundamental science and engineering knowledge
necessary to address LEE. The result will be an end-to-end process-level
assessment, research prioritization plus a robust model verification and
validation (V&V) framework for constructing a multi-scale inter-disciplinary
model chain to generate a priori estimates of LEE potential at geographically
dispersed sites. This tool will inform assessments of leading-edge protection
requirements and/or other mitigation actions. This award is funded by the Global
Centers program, an innovative program that supports use-inspired research
addressing global challenges related to climate change and/or clean energy.
Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers to bring together
international teams to develop research questions and partnerships, conduct
landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to
advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.