* 2329791
* PFI-TT: A Cost-Effective and Scalable Tidal Current Energy Harvesting System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Walter Schurtenberger, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in technically and commercially
developing a transformative solution for tidal current energy converters
(TCECs). The proposed technology has improved efficiency, minimal output speed
variation, low-maintenance requirements, increased durability, and scalability
through a wide range of sizes. It will lower the cut-in speed of a TCEC to low
tidal current speeds and break tidal current energy harvesting technology
limits. The TCECs will use the developed constant-speed generator system to
generate constant-frequency power that is compatible with existing electric
grid. This project aims to enhance energy security by diversifying the energy
mix with untapped tidal current energy resource. Academic, industrial, and
commercial partnership in the project will foster knowledge sharing, leveraging
complementary capabilities, and sharing risks and costs associated with
technology development and commercialization. This collaboration will
technological advancements, reduce costs, reconcile policy trade-offs, and
encourage companies to invest and engage in this sector. Sustainable
entrepreneurship training in the project will support participants throughout
their entrepreneurial and leadership journeys, demonstrating a genuine
dedication to their long-term success and increasing the future workforce in the
marine energy industry.

The proposed project will conduct use-inspired research on the infinitely
variable transmission (IVT) technology to address techno-economic hurdles for
TCECs, which can balance economic, technical, and environmental constraints.
TCECs with the IVT can harness tidal current energy with low tidal current
speeds, and the U.S. sea regions that can be used for tidal current energy
harvesting can be increased from 2% to 70%. The project will address some major
technical hurdles on ecological issues in the commercialization process of the
IVT, operation and maintenance, and real water testing which is a major
bottleneck for innovators of TCECs to bridge the gap from small- to full-scale
prototypes. The project will (a) synergize research efforts on life cycle
assessment for environmental impact evaluation and energy consumption of TCECs
via incorporation of uncertainties and variability and end-of-life management to
reduce the effect of these constraints on both economic and ecological aspects
of TCECs; (b) develop a condition-based predictive maintenance monitoring system
for the IVT by incorporating oil condition monitoring and other diagnostic
parameters to detect early faults; and (c) conduct floating vessel testing for a
scale-up TCEC with the IVT by increasing the size and capacity of the IVT to
reach commercial-scale deployment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.