* 2329669
* PFI-TT: Water disinfection using safe and sustainable copper combined with a locally enhanced electric field
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Xing Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project are to enable safer, more sustainable
approaches to disinfecting water while minimizing the use of chlorine and its
harmful disinfection byproducts. It is still a challenge finding suitable
alternatives to chlorine, but using naturally abundant copper metal may be the
solution. The proposed innovation combines the natural antimicrobial properties
of copper with a low voltage, locally enhanced electric field to reduce the
consumption of both copper and electricity, cut annual operational cost, and
minimize disinfection byproducts. With the successful maturation and
commercialization of this technology, the long-term goal is to launch a spin-off
company to manufacture and provide alternative and sustainable solutions for
water disinfection across many potential market segments (point-of-use at home,
swimming pools and spas, commercial hot water lines, etc.) to minimize the
negative health impacts currently associated with standard chlorine-based
disinfection. Beyond this goal, all undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
students involved in the project will gain the technical and entrepreneurial
skills to tackle problems with evidence-based decision-making and an
entrepreneurial mindset, further enabling their success for translating
innovations in the future.

The proposed project focuses on the further development and maturation of a
chlorine-free water disinfection technology that synergistically combines
locally enhanced electric field treatment and the natural biocidal effect of
copper ions (LEEFT-Cu) to kill pathogens. This approach enables highly effective
microbial inactivation with low copper doses and low electrical energy
consumption. The underlying mechanism exploits the enhanced electric field
attributed to the coaxial electrode configuration, which increases the
permeability of cell membranes for microbial copper uptake, resulting in more
efficient inactivation. The main goal of this PFI-TT project is to address
knowledge gaps and technical barriers of the LEEFT-Cu technology identified
through our previous market research and customer discovery. During this
project, we will 1) test the antimicrobial efficiency of LEEFT-Cu for different
microorganisms; 2) study the effect of water temperature on the performance of
LEEFT-Cu; 3) develop strategies that allow LEEFT-Cu to be effective for water
with higher conductivities; 4) increase the loading and utilization of Cu in
LEEFT-Cu devices to reduce the in-use replacement frequency and cost; and 5)
evaluate the scalability and implementation of LEEFT-Cu through a pilot test
with an industry partner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.