* 2329425
* SBIR Phase II:  HealthText: Providing digital healthcare navigation for underserved communities in the US
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Lisa Fitzpatrick, LISA FITZPATRICK & ASSOCIATES MD PC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2025
* USD 999,904.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to further develop HealthText, an
artificial intelligence (AI) driven digital health information and navigation
platform tailored to support the Medicaid population. The project's broader
impact lies in its potential to address health disparities in under-resourced
communities by providing trusted and relatable health literacy content through a
user-friendly Short Message/Messaging Service (SMS). Under-resourced and
minority communities often experience poor health outcomes and disengagement
from care due to low health and science literacy and distrust. Technology-based
engagement strategies have not adequately reached these underserved populations,
making HealthText a valuable solution to bridge this gap. The core focus of this
project is to deliver targeted and culturally appropriate health information
campaigns directly to Medicaid beneficiaries. Through relatable content and
intuitive SMS messaging, the platform aims to foster trust, increase healthcare
engagement, and reduce avoidable emergency room visits, hospital admissions, and
preventable, health-related deaths. The commercial opportunity associated with
improving healthcare engagement in underserved and minority communities is
significant, given the annual US Medicaid market size of over $720 billion. By
addressing health literacy and navigation support issues, this technology can
help achieve substantial cost savings that could exceed $100 million annually,
while improving health outcomes.

This project has demonstrated successful engagement outcomes among Medicaid
populations, suggesting the potential for widespread commercialization to
Medicaid insurance companies. The project involves refining the delivery of
tailored health information using AI-based communications tools like chatbots
and generative AI. Existing AI resources lack consideration for communication
nuances prevalent in underserved populations with lower educational
achievements. To address this, the AI components will be specifically designed
for underserved and minority communities, thereby minimizing concerns about bias
in existing health-related AI solutions. The solution include: 1) gap analysis
with high priority quality measures; 2) utilization of custom content and
delivery platform to send targeted messaging via text, video, and on-demand AI
chat to patients; and 3) evaluation of improved clinical outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.