* 2329345
* CREST-PRP: Promoting Coastal Biodiversity with AI-driven Modular Seawall Design and Construction
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sara Pezeshk, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 334,156.00

The CREST Postdoctoral Research Program (CREST-PRP) provides two years of
support for research, training, and mentoring experiences for individual early
career scientists at active CREST Centers. The goal of the CREST-PRP awards is
to increase the STEM workforce presence of individuals who are members of groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. CREST-PRP awards recognize investigators with
significant potential and support their research experiences to broaden their
perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and prepare CREST-PRP
scholars for positions of leadership within the scientific community. The
research project, "Promoting Coastal Biodiversity through AI-driven Modular
Seawall Design and Construction," is in direct alignment with the CREST-PRP
goals. Submitted by a researcher affiliated with the CREST Center for Aquatic
Chemistry and Environment at Florida International University, the project is
designed to develop and test Ecoblox, an innovative interlocking modular block
system for shoreline construction that can easily integrate into existing
seawalls or be used to build new seawalls. The project’s design and development
work will build on technological advancements in big data analytics, networked
sensor technologies, Artificial Intelligence, and robotics. The project expects
to advance understanding of design and construction of synthetic seawalls
customized for the conditions of specific ecosystems, that will further
coastline resilience and biodiversity. Additionally, the researcher will receive
active scientific and career mentoring and training to prepare them to flourish
as a STEM professional while simultaneously contributing to the scientific
capacity of the host CREST Center.

The project will apply microclimatic data and site-specific information in the
design process, including factors such as solar radiation, wind patterns, water
and air temperature, and water turbidity, to optimize the overall geometry and
interlocking mechanism of Ecoblox and customize each seawall for specific
ecosystems. AI-driven generative design software will be employed in
investigating the relationship between the size, ratio, shape, and surface
texture of Ecoblox to ideal conditions for the colonization of marine life, thus
promoting biodiversity along seawalls. To ensure accuracy in construction and
efficient construction methods, the researcher will use advanced manufacturing
techniques such as robotic 3-D printing and computer numerical control milling
in the production of Ecoblox with intricate geometries, thus enabling seawall
solutions that are ecologically beneficial and produced with minimal waste and
reduced cost. Finally, the project will explore and develop alternative
materials that minimize the environmental impacts of construction on water
quality and marine life. The extensive training and mentoring the postdoctoral
researcher will receive will not only benefit her long-term career objectives
but also afford benefits to the host CREST Center by bolstering its resident
scientific research capacity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.