* 2329640
* Conference: 2023 Environmental Nanotechnology GRC and GRS Nanotechnology for a More Sustainable World
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* John Fortner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Nanomaterials and related technologies are being widely developed for use in a
number of advanced applications including coatings, antimicrobials, components
in sunscreens, electronics, catalysts, and other products and processes. In
particular, nanoscale materials and technologies have significant potential for
addressing tough environmental challenges from clean water to renewable energy
to climate change, and beyond. The 6th Gordon Research Conference on
Environmental Nanotechnology will focus on advancing understanding of such
materials and processes towards a more sustainable world, considering both
applications and implications. The Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon Research
Conference is one of the most interactive conferences on this topic and has been
a platform for the generation of innovative ideas that go on to heavily
influence the field. Participants include a large breadth of researchers from
all backgrounds and career stages, including graduate students, professors,
industry and government representatives, and international scientists, who
encourage discussion about the latest developments in the field. The open
exchange of ideas and the collaborations and topical discussions that originate
at this conference are fundamental in further advancing the field. Lastly, the
scheduled activities of the Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research
School provide unique opportunities for early-career scientists by integrating
these new scientists into an open and welcoming environment to discuss their
current research and build informal networks with their peers that can lead to a
lifetime of collaboration and scientific achievement.

The organization and focus of the sixth Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon
Research Conference is designed to be at the leading edge of environmental
nanotechnology applications and implications. The objectives of the
Environmental Nanotechnology Gordon Conference are to 1) provide a forum for the
generation of ideas for using nanotechnology to benefit the environment and
society through its role in technology development and 2) to generate ideas and
research programs towards prevention of potential environmental harm that may
come from the development and use of this technology. Discussions revolve around
research that will advance fundamental understandings of the interactions of
nanomaterials with biological and environmental media. The conference aims to
discuss materials that are in current use as well as new one- to three-
dimensional nanostructures, heterogeneous nano-bio hybrid assemblies, and active
nanoparticles that may be developed and used in the future. Specific conference
topics include novel nanomaterials and processes for water treatment, climate
change, agriculture, circular economies, and sensing, among others. The
Intellectual Merit of the Gordon Research Conference on Environmental
Nanotechnology is founded in the creation and nucleation of ideas towards
development of related engineered nanomaterial-based technologies with a
foundation in environmentally sustainable goals and ideals. There is
considerable intellectual merit in the open exchange of ideas on these critical
global topics, which is a Gordon Research Conference hallmark. This conference
will highlight analytical methods and experimental approaches that balance the
beneficial aspects of nanotechnology against their potential adverse risks to
human health and the environment. Collaborations and ideas that originate at
this conference, due to its diversity of participating fields and attendees, is
fundamental in advancing the field of emerging nanoscale materials and
processes, which includes related nanoscale interactions of all types. Broader
Impacts of this conference are many, as ideas discussed at this meeting will
help shape sustainable development of related technologies in addition to key
societal advances including sensors for contaminants, water cleanup and
treatment, climate change, and innovations for presenting nanomaterial science
to the public. The activities of the Gordon Research Conference and Gordon
Research School; also, present unique opportunities for diverse and early-career
scientists by integrating these new scientists into a new, welcoming
collaborative peer network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.