* 2329731
* I-Corps:  Passive in situ pathogen concentration device for wastewater-based epidemiology
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* John Dennehy, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to enable effective surveillance of microorganisms for
identifying threats to human health and the environment. The proposed technology
may be used for wastewater surveillance to predict disease outbreaks and thus
allow health agencies to deploy resources to contain a pathogen that can spread
globally. The technology will be used in the design of non-invasive and safe
sampling devices to assess the health of communities that contribute to
wastewater. In the future, autonomous robots may be used to deploy such passive
sampling devices at strategic locations within city sewer networks to allow
finer geographical resolution of pathogen prevalence and spread. Implementing
the technology at locations such as hospitals may enable the monitoring of
antibiotic resistant genes in bacteria causing hospital-acquired infections that
are hard to treat. In addition, climate change can affect the microbial load and
diversity in natural water bodies. Sampling devices may be deployed in natural
water sources or even public pools to monitor microbial populations. Using a
similar strategy, emerging pathogens such as bird flu may be monitored by
sampling wastewater from farms or zoos. This may reduce the threat resulting
from anthropogenic factors such as global travel and climate change.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a passive sampling device
that may be directly deployed at a water source to concentrate microorganisms.
The technology was originally developed to overcome several shortcomings of
traditional wastewater sampling and virus concentration methods. It uses a solid
substrate to capture and concentrate microorganisms from water sources.
Proprietary solutions efficiently extract genetic material (DNA or RNA) from the
captured microorganisms. Preliminary results demonstrated that viruses such as
SARS-CoV-2 and Influenza may be concentrated successfully to extract their
genetic material. The technology will be further used to construct passive
sampling devices that continuously and safely capture microorganisms while
deployed at a water source. This minimizes the cost, time, and effort to
transport and process potentially hazardous wastewater. Weighing less than 20 g,
these devices may be deployed in water sources such as wastewater treatment
plants, building-level pipes, or even aircraft lavatories when more granular
surveillance of disease outbreaks is required. Further experiments will be
conducted to test the efficiency of the devices in concentrating different
species of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.