* 2329159
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Ferroelectric Ordering and Polarization-Coupled Transport Properties in 2D Van der Waals Materials
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alexander Sinitskii, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Two-dimensional (2D) ferroelectrics are materials
composed of 2D crystal lattices with a spontaneous electric polarization that
can be reversed by the application of an external electric field. Harnessing the
potential of 2D ferroelectric materials for electronic applications may lead to
the development of memory and logic devices that surpass current technologies in
energy efficiency and versatility. This project aims to identify new 2D
ferroelectric materials, understand how to control and manipulate their
properties, and explore the impact of their polarization on electrical
conductivity. In addition to the research goals, the project also has a strong
focus on education and outreach. The project involves both undergraduate and
graduate students, while also providing opportunities for K-12 students and
teachers to learn about nanotechnology. The broader aim of the project is to
inspire and educate the next generation of scientists and engineers. By exposing
students to cutting-edge Quantum Information Science and Engineering (QISE)
research, this project establishes a foundation for a variety of collaborative
QISE activities in the future.

Technical Abstract: Recent advancements in fabrication and characterization
techniques have unveiled the potential for ferroelectric behavior in structures
with reduced dimensionality. This project aims to understand the origin of
ferroelectric ordering in two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals materials and
explore their polarization-coupled transport properties. The primary objectives
of this research are to discover new 2D ferroelectric materials, understand the
role of electrical and chemical boundary conditions in the emergence of
ferroelectric ordering, and explore the physical mechanisms responsible for the
polarization-coupled transport properties of these materials. The research
employs a combination of experimental techniques and theoretical modeling.
Experimental methods include advanced transport measurements as well as
microscopic and spectroscopic techniques for structural characterization and
nanoscale electrical testing to probe the polar and conducting behavior of the
materials. These techniques provide essential data on the existence and nature
of ferroelectric ordering in 2D van der Waals structures. Theoretical modeling
involves first-principle calculations and symmetry-based considerations to gain
insights into the physical mechanisms underlying the ferroelectric ordering and
its coupling with electronic transport properties. This modeling guides the
identification and characterization of new 2D ferroelectric materials and their
potential applications. The outcomes of this research hold significant
implications for both fundamental science and technological advancements,
particularly in the development of multifunctional scalable structures for non-
volatile memory and logic devices. By shedding light on the unique properties of
2D ferroelectric materials, this project contributes to the exploration of novel
materials for future electronic devices.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.