* 2329227
* An integrated technology for efficient selenium remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Daqian Jiang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,995.00

Selenium is a metalloid that is utilized in the manufacturing of various
industrial products including glasses, pigments, photovoltaic cells, and
semiconductor devices. In recent years, the contamination of surface water
systems and groundwater aquifers by selenium (Se) has become a critical problem
in the United States and worldwide. In natural waters, Se predominantly exists
as selenate (SeO42-) and selenite (SeO42-) oxyanion species which are both
highly soluble and toxic. Although selenium (Se) is an essential micronutrient
for human health due to its antioxidant properties, chronic exposure to excess
Se can adversely impact ecosystem health causing mutations and reproductive
impairments in fish and aquatic invertebrates as toxic Se oxyanions
bioaccumulate in aquatic food chains. The overarching goal of this project is to
explore the design, evaluation, and optimization of a new integrated treatment
train that can extract toxic selenate/selenite oxyanions from contaminated water
and reduce them to elemental selenium (Se0) which is non-toxic and non-soluble.
To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to test the
integration of a flow-electrode capacitive deionization (FCDI) ion separation
process with a bioelectrochemical system (BES) into a compact reactor to remove,
reduce, and detoxify selenate/selenite oxyanions from contaminated wastewater
streams using electricity as driving force and power source. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of new
fundamental knowledge and data to advance the design and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective technologies that could remove Se from industrial
and contaminated wastewater streams prior to their discharge into receiving
water bodies. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of a post-doctoral research
fellow, one graduate student, and one undergraduate student at the University of
Alabama.

Conventional and commercially available water treatment technologies (e.g.,
coagulation/precipitation, ion exchange, and reverse osmosis) cannot
simultaneously remove toxic selenate/selenite oxyanions from contaminated water
and convert them to non-toxic and insoluble zero valent selenium (Se0). In this
project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to test the hypothesis that
the integration of a flow-electrode capacitive deionization (FCDI) ion
separation process with a bioelectrochemical system (BES) into a compact reactor
could enable the simultaneous removal, reduction, and conversion of toxic
selenate/selenite oxyanions from contaminated wastewater to non-toxic Se0 using
electricity as driving force and energy source. The specific objectives of the
research are to 1) characterize, evaluate, and optimize the performance of the
integrated FCDI-BES reactor under relevant operating conditions using synthetic
and real-world selenium contaminated wastewater; 2) probe and unravel the
molecular mechanisms of the bioelectrochemical reduction of selenate/selenite
oxyanions using metagenomic sequencing; and 3) conduct a life cycle analysis
(LCA) and a global sensitivity analysis to guide the optimization of the
performance of the proposed new and integrated FCDI-BES treatment train. To
implement the education and training goals of this project, the PIs plan to
recruit and mentor undergraduate students to work on the project research
activities. In addition, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at the
University of Alabama to design and deliver two annual educational activities
consisting of immersive lab demonstrations for 30-50 high school students and
teachers selected from over 120 schools located in the Alabama Black Belt, a
region in the State of Alabama with persistent economic and social challenges
including high poverty and high unemployment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.