* 2329816
* PFI-TT: Behavioral Analysis for Safer Communities: Fair and Ethical AI for Trusted Surveillance
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Jeri Guido, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,001.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in its potential to revolutionize
surveillance systems and promote public safety while protecting privacy. By
leveraging recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI), the project aims to
detect real-time public safety threats by only focusing on behaviors and
utilizing the existing surveillance cameras. This innovation addresses the
pressing challenges of rising criminal activities and public safety threats in
public spaces and private businesses. By focusing on behavioral abnormalities
rather than individual identification, this project helps to remove biases and
promote social equity. The proposed technology has a significant potential for
commercialization, with applications in various sectors, including public
agencies, private businesses, and critical infrastructure, enhancing security
and improving public well-being. The project will foster training and leadership
development in innovation and entrepreneurship by involving students and post-
docs in meetings with stakeholders, attending industry events, and collaborating
closely with the industries involved.

The proposed project aims to address the problem of inefficient and costly
security measures by developing an innovative deep learning-based surveillance
system. The project's successful implementation will foster the scientific and
technological understanding of computer vision and deep learning, advancing the
capabilities of surveillance systems and promoting innovation in the security
industry. The project seeks to create a deep learning system capable of
detecting behavioral anomalies in real-time by utilizing transformer-based
architectures and identity-neutral visual feature embedding. The research
objectives include analyzing complex human behavior without relying on
personally identifiable information, developing a scalable technology, and
conducting real-world pilots. The project aims to establish realistic metrics
for evaluating detection reliability and resilience in real-world settings by
integrating state-of-the-art AI advancements. Anticipated technical results
include a novel anomaly detection dataset, a semi-supervised transformer-based
video sequence learning approach and anomaly detection algorithm, and identity-
neutral visual feature embedding advancements. The project's outcomes build upon
previous NSF-funded research and will contribute to the scientific understanding
of AI in surveillance applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.