* 2329292
* Collaborations in Discipline-Based Education Research to Train Postdoctoral Scholars
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* John Buncher, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,249,912.00

This project will serve the national interest by creating a structured and
scaffolded training program for postdoctoral scholars within the Collaborations
in Interdisciplinary Discipline-Based Education Research (CiDER) program at
North Dakota State University. The CiDER program will facilitate collaboration,
integration, and synthesis across disciplines, while also advancing our
understanding of how to best support the postdoctoral experience and prepare
postdocs for future career endeavors. It may serve as a model for other training
programs. Postdoctoral trainees will collaborate with members of the CiDER
community to conduct independent research projects in STEM Education, with
particular emphasis on exploring STEM teaching and learning in rural
communities. Trainees will engage in professional development designed to
develop both their research skills in DBER and to navigate university and
department cultures.

The CiDER postdoctoral training program will be grounded in a Community of
Practice model and be supported by team-based mentoring and activities designed
to facilitate skill development. The cohort of postdoctoral trainees will
develop independent research projects in one of two threads: (1) teaching and
learning of disciplinary content, and transferring knowledge, skills, and
problem-solving strategies across contexts and disciplines; and (2) general
cognition and learning including examination of pedagogical practices that
impact learning beyond disciplinary understanding, with an emphasis on improving
diversity, equity, and inclusion, promoting institutional transformations, and
increasing scientific literacy. The training plan will address the well-
documented isolating experiences of postdocs, particularly women and people
historically excluded from STEM and will specifically develop traineesâ€™
cognitive and affective skills and to build self-efficacy and sense of
belonging.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field. The project is also supported
by the Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (BCSER) program and the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.