* 2329408
* Community Engaged Disciplinary and Educational Researchers in STEM (CEDERS)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Courtney Faber, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 849,964.00

The institutional cohort postdoctoral fellowship program for Community Engaged
Disciplinary and Educational Researchers in STEM (CEDERS) is designed to enhance
the research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctoral graduates in
STEM Education. Community outreach and public dissemination are regular features
of the work that STEM researchers do. However, traditional approaches to
university-community partnerships privilege academic expertise. In contrast,
community engaged scholarship (CES) encourages a more democratic process and
exchange of multiple types of expertise. This approach can welcome engagement
among communities who often have more knowledge of social issues than academic
researchers. Consequently, CES in STEM holds promise to broaden participation in
STEM-related fields. The CEDERS program is designed to prioritize CES in
educational research projects led by postdoctoral fellows and done in
collaboration with STEM researchers and community stakeholders. Findings from
the fellows’ projects have the potential to influence the direction of STEM
outreach and education that will reach a large number of community stakeholders.
Hence, this project may directly improve the effectiveness of STEM outreach and
education to serve the needs of communities. Further, this model for a STEM
educator-STEM disciplinary researcher-community partnership can provide a
pathway to CES at other institutions working towards the goal of broadening
participation in STEM on an even larger scale.

The project activities will integrate the best practices of STEM postdoctoral
development and CES learning to elevate training of STEM education postdoctoral
fellows through (1) engagement in research that facilitates collaboration among
STEM education and STEM disciplinary scholars and community partners; (2) design
of research that aims for the mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and
resources across institutional and community stakeholders for the purpose of
broadening participation in STEM in PreK-16 contexts; and (3) access to
resources and relationships, including participation in multiple groups and
communities that can expand early career scholars’ connectedness. Integrating
across these approaches can improve not only the postdoctoral fellows’ capacity
for impactful research but also their preparedness for a professional career in
STEM education. To reflect the collaborative nature of the project, postdoctoral
fellows will be mentored by a committee of STEM education and STEM faculty and
supported through individualized research and professional development plans.
These plans follow effective models for building capacity for engaged
scholarship along a competency-based trajectory and incorporate promising
practices for faculty development.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) Program. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field. The AISL Program, supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and
practice that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in
STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.