* 2329536
* An Artificial Intelligence Engineering System Analysis Assistant (Aiesaa) for auto-creation of integrated transmission-distribution grid models
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Ning Lu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2026
* USD 397,000.00

The integration of distributed energy resources (DERs), such as solar
photovoltaic and battery systems, is revolutionizing power grids, offering new
possibilities and challenges. To accurately model the impact of aggregated DER
behaviors on power transmission while considering operational constraints, it is
essential to develop comprehensive integrated transmission-distribution (T&D)
network models. However, creating full-scale models for each distribution system
is impractical due to the large number of systems connected to the regional
transmission grid. In this project, our main objective is to develop Aiesaa, an
Artificial-intelligence (AI) assistant, to transform the process of creating
compact and integrated T&D network models. We aim to overcome the labor-
intensive nature, scalability and model conversion issues, and communication
challenges faced by current co-simulation approaches. Aiesaa will leverage
advanced machine learning techniques to streamline three crucial modeling tasks.
Firstly, it will assist in scenario classification, allowing human experts to
focus on non-critical scenarios where simplified models can be used. Secondly,
Aiesaa will employ meta-modeling techniques to select and parameterize reduced-
order models for critical scenarios, striking a balance between accuracy and
complexity. Lastly, Aiesaa will facilitate human-in-the-loop model integration,
ensuring collaboration between AI and experts to achieve optimal model
performance and complexity.

By combining the speed and accuracy of AI with the insights and experiences of
human experts, Aiesaa will introduce a novel framework for engineering model
creation that surpasses existing methodologies. This approach automates routine
tasks and workflows, freeing up experts to concentrate on higher-level
activities that demand their expertise. Importantly, the human-in-the-loop
approach ensures that AI serves as a collaborator rather than a replacement for
human professionals. The development of Aiesaa has significant implications for
computational efficiency and cost-effectiveness. By reducing model complexity
and shortening development time, Aiesaa enables the use of compact integrated
T&D models on standalone computing platforms. This reduces reliance on expensive
infrastructure, enhances data security, and accelerates simulations.
Additionally, Aiesaa reduces the learning curve for modelers, empowering them to
focus on higher-level tasks such as engineering system design and future
scenarios. Upon completion of the project, we plan to share a prototype of
Aiesaa with the research and engineering community, fostering advancements in
the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.