* 2329409
* RAPID: Human-Infrastructure Interactions with Water Systems during the East Palestine Industrial Crisis
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Lauryn Spearing, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

The February 2023 train derailment in East Palestine, Ohio, led to a large-scale
chemical spill and fire, creating widespread concerns. This Grant for Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) project aims to collect ephemeral data on public
perceptions and experiences, as well as human-infrastructure interactions.
During environmental contamination events, the provision of and access to
accurate, reliable, and trusted information is critical to appropriate
protective actions taken by community members. Public perceptions about water
systems have been studied in response to many natural disasters and boil water
notices, but there is limited understanding of how this unfolds during man-made
crises. The data collected will spur theory building in community resilience
while providing valuable insight for informing future emergency response and
risk communications.

The possible impacts on drinking water were largely unknown by community
members, creating misinformation and uncertainty as to how to respond. The East
Palestine event offers a unique opportunity to study how humans interact with
infrastructure and how communication of water quality data from responding
organizations can be improved to garner public trust. Specifically, this work
will 1) identify public perceptions about water safety and corresponding
behaviors, with respect to the effectiveness of communication from
organizations, the level of trust in test results, and the information sources
they seek out; and 2) document how organizations collected water quality data
and disseminated results to reveal challenges and barriers in risk
communication. Semi-structured interviews and surveys with community members and
responding organizations will be conducted. Operational and communication
documentation will be cataloged and examined. Data collection procedures, as
informed by risk perception, protective action, and water insecurity theories,
will allow for translation to other disaster types or environmental contexts.
This work will also lead to recommendations for agencies responding to future
disasters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.