* 2329021
* FuSe-REG: Enabling Photonic Computing Engines through Hetero-integration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sasan Fathpour, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2026
* USD 537,021.00

Conventional computing based on digital electronic logic faces challenges due to
the rapid growth of artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms,
which need massive amounts of processing power, outpacing the rate at which
computers have historically progressed (according to Moore's Law). Photonics
technologies offer an attractive alternative due to several advantages,
including high speed, energy efficiency, and the potential for massive
parallelization of information processing. This project aims to tackle the
obstacles in using integrated photonic deep neural networks for the next
generation of computing platforms. Despite previous efforts, these networks
still face challenges that make them impractical for real-world applications. In
particular, most previous photonic neural networks are not scalable and require
electronic circuits for achieving nonlinear effects, thus inevitably losing the
high-speed advantages of photonics. An interdisciplinary approach is needed to
tackle several problems, including designing novel neural network architectures
for efficient processing of information encoded in light and integrating
different materials for achieving desired functionalities, such as
reconfigurability and nonlinear effects, which are essential for machine
learning. This project focuses on developing a new deep learning architecture
that is compatible with photonics and optoelectronics technologies and
significantly reduces the size of optical neural networks compared to previous
attempts. The proposed platform aims to create a scalable deep neural network,
enabling real-time optical signal processing for a wide range of applications,
from telecommunications, imaging, and biomedical applications to classical and
quantum information processing systems. The proposed effort will create a
roadmap for accelerating fundamental research and applied technology development
for realizing functional photonic deep neural networks. This effort also
provides a unique opportunity to train and educate students beyond their
laboratory research through engagement in advanced research activities and
through internships, workshops, and conferences. The participating investigators
will develop short courses for two technical workshops that will involve
fundamental and advanced research subjects. In addition, the team will organize
conferences aiming to identify additional collaborators. Finally, internship and
research rotation opportunities will be created for undergraduate students.

This project brings together expertise from optical computing, integrated
photonics, and hetero-integration to develop a novel deep-learning architecture
that is built around the fundamental physical laws of light propagation in
integrated photonic circuits. In conjunction with hetero-integration, this
architecture leads to dramatic size reduction to enable the realization of
large-scale photonic deep neural networks. The proposed architecture utilizes an
interlacing of linear and nonlinear operations and is uniquely parametrized to
facilitate integration of tens of network layers in a photonic implementation.
The thrusts of this project involve (i) developing a theoretical/computational
infrastructure for photonic deep learning; (ii) hetero-integration of
semiconductor and other optical materials, including lithium niobate, to achieve
strong and flexible nonlinear effects on a photonic chip; (iii) realizing and
optimizing ultracompact phase shifters based on phase change materials; and (iv)
design, fabrication, and experimental demonstration of all-photonic neural
networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.