* 2329431
* AF: Small: Next Steps for Weitzman’s Pandora's Box Problem in Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Bo Waggoner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Many of today's economic interactions take place on platforms: buying and
selling items, renting a ride or a room, finding jobs, and more. This project
investigates economic and algorithmic principles underlying good marketplace
design on platforms. Participants face a challenge of searching through
alternatives for the best choice, while not wasting too much time and effort on
the search. The platform should use algorithmic principles to enable them to
solve this problem of decision-making under uncertainty. Meanwhile, participants
are impacted by others' strategic choices. Some participants have conflicting
goals, such as wanting to buy the same item. Others have complementary goals,
such as an employer who wants to hire a good employee. To help the participants
achieve their goals -- finding good matches, saving money, and saving time -- a
marketplace must be designed with both good algorithmic and economic
foundations.

This project will study design of mechanisms, such as an auctions or matching
marketplaces, when there is costly hidden information about the alternatives. It
considers allocation and matching problems -- for example, matching workers to
employers -- in strategic environments. Participants are initially uncertain
about the value of the alternatives. They must expend effort or incur costs to
search and study the alternatives, discovering their preferences as they go. To
make good allocations or matches, the platform must coordinate strategic agents
to prudently spend resources to gather information. A classic algorithmic model
for such problems is called the Pandora's Box problem, which was defined by
Weitzman in 1979. This project will investigate algorithmic solutions to new
variants of the Pandora's Box problem and how to translate such solutions into
mechanisms such as auctions. The project will use game theory to study the
social welfare -- a measure of total value created for users of the system. The
social welfare balances the value generated by making good choices against the
costs expended to gather information. The goal is to design mechanisms with
approximately optimal social welfare, even when agents act strategically.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.