* 2329530
* Conference: 9th Annual HBCU Climate Education Conference
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Beverly Wright, SOUTHERN CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE INC., DEEP SOUTH CENTE
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,501.00

The Deep South Center for Environmental Justice will partner with The Bullard
Center for Environmental and Climate Justice at Texas Southern University, in
collaboration with thirty-two (32) Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and fifteen (15) community-based organizations, to host the 9th Annual
HBCU Climate Education Conference in New Orleans, Louisiana on October 11-15,
2023. The Conference addresses the significant need for climate education for
HBCU students who are largely under-represented in scholarship on climate
science but over-represented as members of communities most vulnerable to
climate impacts. The Conference is a one-of-a-kind national gathering that
brings together HBCU students and faculty, community-based organizations,
climate and environmental scientists, green business entrepreneurs, and
environmental justice advocates in sessions that explore climate science and
disproportionate climate impacts on vulnerable and marginalized communities. Now
in its ninth year, the Conference continues to serve as a call to action for
students at HBCUs to become engaged in education, research and informed
decision-making in the field of climate science.

The 9th Annual HBCU Climate Education Conference aims to bridge the gap between
theory and the experiential realities of climate impacts by bringing together
HBCU faculty and students, researchers, climate scientists, and environmental
justice and coastal community residents impacted by toxic facilities and severe
weather events. The major purpose of the Conference is four-fold: (1) introduce
HBCU students to climate science; (2) engage students with Gulf Coast
communities experiencing climate impacts; (3) engage students in the practice of
the profession through the presentation of research findings; and (4) interact
with and learn from professional experts in the field. The Conference strives to
create synergy between academia and vulnerable communities; contribute to
addressing chronic or emerging challenges related to climate impacts in coastal
regions and port cities that can be exacerbated by offshore oil and gas
operations and natural disasters; and foster the development of leadership and
communication skills, competencies in science literacy, and capabilities of
participating HBCU students.

This project is co-funded by NSF's Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership in
Diversity Program (GOLD-EN) and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to strengthen STEM
undergraduate education and research at HBCUs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.