* 2329865
* PFI-RP:  Towards Democratization of Ultrafast 3D Ultrasound Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jun Zou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to disseminate a transformative three-
dimensional (3D) ultrasound imaging technology that provides an accessible and
practical solution for comprehensive tissue examination in clinics. The
technology has the potential to address technical limitations of 2D imaging and
make ultrasound a more reliable tool for early detection, diagnosis, and
prognosis of many diseases that disproportionally impact people from low-income
and under-resourced communities. The technique also provides the research
community with new 3D imaging capabilities to probe the structure and function
of deep tissues noninvasively and holistically in vivo, facilitating new
discoveries and development of new therapies. The approach equips 2D ultrasound
imaging systems with the ability to perform 3D imaging, results in lower costs
and increased accessibility, making broad and direct impact on patient care
globally. In addition, the technology will provide a viable 3D imaging solution
for the ultraportable, pocket ultrasound devices that are becoming increasingly
popular. Since many of these devices are not used by trained sonographers, 3D
imaging is particularly useful for mitigating operator dependence. As such, the
technology becomes essential because it will conveniently enable 3D imaging for
the ultraportable at-home ultrasound market.

The proposed project presents a highly practical and cost-effective solution to
democratize ultrafast 3D ultrasound imaging because it instantly converts
existing 2D ultrafast ultrasound imaging systems into 3D-capable devices. The
technology addresses the market needs of 3D imaging by working with existing
ultrasound systems and probes, lowering financial barriers for new users,
breaking existing technical barriers of 3D ultrasound imaging, and enabling
advanced imaging modalities that are not possible with conventional techniques.
The research objective of this PFI-RP project is to conduct use-inspired
research to overcome the knowledge gaps and technical challenges of the 3D
imaging technique, making this technology ready to be transferred to the
commercial ultrasound market. The proposed project will improve various
components of devices to improve imaging quality. The proposal will also develop
automated calibration and synchronization methods to facilitate streamlined user
experience. Designated control hardware and software interface will be developed
for integration with commercial ultrasound systems. Finally, in vivo animal
imaging studies will be conducted to evaluate the imaging performance of the new
3D imaging device. Successful completion of this project will culminate in a
commercially viable 3D imaging technology that is poised for immediate
commercialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.