* 2329540
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Securing WebAssembly using Static Analysis and Binary Instrumentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Frank Tip, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 385,580.00

WebAssembly is a web technology that has rapidly been gaining in popularity. It
is a low-level bytecode format that was introduced in 2017, and was originally
designed for computationally-intensive tasks in the browser such as cryptography
and games. Today, as envisioned, WebAssembly is supported by all modern
browsers, and heavily used by applications. Recently, a number of critical
security concerns in WebAssembly binaries have been identified for which no
adequate solutions exist. This project is concerned with the development of
WASSY, a novel system and a comprehensive suite of tools for detecting and
mitigating security vulnerabilities in applications that rely on WebAssembly.
WASSY will rely on a combination of static analysis techniques, which analyze
WebAssembly binaries without executing them, to detect likely vulnerabilities,
and binary instrumentation techniques that rewrite a WebAssembly binary to
mitigate potential vulnerabilities. The developed techniques will be evaluated
on a suite of applications that rely on WebAssembly binaries and that contain
vulnerabilities. The research will benefit users of web applications by reducing
the number of vulnerabilities that can be exploited, thereby reducing the
potential for loss of data, and associated financial and legal exposure. Results
of the project will be disseminated via publications in scientific venues and
through release of open-source software and data sets. Societal benefits will
follow from improvements in web software security that is enabled by the
adoption of the developed techniques. The developed static analysis techniques
will be designed to accommodate several characteristics that are specific to
WebAssembly such as its stack-based representation, lack of names and structure,
lack of type information, and index-based access to linear memory and function
tables. A family of flow-insensitive, flow-sensitive, and context-sensitive
algorithms will be developed accordingly, using abstractions suitable to the
domain, and designed to account for interaction with JavaScript code that
executes in the host environment. The developed binary instrumentation
techniques will be designed to counteract vulnerabilities that may arise in web
applications that rely on WebAssembly binaries, such as injection
vulnerabilities and cross-site scripting vulnerabilities. To this end, binary
instrumentation will be used to implement suitable variations on classic
security concepts such as stack canaries, memory segmentation, and address space
randomization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.