* 2329630
* The Louisiana Freshwater Sponge Project: Developing an Environmental Science Undergraduate Research Pathway from Degree Entry to Workforce and Graduation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Mary Miller, Baton Rouge Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2028
* USD 860,815.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing the critical need
to provide two-year college students with opportunities to participate in early
undergraduate research activities on their own campus prior to transferring to a
four-year university. The demand for a skilled STEM workforce has only increased
over the past decade and is projected to continue in this direction for the
foreseeable future. It is therefore essential that the STEM education community
continue to develop innovative STEM pathways that increase the number of
qualified STEM graduates in the United States. Importantly, two-year colleges
are ideally positioned to play a significant role in this effort. In this
project, students from nearby minority serving high schools will be recruited to
participate in paid research opportunities throughout their two-year college
STEM experience. The project will engage two-year college students and faculty
in on-campus research activities and internships through the established
Louisiana Freshwater Sponge Project. Additionally, industry partnerships will be
leveraged to extend training to the workplace. Participants will also gain
leadership skills and participate in outreach activities that engage the
community in science activities. Ultimately, this project aims to build a
transferrable model for engaging two-year college students in research
experiences that result in increased retention and success in STEM degrees.

The overall goal of this project is to develop, implement, and assess an
environmental science research pathway at a two-year college. Three objectives
will guide implementation: 1) Create and implement a research pathway to
positively impact a diverse STEM student population; 2) Provide career training
and scientific literacy engagement activities; and 3) Promote environmental
science careers and research through community, campus, and high school outreach
activities. While many documented research experiences for two-year college
students are limited to summer programs, this project intends to build
opportunities that provide continuous research and professional development
training throughout the academic year. This will create a platform to increase
retention, workforce readiness, and/or transfer to a four-year university. Over
the life of the project, twenty-four students will participate in every step of
the pathway, while more than 100 additional students will benefit from
individual project components including job placement in externships, scientific
literacy workshops, and training at the Louisiana University Marine Consortium
Research Laboratory. The impact of the activities on both cognitive and
affective domains will be assessed in on-going collaboration with an external
evaluator. Formative and summative evaluation methods will provide the project
team with feedback at regular intervals. The results will be disseminated via
publications, presentations, and professional networks. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM
education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes
innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-
year colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.