* 2329027
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Exceptional entanglement transition and supersensitive quantum sensing empowered by anti-Hermiticity and symmetries
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jianming Wen, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 796,083.00

Non-technical Abstract: As an emerging interdisciplinary research area, Quantum
Information Science and Engineering (QISE) is poised to revolutionize computing,
communication, signal processing, networks, metrology, sensing, and more.
However, despite notable progress in this field, the decoherence of quantum
states inevitably introduces imperfections and errors in quantum operations. In
this project, the team aims to tackle this challenge by harnessing non-Hermitian
physics, along with non-Hermiticity and symmetries, to preserve and enhance
nonclassical correlations and entanglement properties in two complementary open
quantum systems with groundbreaking theoretical and experimental demonstrations.
These advancements can have exemplary applications in supersensitive quantum
sensing. Moreover, the study of these two systems unveils new insights into the
distinct characteristics of non-Hermitian quantum physics, which fundamentally
differ from classical or Hermitian physics. This project also prioritizes
student training, particularly focusing on those from underrepresented
minorities, thereby strengthening the pipeline that supplies the science and
engineering workforce in QISE. Outreach activities, such as public lectures and
high school quantum summer research internships, cater to high-school students
and the general public, thus fostering broader engagement with quantum science
and technology.

Technical Abstract: Integrated quantum photonics and superconducting circuits
are emerging as two primary contenders for various QISE tasks. However, their
quantum performance is highly susceptible to decoherence. The current mainstream
QISE research focuses on controlling and mitigating various decoherence factors
to preserve the coherence of quantum states, yet, significant challenges
persist. In this project, the team exploits the effects of anti-Hermiticity and
symmetries such as parity-time symmetry, and their induced nontrivial phase
transitions. First-of-its-kind testbeds, which link twin beams or two coupled
qubits with phase-sensitive amplification or natural dissipation, will be
developed. These testbeds enable studies on quadrature and quantum-mechanical
passive parity-time symmetries, respectively. The project emphasizes the non-
Hermitian evolution of quantum systems with nonclassical correlations and
entanglement, exploring their intricate and even counterintuitive connections
with non-Hermiticity and symmetries. Furthermore, this project explores the
potential applications of these systems in supersensitive quantum sensing. The
successful outcomes of this proposal will deepen our understanding of the
fundamental roles of gain and loss in symmetry-underlying physics and their
implications in open quantum systems. Additionally, it will provide experimental
insights into several open questions that are currently subject to focused
debate. Moreover, the exotic quantum photonic processing, based on continuous
variables and discrete variables, under quadrature and passive parity-time
symmetries, can offer elegant solutions to key challenges that are
insurmountable using existing Hermitian methodologies. While the current
experimental research is limited to demonstrating a few fundamental quantum
effects, developed systems and techniques from this groundbreaking research can
be deployed to a wide range of continuous-variables- and discretized-variables-
based QISE studies.

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.