* 2329801
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Reliable Monitoring and Predictive Modeling for Safer Future Smart Transportation Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Branko Glisic, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 29,999.00

Modern societies depend critically on their transportation infrastructure, in
particular on the networks of roads. Hence, there is a growing need for an
accurate and reliable assessment of the structural health condition of roads,
especially of their subsurface courses (layers) responsible for roadsâ€™
structural strength and performance. The approaches to addressing these needs
must be pervasive, scalable, sustainable, wireless, low-cost, low-power, high-
resolution, and deployable for long durations of time, with negligible
disturbances to the courses. Currently, existing monitoring techniques fall
short of fulfilling these requirements, in one way or another. The project seeks
to develop foundational technology that addresses this challenge.

The key enablers of the proposed technology are tiny wireless Backscatter-based,
Batteryless, Radiofrequency Sensors (BBRS), which sense the communication
channel between themselves while communicating using backscatter modulation.
BBRS measure the phase and amplitude of the communication links, which allow
discerning of various material properties, and enable simultaneous monitoring of
distances, relative displacements, strain, cracking, stiffness, humidity, and
temperature throughout continuums of subsurface courses. BBRS are powered by an
external RF signal provided by exciters installed on moving vehicles; the same
RF signal which supplies the carrier for the backscattering. Information is
carried among BBRS via multihop networking. BBRS are able to carry out some
basic data processing. The aim of this project is to generate preliminary
results to demonstrate the feasibility of multiparameter, almost-continuous
monitoring of pavement subsurface courses enabled by embeddable BBRS; protocols
that enable readout from thousands of densely dispersed embedded BBRS using
mobile exciters and receivers; and physics-informed machine learning algorithms
for evaluation of current condition and performance of monitored courses, and
for predictive modeling of their deterioration over time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.