* 2329092
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Ethics of Care and Compounded Disaster
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Adriana Garriga-Lopez, University of Puerto Rico Cayey
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 29,100.00

When a disaster strikes, health care workers spring into response, treat the
injured and aid the sick. But what happens when disasters keep happening, one
after another? How do health care workers cope with the constant demands of
disaster conditions? This project documents how health care workers responded to
disaster conditions, cared for patients, and worked to rebuild the health care
system following a major natural disaster. The research is important because
disasters and health emergencies are becoming more frequent and more severe.
Therefore, gathering data on how the health care work force responds emotionally
to prolonged crisis conditions can aid in designing more effective responses.
The broader impacts of this project include the training underrepresented
students in anthropology and broadening participation for students
underrepresented in science. Data from the project will be disseminated to
improve healthcare delivery in post-disaster conditions. This project is jointly
funded by Cultural Anthropology, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR)

This project examines whether the ethics of healthcare provisioning transform
under conditions of "compounded disaster," through an investigation of disaster
recovery in Puerto Rico, whose infrastructure was devastated by Hurricane Maria
in 2017, and was still operating under conditions of sustained emergency at the
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The central question of this research is: Did
health care workers' experiences during and after Hurricane Maria transform
their ethics of care? The ethics of care refers to the practices and self-
understanding that guide and motivate those who do the work of caring for
others. The investigators hypothesize that health care workers developed a new
ethics of care that drew upon pre-existing cultural features, but reflects a new
sense of solidarity, greater efficacy, and shared purpose forged in the
aftermath of Hurricane Maria. The investigators anticipate that this new ethics
of care has evolved or transformed through compounding disasters including
earthquake swarms and COVID-19. The research design includes data collection
through individual interviews, remote focus groups, and on-site participant
observation. The project contributes to the scientific understanding of the
underlying cultural processes through which disasters transform communities;
whether compounded disasters have a geometric or exponential impact on these
communities; and also, if the ethics of care fundamentally change under these
circumstances. This project generates theory to explain the underlying cultural
processes through which (1) disasters transform communities and (2) care workers
forge practices and self-understandings that aid in the process of disaster
recovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.