* 2329014
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Deep Learning and Signal Processing using Silicon Photonics and Digital CMOS Circuits for Ultra-Wideband Spectrum Perception
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jia Di, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 118,668.00

The radio frequency (RF) spectrum weaves the very fabric of wireless
communications. And it is among the most precious and scarcest of natural
resources. Tomorrow’s tech applications such as digital twins, smart vehicles,
and augmented reality demand Gigabit-per-second wireless connectivity everywhere
all the time. Such demands call for effective mechanisms to guarantee efficient
and secure RF spectrum access. Existing methods use simple techniques that can
detect users' presence in the spectrum but cannot sense the “who, when, and how”
of the spectrum being utilized. Nonetheless, emerging artificial intelligence
(AI) methods including but not limited to machine learning (ML) techniques are
promising for achieving “RF perception.” A thorny problem in using AI algorithms
for RF perception is the inability to process the massive sensed bandwidth of
the spectrum. To solve this problem, this project will leverage a hybrid
integration approach, where photonic and electronic small chips, or chiplets,
will be synergistically combined to facilitate AI/ML-enabled RF perception over
the entire RF spectrum. The education component of the project will address the
dearth in the US-based semiconductor workforce through a combination of training
on photonic and electronic chip design, AI/ML, and wireless technology skills.
The FuSe team will mentor women and minorities who are underrepresented, in
topics such as semiconductors, chip design, and wireless communication. Outreach
to high-school students using AI-based projects will help build a pipeline of
students to pursue engineering degrees focusing on semiconductors and computing.
A critical educational emphasis is to fast-track training of students on newer
FinFET nodes through a complete revamp of analog and digital IC design courses.
The PIs will share the developed education and training material amongst the
collaborators and make them available online.

To achieve AI-enabled spectrum sensing, this convergent FuSe project will co-
integrate a photonic integrated circuit (PIC) with mixed-signal and energy-
efficient asynchronous digital chiplets to realize real-time wideband RF
perception. The PIC front-end will allow RF spectrum processing and
channelization of over 24 GHz of bandwidth. The mixed-signal IC will interface
the PIC’s output with digital AI accelerator chiplets. The team will create
AI/ML algorithms for modulation recognition, spectrum sensing, and detection of
wireless internet-of-things (IoT) devices or specific RF hardware front-ends
using fast convolutional neural networks. PIs will employ high-level synthesis
(HLS) of speed/power-efficient RF processing cores for real-time AI/ML algorithm
implementation. These HLS prototypes will be custom optimized for minimum chip
area and power consumption and will achieve low complexity and fast throughput
using weight quantization, compressive processing, quantization-aware
retraining, signal flow graph pruning, and power/area-optimized digital
computing circuits. The team will synthesize the digital cores as asynchronous
digital chiplets. Finally, the photonics and electronic chiplets will be taped-
out and fabricated using state-of-the-art commercial foundries including the
FinFET-based CMOS process, and then packaged for testing and evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.