* 2329090
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: High-throughput Discovery of Phase Change Materials for Co-designed Electronic and Optical Computational Devices (PHACEO)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Eric Seabron, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2026
* USD 132,254.00

Non-technical Description

The demand for energy needed to store and process data is growing at an
unsustainable rate. New technologies are clearly needed. Phase change materials,
which can dramatically change their electronic, optical, and physical properties
during phase transitions, offer a promising solution. Their tunability makes
them promising candidates for emerging applications such as energy efficient in-
memory computing. This FuSe project will explore a new class of phase change
materials that combine five or more elements in comparable amounts. The field of
materials science has been captivated by the discovery of such “high entropy”
materials. For example, high entropy ceramics have unique thermal and mechanical
properties not possible with simpler compositions. In this project,
investigators will combine computational materials discovery with combinatorial
synthesis to realize high entropy phase change materials. The most promising
candidates will be characterized comprehensively and integrated into electronic
and photonic computational devices. The team will establish a robust pipeline to
educate the next-generation workforce. They will offer rotational internships so
that students can work at different universities and in cross-cutting fields and
promote their success through mentoring. The team will also create a partnership
between the University of Maryland and Howard University, an HBCU, to promote
the direct exchange of research mentorship and training.

Technical Description

The central hypothesis driving this Future of Semiconductors project is that
high-entropy phase change materials (PCMs) can form a thermodynamically stable
single phase when elements randomly occupy one type of lattice site and are
present in high concentrations rather than as dopants. This structure,
stabilized by large configurational entropy, will enable development of PCMS
with low/zero resistance drift and large bandgaps (>1.5 eV) or extinction
coefficient contrast (∆k~2-3) for optical memristors in the visible and
infrared. The proposed research comprises four thrust topics to be conducted in
a closed-loop fashion. 1) First-principles computation material discovery to
predict previously unexplored entropy-stabilized PCMs. 2) Combinatorial
synthesis via sputtering of selenides and tellurides and thermal evaporation of
sulfides in order to explore multiple compositions in a single run. 3)
Electrical, optical, structural, and compositional material characterization to
reveal the intrinsic (permittivity, structure, vibrational modes, composition,
conductivity, capacitance, etc.) and extrinsic (void formations, capping,
geometry, substrates) factors dictating device performance. 4) Integration of
PCMs into photonic and electronic devices to demonstrate optical and electrical
memristors and memcapacitors with optimal performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.