* 2329297
* The Origin and Structure of the Monsoon Onset Vortex
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Anantha Aiyyer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2026
* USD 587,816.00

Two events over the Arabian Sea are clear precursors to the Indian summer
monsoon: the formation of a "mini warm pool" of heightened sea surface
temperatures (SSTs), and the extension of the low-level Somali jet across the
Sea from the East African coast to the west coast of India. The jet brings
moisture evaporated from the warm Arabian SSTs to coastal India triggering the
monsoon, and in many years monsoon onset is accompanied by a cyclonic vortex
known as the Monsoon Onset Vortex (MOV). The MOV is of interest not only for its
association with monsoon onset but also because it can evolve into a typhoon and
cause extensive damage on landfall.

Work under this award seeks to understand the formation of the MOV, taking into
account the influence of the mini warm pool and the influence of the Somali jet.
The former encourages deep convection which in turn can promote vortex formation
at mid-tropospheric levels, while the latter can generate a vortex through
barotropic instability at the lower-tropospheric level where the jet is found.
The goal of the work is to understand how these two mechanisms combine to create
an MOV. The work involves analysis of data from satellite missions and
reanalysis datasets along with simulations generated with both simple idealized
models and the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model. The project also
includes a stability analysis of the Somali jet, taking into account both its
latitudinal shear and its time variation.

The work is of societal as well as scientific interest given the connection of
the MOV with monsoon onset and its tendency to generate powerful landfalling
typhoons. The project also provides support and training to two graduate
students and two undergraduates. In addition, the PI serves as a mentor to high
school students and contributes to the summer research program of the NC School
of Science and Math.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.