* 2329282
* CAREER: The phenotypic spectrum: Quantifying new patterns of architecture variation in crop roots
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Alexander Bucksch, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 761,500.00

Plant roots are remarkably diverse in size and shape. It is not fully understood
how the diversity in root architecture contributes to crop yields or plant
biomass in part because roots are buried underground and difficult to study.
This research takes a quantitative approach to analyze the wide diversity of
root architectures. Bean roots grown under experimental conditions will be
imaged and the resulting data will be used to create new mathematical and
computational tools to discern causes of root variability. Combined with genomic
information, the analytical tools will identify genetic elements underlying root
shapes in response to environmental and genetic variation. The research will
point to new opportunities for breeding targets in crops such as bean and
extended to maize. The research also couples with an education program that
integrates computation with plant research, thus addressing the critical
national need for a computationally trained plant science workforce. The novel
tools will be publicly available and deployed using national
cyberinfrastructure: further the technologies will be integrated into two
courses that enable basic science and computational biology within an
experiential learning environment. A new student award is implemented through
the Plant Center and the Georgia Informatics Institute to highlight advances
attained by working at the computational and plant science interface. Together,
the integration of science and education sets forth a path for fast
dissemination of results into breeding programs.

After decades of research on plant roots it is still a mystery how and why root
architecture arises in seemingly endless variations of shapes. The research
introduces the phenotypic spectrum as a new quantitative theory that extends the
established concept of plasticity by a new dimension. The phenotypic spectrum of
one genotype consists of distinct root architecture types, each of which is
hypothesized to be associated with a different plasticity curve across
environments. Theoretically, the phenotypic spectrum emerges for a population of
one genotype if all elementary geometric measurements at all locations within
each individual root system are taken and each individual is summarized by a
whole root descriptor. Descriptors with similar characteristics correspond to
one architecture type. Hence, the spectrum is not observable with current
phenotyping tools that capture only one location in a root system per trait.
Quantifying the phenotypic spectrum demands the development of unprecedented
whole root descriptors and simulation techniques to capture the differences in
the 3D spatial organization of the whole root architecture. In doing so, a new
combination of differential geometry and imaging approaches as well as a newly
developed statistical analysis is proposed. The experiments will provide an
understanding of how to describe and evaluate the interplay of different root
architecture types in the greenhouse and the field by linking both with the
developed descriptors. The educational goal is to increase the number of
researchers at the interface of computational and plant sciences through two
courses using the developed tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.