* 2329987
* Planning: Positive Mental Health in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Nocerino, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,657.00

Geoscientists at all education and career levels experience mental health
challenges, and are frequently isolated during fieldwork, in the laboratory, and
in learning environments. COVID and the use of virtual lessons and meetings
removed geoscientists from their support networks and normal daily structure,
leading to negative impacts on the wellbeing of the community. The intersection
of mental health and the geosciences is a relatively unexplored area of study.
This planning effort will support a gathering of social scientists and
geoscientists, who will engage in a dialogue and review materials created over a
two-year time period, which will result in new knowledge about mental health in
situations specific to the geosciences and will situate these within the broader
STEM mental health context, and within the context of structural racism and
other bias. By directly addressing both how to change institutional cultures
around mental health and how to support geoscientistsâ€™ mental health resilience,
the proposed work is intended to contribute to retention, improved wellbeing,
and professional development for a wide variety of groups, including those who
have been historically excluded from the geosciences. These outcomes could
ultimately lead to a stronger geoscience workforce that appropriately represents
the communities most affected by climate change and environmental injustice.

The current interdisciplinary approach involves social scientists, experts
interested in improving educational and workplace culture in the geosciences,
and participants whose expertise may come primarily from lived experience. To
create an initial community around mental health, a one-day in-person convening
will be supported to gather experts from psychology and geology to share
evidence-based approaches and lived experiences, discover community needs, and
create a foundation for addressing mental health in the geosciences in a
comprehensive way. This planning effort will be organized by the Geological
Society of America (GSA) and facilitated by the Science Education Resource
Center (SERC). Outcomes will be used to develop resources that will be widely
disseminated through publications, presentations, and professional development
activities for the cohort of participants. Through these efforts, the project
seeks to create change agents in order to orient the geoscience community toward
a coordinated proposal to develop a comprehensive program of mental health
support and training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.