* 2329097
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: NC A&amp;T QISE Research Workforce Development Programs
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Troy Van Voorhis, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,835,496.00

Non-Technical Description: Solutions to numerous complex scientific problems are
directly related to the availability of suitable computational capabilities –
speed and accuracy and sophistication. We are rapidly approaching the upper
limits of classical supercomputers capabilities, hence the need to design new
computer systems that will contribute to the solution of complex challenges. The
advent of quantum computer systems promises to bring about revolutionary changes
to all human endeavors – with immediate interest in application of quantum
computing, quantum sensing, quantum chemistry, and quantum biology. This coming
quantum revolution is strongly dependent on having a skilled quantum information
science & engineering (QISE) workforce capable of taking the novel ideas to
breakthrough quantum-based products in the marketplace. North Carolina A&T State
University (NC A&T) is the largest public Historically Black College and
University (HBCU) and a leading producer of African American undergraduate
physical sciences and engineering degrees. NC A&T’s faculty and students have
embarked on a comprehensive QISE workforce development programs which leverages
its institutional academic strengths and long-term strategic plan to enable
highly productive partnerships with key industrial stakeholders and academic
experts. This strategic partnership will catalyze cutting-edge QISE research,
enhance nascent QISE academic programs, and expand the engagement of African
American and women in the QISE workforce.

Technical Description: The utilization of Noisy, Intermediate-Scale Quantum
(NISQ) devices to solve challenging scientific problems has been hampered by the
low coherence in massively entangled quantum systems. Hence, investigators have
developed a variety of strategies to minimize the limitations and maximize the
strengths of current NISQ computers. Our team will employ several variational
quantum algorithm techniques to enable the exploitation of the computational
advantages of NISQ computers in the areas of hypersonic flow and the design of
novel 2D quantum materials. The team consists of academic institutions (NC A&T,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Ohio State University, and the
University of the West Indies), a national laboratory (Brookhaven National
Laboratory), a private research organization (Universities Space Research
Association), and a leading quantum computing service provider (qBraid). The
ExpandQISE: Track 2: NC A&T QISE Research Workforce Development Programs
consists of: Core Research Projects (Quantum algorithms for computational fluid
dynamics of nonlinear flows; quantum computational chemistry for the design and
fabrication of novel semiconductor and quantum materials), a Development Project
(construction and operation of a programmable quantum computer); and the design
and implementation of QISE education research and workforce development projects
(QISE Undergraduate Scholars Program; QISE Short Course Series).

This project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.