* 2329957
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Higher-Order Concentric Gravity Waves in the Northern Winter Thermosphere and Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2024,10/31/2026
* Sharon Vadas, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 719,982.00

This award will determine how the breaking of mountain waves affects space
weather approximately 100-200 miles above the Earth’s surface. Mountain waves
are created from the wind flowing over mountains. Mountain waves break and
overturn when they get high enough above the mountains, similar to an ocean wave
breaking on a beach. This process generates turbulence and large-scale waves
which travel to higher heights above Earth. At 100-200 miles above the Earth’s
surface, the neutral molecules in the waves collide with ions, which creates
waves in the plasma called traveling ionospheric disturbances (TIDs). Some of
these TIDs look like circular rings on maps of the total electron content from
GPS receivers. TIDs can cause storms in the space weather that make it difficult
to communicate with the satellites that orbit Earth. Understanding how energy
and momentum are transferred through atmospheric regions via several gravity
wave generation and dissipation cycles including secondary and tertiary gravity
wave processes (multi-step vertical coupling processes) is important. This
project includes 2 undergraduate students during the summertime for the 3-year
duration of this grant. This research will therefore further the development and
education of a globally competitive STEM workforce and will promote the progress
of science. The team will share GPS/TEC signal processing routines which will
benefit the community.

The main objectives of this research are to determine 1) the gravity wave (GW)
characteristics and sources of concentric traveling ionospheric disturbances
over the quiettime winter continental United States (CONUS) and Europe through
detailed observational studies, and 2) the “multi-step vertical coupling” (MSVC)
processes which create higher-order GWs in the thermosphere from orographic
forcing over the winter CONUS and Europe through detailed modeling studies.
Because GPS/TEC observations are dense over the CONUS and Europe, these
locations provide ideal locations to study these concentric TIDs. The team will
identify and analyze concentric TID events observed by GPS/TEC during quiettime
December-February for 5 winters during 2012-2023, and will simulate and analyze
6-9 one-week mountain wave (MW) events with the GW-resolving HIgh Altitude
Mechanistic general Circulation Model (HIAMCM). They will address SQ1: What are
the GW characteristics, locations, occurrence rates, and sources of the
quiettime concentric TIDs observed by GPS over the winter CONUS and Europe? and
SQ2: What are the simulated coupling processes by which orographic forcing over
the CONUS and Europe creates higher-order concentric GWs in the thermosphere,
and what are the large-scale changes that result in the thermosphere? The
methodology includes HIAMCM, a ray trace model (the Model for gravity wavE
SOurce, Ray trAcing and reConstruction (MESORAC)), and publicly-available
NRLMSISE-00 and HWM14 models, MERRA-2 reanalysis data, GOES and EUMETSAT
satellite data and GPS/TEC data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.