* 2329385
* NSFGEO-NERC: C-Streams: The Gulf Stream control of the North Atlantic carbon sink
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Lisa Beal, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,001.00

The ocean takes up about one-quarter of the carbon dioxide (CO2) emitted by
humans each year, slowing climate change. The North Atlantic Ocean is
disproportionately important for anthropogenic carbon uptake. The North Atlantic
also hosts a strong “natural” carbon cycle driven by both biological and
physical processes. A team of scientists from the US and UK will address a
fundamental knowledge gap as to how the oceanic carbon sink will evolve in the
future, by focusing on the mechanisms controlling the North Atlantic carbon sink
– particularly the effect of ocean circulation. This is a project jointly funded
by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and
the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via
the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint
US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose
investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint
determination of an award recommendation, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget that supports scientists at institutions in their respective
countries. In addition to the US/UK collaboration, the project includes a
partnership with The Island School in the Bahamas, substantial public outreach,
and support for an early career postdoctoral researcher.

The prevailing view of the North Atlantic’s role in carbon uptake is that it is
controlled by surface fluxes, such that strengthening stratification will reduce
future uptake. The project team hypothesize that the transport of nutrients and
low-carbon waters by the Gulf Stream will also influence future carbon uptake
over the North Atlantic. The Gulf Stream injects old nutrient rich and
anthropogenic carbon-poor waters into the North Atlantic, driving some of the
highest rates of CO2 uptake seen anywhere in the ocean and shaping patterns of
CO2 uptake across much of the subpolar and subtropical gyres. The project
objectives are to: (1) Quantify and understand the source waters that feed the
Gulf Stream at Florida Straits;(2) Measure and model the processes that modify
the nutrients and carbon carried by the Gulf Stream as it enters the North
Atlantic; (3) Understand how the Gulf Stream affects North Atlantic carbon
uptake now and into the future; (4) Disseminate this new understanding to those
steering future measurements of oceanic CO2 uptake and managing our response to
climate change. Specific outcomes from the project will include: (1) A two-year
time series of daily physical, biogeochemical, and velocity fields across the
Florida Straits, characterizing the source-point variability of Gulf Stream
properties; (2) A two-year time series of dynamical and biogeochemical
transports of the Gulf Stream and their southern hemisphere and recirculating
components. Characterisation of the variability of these transports and how they
relate to the basin-wide circulation; (3) Synthesis of the new observations with
long-term in situ and satellite observations and with targeted model experiments
to build an understanding of how Gulf Stream nutrient and low-carbon transports
vary in relation to near-field and far-field oceanic and wind conditions and to
infer how they may be changing over multi-decadal time scales.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.