* 2329776
* EAGER: Characterizing the intrinsic memorability of voices
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Wilma Bainbridge, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 08/31/2024
* USD 203,995.00

Voices are one of the primary ways in which we communicate, and they convey
important information about the speaker, such as their thoughts and emotions.
However, not all voices are created equal—some intuitively stick in our memories
better than others. In the visual domain, previous research has found that
despite all of our distinctive personal experiences, people tend to generally
remember and forget the same faces, and so people’s visual memories are
predictable to an extent. It is not yet known if the same is true for
voices—whether voices have an intrinsic “memorability” that makes us universally
remember some better than others. This project examines these open questions.
Understanding what makes a voice easy to remember has resounding real-world
applications. From designing learning materials, to creating voice assistants,
understanding what makes a voice more memorable may be able to improve learning,
memory and attention. By understanding what influences memory for voices, we
also advance scientific knowledge about memory more broadly. For example, this
research sheds light on whether or not there are similar principles across both
vision and audition that determine what types of memories are preserved and
discarded by our brains.

Towards this goal, this project consists of three experiments to take place over
a 15-month period. First, we test thousands of people’s memories for 630 diverse
voices saying the same sentence, determining which voices emerge as the most
memorable and forgettable, and if there are similarities across listeners in
terms of what they remember. Second, we examine whether there are voices that
are memorable or forgettable regardless of what they are saying. Third, we
determine the features that make a voice memorable. Computational tools, that
take in a voice recording and predict the chance someone will remember that
voice, are being generated and made publicly available, and findings are being
incorporated into an undergraduate textbook on Big Data in the Psychological
Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.