* 2329940
* Semiconductor-based Terahertz Traveling Wave Amplifiers for Monolithic Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mathias Schubert, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 379,921.00

Monolithic integration of terahertz (THz) amplifiers can pave way to
miniaturization and mobility of many terahertz systems. In this project PIs
propose a new configuration of terahertz amplifiers which can use traveling-wave
phenomenology to provide terahertz gain in semiconductor media. Traveling wave
gain occurs due to a synchronous interaction between moving charged particles
and electromagnetic waves in its vicinity. Classically, this phenomenology has
provided amplification of electromagnetic waves in a large array of vacuum
electron devices (e. g. vacuum-electronics based travelling wave amplifier).
Notably, translation of this phenomenon into semiconductor media and its scaling
to sub-millimeter dimensions is highly desirable. This is because of the
possibility of obtaining similar gains and a high output power within microwave
monolithic integrated circuits (MMICs). This proposal will address new computing
algorithms, material optimizations and device configuration innovations to
create high gain amplifier topologies in 0.1 to 3 THz range based on electron-
wave dynamics in semiconductor materials. This project aims at (1) introducing
efficient numerical modeling tools to unveil the underlying complex
phenomenology of electron-wave interactions in semiconductor materials and (2)
investigating and validating the device concepts that exploit a synchronous
electron-wave interaction for a THz wave amplification. Overall, the project
will broadly impact the medical, security, and wireless-communication areas, and
benefit the national infrastructure of security and defense resiliency through
its impact on wireless communication and imaging technology. The project further
supports workforce development through training and education of one graduate
student and three undergraduate students via the summer internship program. The
research outcomes as well as new scientific knowledge created from this proposal
will be tied to the curriculum development by the PIs at UNL.

The specific scientific innovations of the project will be focused on
advancements of multiphysics, multiscale numerical solvers, material and device-
configuration innovations, and experimental validation of the amplifier through
fabrication and measurements. To reach an optimized device PIs exploit naturally
confined 2D electron gas in high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) and in
other confined electron-gas systems for creating a gain media for terahertz
electromagnetic waves. This is achieved by augmentation of slow-wave structures
near 2D confined media to provide electron-wave interactions and amplification
of THz waves. To model this problem, the project will first address the low
computational efficiency and accuracy of current multiscale multiphysics global
models. Project will specifically introduce time-domain numerical solvers that
are based on multi-domain use of unconditional stability for gaining time-
advantage and iterative corrections to maintain the accuracy. PIs will adapt
Alternate Directional Implicit (ADI) and iterative ADI algorithm for their
integration into multiphysics finite different time domain method to provide up
to an order more efficient numerical solver. Secondly, the project will use the
proposed solvers towards developing behavioral models, material, and geometry
optimizations, and thus provide first estimates of power, gain, and bandwidth
through these studies. Numerical studies will be used to optimize the devices
for fabrication and measurements. In this context, the study will expansively
investigate electromagnetic slow-wave structures, numerically model classical
and new emerging material systems, and provide novel adaptation of the device
concepts such as by using 2DEG-bilayer and superlattice. To validate the device
concept, cold-tests are proposed in Ka-band, and device prototyping and
measurements are proposed in W-band.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.