* 2329874
* EAGER: Quantum Teaching and Learning in Elementary Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jessica Rosenberg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,769.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding K-12 quantum
education research into the elementary grades, investigating how elementary
teachers and students learn quantum science concepts. As quantum technologies
emerge, the resulting changes in numerous STEM fields will lead to an increasing
need for quantum workforce development. Quantum education research at the K-12
level has been limited and has largely focused on high school students and
teachers, yet most students have decided if STEM is for them long before high
school. Elementary students are still developing their interests and beliefs
about who they can become. To diversify the future quantum workforce in this
fast-changing field, students must be introduced to quantum in the elementary
grades. This two-year project will engage 10 elementary teachers and over 400
elementary students in quantum learning experiences, with an increasing impact
in the years following the project.

This project will study learning associated with elementary teachers' engagement
in professional learning and elementary students' learning related to quantum
science, quantum thinking, and careers. The knowledge base required for
elementary teachers and students to learn quantum will be identified in order to
explore and compare how elementary students and teachers conceptualize and make
sense of quantum science concepts. The project will also examine how elementary
teachers adapt, develop, and implement quantum curricular materials for use in
their classrooms. This study will serve as a first effort to understand how
teachers develop their knowledge and conceptualization of quantum ideas and
pedagogy for the elementary classroom. By opening the door to research on
quantum education at the elementary level, this project will create
opportunities for diverse learners to engage and get excited about this upcoming
area of future opportunities. The goals of this project are to (a) engage
elementary teachers in quantum learning experiences, and (b) develop elementary
quantum curricular materials. This project is co-funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 (DRK-12) program, which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.