* 2329578
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE Secure Development Conference (SecDev)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Weihang Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2024
* USD 18,000.00

This project supports student attendance at the 2023 IEEE Cyber Security
Development (SecDev) conference to be held in Atlanta in October 2023. Research
on software security usually focuses on detecting vulnerabilities in software
and attacks on resources. However, there is little attention to how programmers
can develop secure software from the ground up. This conference series on Secure
Development (SecDev) focuses on this important area. The 2023 IEEE SecDev
Conference aims to continue its mission of providing a forum where researchers,
practitioners, and decision-makers can meet to discuss ideas that focus on
building-in security into our systems. The support for the conference is
important for educating and training the workforce in this area and helping
provide a pathway to research careers. The technical advances presented by the
conference are critical to the development of secure software, which is
important to society.

SecDev encourages students to consider big ideas that lead to a stimulating,
thoughtful, and perhaps (gently) provocative discussion. This project sponsors
travel expenses for students to attend the conference. Participation in the
conference provides students with opportunities to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field, consequently
exerting a positive impact on the quality of their research. The training and
development of students in this way also help widen the talent pool of
professionals and researchers focused on addressing the challenges of developing
critical secure systems and services, leading to potential new areas of inquiry
in this domain. This project also broadens the participation in the conference
of underrepresented students in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.