* 2329738
* I-Corps:  Web-based Platform for Real-time Crime Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Minxuan Lan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a web-based crime mapping platform to support crime display and
analysis. The proposed technology may be used to promote public awareness and
give people a reliable source for potential risks at locations they plan to
visit. The goal is to reduce vulnerability and risks of being victimized. In
addition, the proposed technology may equip law enforcement professionals with
theory-based crime analysis and evidence-based quantitative/qualitative analyses
and may be expanded to reduce gun violence and drug-related crime. Currently,
several websites and cellphone apps provide historical or near real-time crime
information. However, none of these products perform crime pattern analysis or
crime prediction. Rather, they only show basic information about specific
incidents. Additionally, some of these products rely on voluntary reports from
users, but such information may not be consistent. The proposed technology
collects and analyzes verified information from creditable resources and
provides practical analyses.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of web-based platform to
display the distribution of crime incidents for the public and perform theory-
based crime analyses for police officers. Crime statistics are usually raw or
aggregated numbers, while the proposed platform may receive live feeds from law
enforcement agencies, newspapers, media, and trustworthy sources. Crime
incidents (including the location, time, offense type, and other information)
will be geocoded and plotted on live maps in real-time for the public to search,
review, and query. In addition, the proposed technology is designed to provide
advanced analyses (e.g., spatial pattern, temporal pattern, hot spot, histogram,
and charts) for law enforcement officers to help them analyze crime and keep
communities safe. Law enforcement professionals and designated users may access
results of theory-based crime analysis including but not limited to hot spot
analysis, space-time cube analysis, temporal pattern detection, and risky
facility detection. Also, this platform may be used to generate intuitive
reports for users based on their specific needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.