* 2329538
* PROMISE: Postdoctoral Research Opportunities and Mentoring for Inclusive STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* David Boyer, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,249,729.00

The PROMISE program will support three postdoctoral fellows focused on equity
and social justice in all aspects of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) education research, practice, and policy at the higher
education level. PROMISE Fellows will tap into ongoing research, structures and
projects in the Department of Engineering and Science Education (ESED) at
Clemson University, as well as other campus- and state-wide resources. They will
be mentored by ESED faculty and experts in STEM communication. Through program
activities, PROMISE Fellows will build their identity as inclusive STEM
educators and incorporate social justice into their own areas of interest and
expertise. This project is designed to contribute to STEM education by providing
insights to policy-makers on issues of equity and social justice in STEM
education at regional, state and federal levels and by preparing the next
generation of STEM educators and mentors to emerging scholars from diverse
populations.

PROMISE will leverage existing projects and national networks of STEM education
researchers and policy makers to enable Fellows to connect fundamental and
applied research in the context of social justice in STEM education. PROMISE
will employ a cognitive apprenticeship approach to provide the content and
applied practice, and will draw on Black Feminist Thought to provide a mentoring
structure necessary for Fellows to build robust research portfolios. Mentored
teaching experiences for those seeking to expand their teaching portfolio will
include classroom observations, instruction, and guidance on implementing
inclusive and innovative pedagogical methods. Opportunities to advance knowledge
and policy in STEM education include workshops and symposia on research methods,
social justice, STEM education policy, and STEM communication, culminating with
the Fellows writing a grant proposal to fund and conduct a STEM Education Policy
Summit in Columbia South Carolina. PROMISE Fellows will present their research
and discuss STEM education policy and action with lawmakers, policy advocates
and community stakeholders. PROMISE Fellows will acquire expertise in education
research methods, contribute to the research literature, and participate in
scholarly and policy-related communities.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Program (STEM Ed PRF) in partnership with the EDU Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research Program (ECR: BCSER) and the EDU Core
Research (ECR) Program. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The
ECR:BCSER Program is designed to build investigators’ capacity to carry out
high-quality STEM education research. The ECR Program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.