* 2329473
* STEM Education Organizational Postdoctoral Research Fellowships: Collaborative Research in Informal STEM Learning Environments
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,245,879.00

The New York Hall of Science (NYSCI), will recruit and support two postdoctoral
fellows, who will spend 24 months conducting research in residence with NYSCI’s
diverse staff, audiences, and local community. This fellowship program is
designed to support the postdoctoral researchers as they develop and pursue
independent lines of research on equitable and inclusive informal STEM learning
experiences. Research training will emphasize practices for conducting research
with culturally and linguistically diverse audiences and collaborative research
methods that directly engage STEM practitioners and/or community members in the
research process. Fellows will be mentored by both research professionals and
informal STEM practitioners, including educators and program developers, exhibit
designers, museum facilitators, and curriculum developers. Through mentoring and
peer-to-peer collaborative relationships, postdoctoral fellows will have rich
opportunities to generate new knowledge about effective, inclusive practices in
STEM education, as well as to develop the skills needed to build and sustain
productive, mutually beneficial partnerships with practitioners in informal STEM
learning environments. Postdoctoral fellows will leave the fellowship equipped
with strategies for conducting culturally responsive and practice-relevant
research that they can apply to future careers.

Advancing knowledge about how to support STEM learning for diverse audiences and
in diverse contexts depends upon researchers’ methodological and theoretical
expertise and on their ability to work competently and collaboratively with
diverse stakeholders within informal STEM environments. Mastering both sets of
competencies is critical to enabling early career researchers to become leaders
in field-wide efforts to produce more practice-relevant and accessible forms of
research. Within complex, real-world settings, the practice-based knowledge of
educators, designers, and facilitators, as well as the lived experiences of
community members, are integral to the success of educational environments and
interventions. Training in research approaches that honor diverse perspectives
and ways of knowing — across cultures, disciplines, and roles within educational
institutions — can support early career researchers in developing lines of
research that address issues of equity in STEM learning in responsive and
impactful ways. Postdoctoral scholars will be invited to locate their existing
research interests relative to two broad areas: STEM learning in informal
learning environments, and broadening participation in informal STEM learning.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) Program. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the
research knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM
education, education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to
engage in fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the
field. The AISL Program, supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and
practice that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in
STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.