* 2329852
* PFI: TT: An Intelligent Homecare System to Assist Older Adults Who Age in Place
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Alex Bishop, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 277,710.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is that the proposed Intelligent
Homecare System (IHS) will allow home-bound older adults to remain safe and
healthy within their own homes, therefore benefiting the growing elderly
population in the United States. If the PFI project is successful, the IHS is
expected to offer the following functions. First, by monitoring older adultsâ€™
well-being in terms of activities of daily living (ADLs), physical and
subjective well-being, and emergency situations, the IHS will promote older
adults' health, safety and independence. Second, by better connecting older
adults with their caregivers and better managing their daily life, the IHS will
help bring peace of mind and reduce the cost of healthcare to family members.
Third, with a better tool for home healthcare, formal caregivers can enjoy
improved productivity, reduced cost of operation and increased revenue. This
research will also improve the educational environment at Oklahoma State
University in disciplines such as artificial intelligence (AI), robotics,
embedded computing, and machine learning, as well as in non-STEM disciplines
such as gerontology and entrepreneurship.

This proposed project aims to develop a prototype of the IHS and prepare it for
commercialization. The research addresses the challenges in deploying the IHS
for real world applications. The major research tasks are: 1) designing a
prototype of IHS and a wearable device; 2) developing a collaborative and
multimodal activity recognition algorithm; 3) developing the IHS functions for
well-being monitoring, intervention, and communication; 4) developing the IHS
capabilities to overcome the psychosocial barriers associated with advanced
ages. The novelties of the proposed work include: 1) The IHS leverages its
sensing capability and local AI to understand the daily activities of older
adults, which provides the basis for health monitoring, intervention, and
communication with caregivers. 2) The IHS assesses the physical and subjective
well-being of older adults through anomaly detection and clinical interview. 3)
The IHS proactively engages the at-risk older adults to deliver timely
interventions through health coaching and daily life management. 4) The IHS
offers AI-assisted intelligent messaging and telehealth to connect the older
adults with caregivers, therefore promoting the socioemotional well-being of
older adults. 5) The IHS overcomes the psychosocial barriers by developing
technologies for age-friendly human machine interface (HMI), learning and
adaptation, and privacy protection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.