* 2329619
* EAGER: Identifying Drivers of Political Action amid Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Chloe Kessler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 136,096.00

The widespread recognition of the human role in environmental change inspires
political action of all kinds, including extremist movements. This project
considers environmental extremists who propose that revolutionary action will
ease environmental pressures. While serious investigations of extremism to date
have much to teach about these groups’ means, scholars know less about the
utopic visions that fuel their resolve and growth. The stakes of this omission
are high: both scholarly and policy efforts to address extremism will be
hamstrung without a grasp on these groups’ driving aspirations. This study works
toward such an understanding. It also builds capacity among qualitative social
scientists to continue this research, by supporting students’ training in
methods of scientific collection and analysis. Scientific results will be
communicated to the public, as well as policy stakeholders interested in the
drivers and development of environmental extremism.

This early concept grant for exploratory research (EAGER) project involves
extensive work among extremist environmental groups online. Such research is
valuable in its own right, given the vital role of online organizing for
extremist groups, but is also a crucial step toward securing the in-person
access needed to conduct emplaced fieldwork among the same. Through archival
research, media analysis, online observation, and interviews with extremist
actors, researchers ask: What kinds of environmental futures do these groups
seek and what are their historic precedents? Do these desired futures motivate
action in the present and, if so, what kinds of action? And what role, if any,
do extremists hold for violence in the path toward these futures’ realization?
Methods include text analysis of online archival resources; passive online
observation and discourse analysis; online participant observation and
interviews; and a pilot in-person study to test the feasibility of a larger
study. Findings will contribute to a more capacious understanding of
environmental activism, while also providing insight into the affirmative
visions that lend extremism its weight.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.