* 2329783
* PFI-TT:  A Smart Bipolar Surgical Device for Electrosurgery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Wei Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2025
* USD 252,479.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to advance surgical technology by
introducing sensing, detection, monitoring, and artificial intelligence in
surgical tools to reduce risk, improve patient outcome, and create economic
opportunities for the U.S. manufacturing industry. Specifically, the proposed
project will develop a smart surgical device for electrosurgery that is a widely
used for hemostasis in many major surgical procedures. Despite its advantages
for fast operation, shorter recovery time, and suitability for minimal invasive
operations, the electrosurgery technology suffers from major challenges such as
tissue sticking, charring, surgical smoke generation, peripheral thermal damage,
and seal failure that could lead to life-threatening rebleeding. The proposed
smart electrosurgical technology will help eliminate rebleeding, ensure a
healthy working environment, and save hospitals hundreds of millions of dollars
annually. The proposed project will facilitate partnership among academic
researchers, device designers, manufacturers, commercialization experts, and end
users. It will provide real-world training opportunities, both technical and
entrepreneurial, to students of diverse backgrounds and promote the startup of
companies for job creation.

The proposed project will develop an innovative acoustic sensing and monitoring
method to predict the formation of reliable blood vessel seals, providing
quality assurance in electrosurgical procedures. Existing methods to mitigate
the risk associated with electrosurgeries include applying non-sticking coating
to the electrodes, adding cooling channels to the electrical forceps, and
automatically terminating the electrical power based on the tissue impedance
change. However, these methods are either cumbersome or unreliable due to the
variability of tissue properties. The innovative acoustic sensing technology
proposed in this project captures the fundamental physical phenomenon of the
electrosurgical process and is not affected by the tissue variability. The
proposed research will develop scientific understanding of the relationship
between tissue heating and the acoustic signal, use machine learning to predict
the size of the heat affected zone (HAZ), and develop a smart electrosurgical
device for demonstration. The proposed research will also explore the
feasibility of developing a graphene-based acoustic sensor to be integrated with
the smart surgical device such that the signal quality can be significantly
enhanced.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.