* 2329682
* I-Corps: Smart Textile Charging Platform for Wearable and Portable Devices
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Shubhendu Bhardwaj, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 21,884.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
wearable device market. The customer discovery process will provide critical
data to determine the wireless charging needs for medical professionals,
patients, nurses, first responders, and other users who may use wearable
devices. The wearable market is expected to be $58B by 2022. Specifically, the
technology will impact patients and the most marginalized groups such as the
elderly and infants by providng wireless charging to their body-worn devices. It
will also allow military/defense personnel to stay on duty while their body-worn
communication devices and tactical gear are continuously charged.

This I-Corps project will advance an innovative wearable technology approach
combining textile-based radio-frequency (RF) modules and antennas for power
harvesting. Implementation into a smart charging platform provides power
transmission via novel antenna topology and power management circuitry suitable
for the charging needs of wearable, medical, and Internet of Things (IoT)
devices. The proposed anchor-shaped antenna allows misalignment-resilient power
transfer for body wearable charging solutions. Combination of the anchor antenna
and high efficiency rectifier circuit provides a seamless power collection and
transmission method integrated into the upholstery of surfaces (e.g. chair,
couch, bedding). This system will charge gadgets, medical, or military equipment
and enable communication while charging through daily life activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.