* 2329579
* Postdoctoral Fellows as Leaders in Next-Generation Computer Science Education Research-Practice Partnerships Serving Minoritized Communities
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elsa Villa, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 918,169.00

This post-doctoral training fellowship project addresses two broad issues: (1)
Hispanic/Latinx students are underrepresented in the computing industry; and (2)
computer science (CS) education has yet to find a way to connect and draw from
the experience of Hispanic/Latinx students to design better educational
processes and learning experiences within their communities to encourage them to
study computer science. CS education is a nascent field compared to other STEM
education fields. To better understand the complex issues of introducing CS to
minoritized and marginalized communities, the field needs an intellectually
diverse set of researchers who are passionate for the topic and can conduct more
research and identify opportunities for engaging communities in CS education.
This project builds capacity in CS education by engaging a new cohort of post-
doctoral fellows who are positioned to advance the field of CS education
research and ultimately increase the number of computer science graduates to
bolster the US economy.

The postdoctoral training grant will strengthen the capacity (i.e., knowledge,
skills, practices) of recent doctoral graduates to engage in research at the
intersection of CS and other STEM disciplines in predominantly Hispanic-serving
K-12 environments. Computer science education research projects will be
structured around (a) learning of CS, (b) teaching of CS, and (c) CS policy in
K-12. The research and training plan is based on a model of co-generative
mentorship and provides comprehensive professional development and mentorship
opportunities to participating postdoctoral fellows who will be embedded in
existing research projects and supported to design and execute their own
independent research projects. Situated at The University of Texas at El Paso
(UTEP), one of the largest producers of Hispanic computer scientists in the
country, this organizational postdoctoral fellowship program will be closely
aligned with the endowed Hopper-Dean Center of Excellence for K-12 Computer
Science Education in the UTEP College of Education and the NSF-funded and UTEP-
led Computing Alliance of Hispanic Serving Institutions [CAHSI], an Eddie
Bernice Johnson INCLUDES national alliance. The project has potential to make
significant contributions to the field by providing advanced training and
professional development opportunities to postdoctoral researchers. The project
has further potential to enhance the research skills of postdoctoral researchers
and prepare them for successful careers as researchers, policy influencers, and
educators in computer science education, especially in Hispanic-serving K-12
environments.

This project is supported by NSFâ€™s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Racial Equity in STEM
Education Program (EDU Racial Equity) and the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program. The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills,
and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and
related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and
applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The EDU Racial Equity
Program supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and
workforce development through research and practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.