* 2329497
* The RISE Postdoctoral Training Program in Mathematics Education: Inclusive STEM Education rooted in an Integrative Theory of Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Percival Matthews, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,249,913.00

The RISE Postdoctoral Training Program will train a cohort of postdoctoral
scholars in STEM Education research using a framework based on the RISE
principles (Nasir et al., 2021). The RISE principles hold that learning is:
Rooted in basic biological and cognitive processes; Integrated with
socioemotional and identity development; Situated in and shaped by social and
cultural contexts; and Experienced as embodied and socially coordinated. Guided
by these principles, the research and education training plan features five key
components: (1) individualized mentorship; (2) research apprenticeships with
existing projects that address one or more of the RISE principles; (3) support
for independent research according to fellows’ interests and guided by their
primary and secondary mentors; (4) interdisciplinary training; and (5)
development of professional competencies, including publishing and grant
writing. The program integrates cutting edge science on effective mentorship
with the mentoring team’s interdisciplinary expertise in the learning sciences
and STEM education. The program will nurture a cohort of emerging researchers
committed to serving underrepresented communities who are prepared to both push
the frontiers of inclusive STEM education and to train future researchers.

The program features a theory-driven, resource-rich, cohort-based approach,
offering customized mentored experiences to ensure the engagement and retention
of diverse researchers participating in community-engaged research. The proposed
program rests upon the proposition that a generative path towards creating more
equitable STEM learning outcomes requires recognizing that extant views of
learning limit widely held beliefs and visions about what can be learned, who
can learn, and importantly, how learning occurs. The program will thus leverage
combined insights from interdisciplinary studies of the science of learning as
detailed in the RISE framework. The work will be driven by a core of
established, highly productive math education and math cognition researchers
with interdisciplinary yet complementary expertise who manage a large slate of
existing projects with which postdoctoral fellows can engage. Moreover, the
project will enlist support from UW–Madison’s nationally recognized institutes
for promoting effective mentor training and community-engaged STEM research. In
sum, the RISE Postdoctoral Training Program will marshal an array of expertise
and resources to nurture a cohort of new researchers from diverse backgrounds
who are prepared both (a) to push the frontiers of inclusive STEM education and
(b) to achieve sustained impacts by ensuring greater participation in STEM by
successive generations of learners from diverse groups.

This project is supported by NSF’s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Discovery Research
PreK-12 Program (DRK-12). The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The
DRK-12 Program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.