* 2329528
* Working Across Boundaries through promoting collaboration and interdisciplinarity in future STEM education scholars
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Geoffrey Potvin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,249,996.00

This project will serve the national interest by preparing a cohort of three
postdoctoral fellows to engage in innovative research in STEM education that
emphasizes collaboration and interdisciplinarity. There is an urgent need to
grow interdisciplinary work in STEM education, as this field increasingly
requires interdisciplinary approaches to address complex STEM education
questions that cut across and impact multiple disciplines. While significant
growth has occurred within individual disciplines in STEM education and
Discipline Based Education Research, there has been minimal interdisciplinary
work carried out. This project will support a cohort of postdoctoral scholars
through research, professional development, and mentoring activities to become
well-rounded scholars that engage in intentional interdisciplinary education
research. The work of these scholars will improve the quality of STEM education
in different disciplines and education levels, benefiting STEM students across
disciplines and potentially strengthening the connections between disciplines.

The project activities draw from multiple professional development frameworks
and include opportunities that enhance postdoctoral fellowsâ€™ research knowledge
and skills, academic and professional development, and professional
socialization. The program will support these emerging STEM education scholars
to become independent researchers and bring unique expertise and
reconceptualizations of interdisciplinary considerations to STEM education. The
scholars will be supported through individualized professional development plans
that will include novel, independent research, a collaborative inquiry, and
optional experiences such as teaching and/or auditing courses. Scholars will
also receive multidisciplinary mentoring from an intentionally chosen collection
of mentors, each of whom takes on distinct roles in supporting each scholar. The
postdoctoral scholars will advance knowledge in their future field and in
existing nationally prominent research projects. Also, they will advance our
understanding of postdoctoral research support systems, particularly across
disciplinary boundaries, through a collaborative inquiry project. They will also
access a series of professional development programs to improve their research
knowledge, develop their academic and professional skills, and build their
professional network. Cohort activities will include opportunities to develop
key professional skills through experiential learning and facilitated
discussions and develop a strong professional network of mentors and colleagues.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field. The project is also supported
by the Directorate for STEM Education Core Research Program (ECR) and the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program (IUSE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.