* 2329634
* NSF/BIO-DFG: The role of ARL 13B in controlling ciliary cAMP signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Tamara Caspary, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 724,356.00

Cells are the building blocks of tissues and must communicate effectively in
order for tissues and organisms to form and function. One compartment of
vertebrate cells critical for cell communication is the primary cilium, a
slender projection on almost all cells that functions as a cellular antenna.
While it is clear that primary cilia are critical for cellular communication,
how cilia participate in cellular communication is not well understood. The
cilium is challenging to functionally or physically isolate. The complete loss
of cilia results in a loss of all ciliary signaling; a complete loss of proteins
enriched in cilia leads to a loss of the cellular and ciliary pools of that
protein. Thus, deciphering what is happening within the cilium versus the cell
body is murky. The Caspary Lab developed genetic tools to isolate function of
one ciliary protein specifically within cilia; the Mick and Wachten labs have
complementary expertise in defining the protein composition within the cilium
and manipulating signaling specifically within cilia, respectively. This
collaborative research will combine the skills of the 3 labs to train and
exchange students in investigating the signaling within cilia. At Emory, this
project will involve students in cohort-based, structured research experiences
that will train the students in research along with ethics and scientific
presentation. This project will benefit society by providing bona fide research
experiences to a broad swath of students and, through exchange, expose them to a
diverse array of techniques to address the fundamental question of how cilia
mediate cell communication.

Cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling is a central messenger for ciliary signaling.
Components of the cAMP signaling cascade are enriched in primary cilia,
generating a functionally separate cAMP compartment. Recent reports demonstrate
that aberrant localization of ciliary cAMP signaling components alters ciliary
signaling. However, how the cell distinguishes between ciliary and cytoplasmic
cAMP signaling outputs and which signaling pathways and cellular cues are
specifically engaged by ciliary versus cytoplasmic cAMP signaling is not known.
ARL13B is a regulatory GTPase highly enriched in cilia. The Caspary Lab
engineered a cilia-excluded variant of ARL13B and showed that it retains its
known biochemical activities to enable the isolation of ciliary ARL13B function.
In this research, the Caspary, Mick, and Wachten labs will investigate whether
loss of ARL13B in the primary cilium controls ciliary cAMP signaling in a kidney
epithelial cell line. Aim 1 will unravel the ciliary cAMP “signature” in cells
expressing only cilia-excluded ARL13B. Aim 2 will optogenetically stimulate cAMP
signaling within normal and Arl13B-excluded cilia to define the common RNA and
protein composition. Aim 3 will investigate the role of ciliary cAMP signaling
in remodeling morphology of cells lacking ciliary ARL13B through use of 3D
cultures. Finally, Aim 4 will manipulate the phospholipid composition of the
ciliary membrane to determine whether it regulates ciliary cAMP/ARL13B-signaling
within cilia. Through this research, the role of signaling within the primary
cilium will be deciphered at unprecedented resolution.

This collaborative US/Germany project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.