* 2329570
* A Postdoctoral Fellowship in Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jonte Myers, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,207,522.00

Improving students' performance in STEM subjects is crucial for their future
career readiness and the development of essential 21st-century skills.
Policymakers have prioritized education initiatives to support U.S. students'
achievement in STEM. However, evidence indicates ongoing challenges in
increasing mathematics and science outcomes, particularly for students from
minoritized groups, including students of color, low-income students, and
students with disabilities. To address this issue, teachers need access to
evidence-based interventions to tailor their instruction and meet these
students' learning needs, thus increasing their access to the science and math
curricula. Yet, there is still much to learn about the most effective math and
science interventions for these students and the conditions that impact their
effectiveness. High-quality, comprehensive reviews of studies on math and
science interventions focused on these students are suitable for identifying the
most promising instructional practices and the conditions under which they are
effective. By conducting these reviews, we can identify effective strategies and
techniques to improve math and science outcomes for these students, promoting
fair and equitable access to the mathematics and science curricula, and
ultimately contributing to more inclusive and effective educational practices.
However, a lack of scholars, especially those from minoritized backgrounds, with
advanced knowledge and skills in conducting high-quality reviews to identify
evidence-based mathematics and science practices for these students remains a
challenge.

The post-doctoral program aims to prepare the next generation of scholars with
expertise in conducting high-quality systematic reviews and meta-analyses
focused on math and science outcomes for K-12 students from minoritized groups.
The program emphasizes situated learning research, cohort-building, and
networking to prepare a cohort of post-doctoral fellows to acquire and apply
advanced techniques for conducting high-quality systematic reviews and meta-
analyses to identify evidence-based interventions for increasing these students'
mathematics and science proficiency. They will also explore sources of
heterogeneity in these interventions to understand the conditions under which
they are effective. The fellows will receive training in performing effective
literature searches and coding procedures, using multilevel modeling to address
complex data structures, implementing multilevel and multivariate modeling, and
using machine learning algorithms for article screening and coding in
hierarchical databases. Additionally, scholars will develop dissemination
materials that assist teachers in effectively translating research into
classroom practices. The project has the potential to contribute significantly
to STEM education by increasing the number of scholars from minoritized
backgrounds who can conduct high-quality systematic reviews and meta-analyses
focused on evidence-based practices for minoritized students. This, in turn,
will lead to more equitable and effective instructional strategies, ultimately
improving mathematics and science outcomes for historically underrepresented
groups.

This project is supported by NSFâ€™s STEM Education Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship (STEM Ed PRF) Program with co-funding from the Discovery Research
PreK-12 Program (DRK-12). The STEM Ed PRF Program aims to enhance the research
knowledge, skills, and practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education,
education, and related disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in
fundamental and applied research that advances knowledge within the field. The
DRK-12 Program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.