* 2329979
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Swarm over Poker 2023--An Auroral System-Science Campaign Exemplar of Archiving and Aharing Heterogeneously-Derived Data Products
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Kristina Lynch, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 433,534.00

This collaborative project, involving Dartmouth College, the University of
Alaska Fairbanks, and SRI, will explore and develop a new data infrastructure
through the system-science use of a Swarm-over-Poker 2023 auroral observational
campaign. The team will create new and powerful combined data products from this
heterogeneous, distributed, multipoint data set and develop a data-sharing
platform to share the derived heterogeneous data products and algorithms with
the community. These data are interwoven into new, featurized data products and
maps for both ionospheric model ingestion and ML studies. These products and
tools will enable studies addressing science questions such as how and to what
extent the auroral environment context (activity level, local time, latitude)
controls the specifics of pre-midnight arc-scale auroral activity and coupling.
This is timely as our community moves toward true system-science efforts that
require a diversity of data to greatly advance our understanding of auroral
generation and electrodynamics. The novelty of this project is that it will
demonstrate the design of a research infrastructure for sharing and archiving
derived data products from heterogeneous sources to enable new science for
cross-scale cross-region coupling auroral studies. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be supported by this project. The students exposed to this project
will learn to work with heterogeneous and “multifaceted” CEDAR system science,
interweaving multiply-distributed data with featurization tools, and with
modelling, as needed for cross-scale cross-region coupling auroral studies. The
project will host a series of virtual community discussions to engage with the
broader geospace community.

Swarm-over-Poker 2023 provided the opportunity to collect in situ ionospheric
current and flow data from the ESA Swarm spacecraft, during nightly conjunctions
with Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR), Alaska, from mid-February through the end
of March 2023. The PFRR data include filtered auroral imagery, Poker Flat
Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR) radar data, ground magnetometry, and additional
instrumentation. The Swarm in situ data include thermal ion plasma flow data and
field-aligned current data. From this heterogeneous, distributed, multipoint
data set, the team will create new and powerful data products to address auroral
system science by data-driving ionospheric models. The three science objectives
are (1) an auroral system-science study of 2- way arc-scale vs regional-scale
coupling for nightside auroral arcs using the winter 2023 Swarm-over-Poker
campaign dataset. (2) Generation of tools for, and the data products of,
ionospheric model-absorbable imagery-derived and imagery-guided heterogeneous
data products for this campaign, and for shared public use. (3) Using this
CEDAR-science driven study as a testbed for designing a new data infrastructure
for using and sharing heterogeneously-derived CEDAR-science data products.
Specific science questions to be addressed are (1) How, and how much, does the
regional auroral environment constrain the details of specific arc-scale
features? (2) What is the effect on the regional auroral environment, from arc-
scale event signatures?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.