* 2329845
* PFI-TT:  Reliable High-Power Circular-Beam Semiconductor Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Douglas Hall, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the demonstration of a new class of
reliable, high-beam-quality semiconductor lasers capable of producing a
circular, nearly ideal output laser beam operating in a power range which is
currently inaccessible by existing technologies without the use of external
systems. Providing a higher quality, near perfect laser beam at much lower cost
promises to enable new applications beneficial to society: faster data networks,
innovative healthcare solutions, enhanced autonomous vehicle safety, and
improved consumer products. This will be achieved by eliminating external
optical components which incorporate additional beam degradation. These advances
result from the more-easily manipulatable and focusable beam producing a more
intense, laser focused spot. The new processing methods employed will also have
significant additional promise for increasing the density of future photonic
integrated circuits, critical for supporting society’s rapidly growing needs for
internet and data center applications.

The proposed project specifically addresses a long-standing limitation of most
edge-emitting diode lasers – their inherently asymmetric, highly elliptical, and
thus astigmatic (hard to focus) output beams in 10-500 mW range. Devices like
vertical cavity surface emitting laser (VCSEL) can emit a circular output beam,
but are limited to maximum output powers of ~5-10 mW. The proposed innovation
uses a novel method to fabricate edge-emitting lasers, employing a deep etch
through the active electron-hole recombination region followed by a special wet
thermal oxidation process to ameliorate etch damage while smoothing and
passivating the etched sidewall. With this high-index-contrast design, single-
mode circular output lasers with powers 80 times greater than that of commercial
single-mode VCSELs have been achieved. The focus of this project is to lifetest
packaged lasers with facet passivation coatings and demonstrate their capability
for long-life, continuous operation (e.g., 5000-10000 hours) as required for
successful commercialization. The oxide-semiconductor interface properties will
be assessed and optimized using time-resolved photoluminescence; beam quality
including astigmatism will be characterized, and the expected high-speed RF
modulation performance evaluated. Alternative approaches including quantum-dot
active region material and atomic layer deposition dielectrics will also be
explored.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.