* 2329842
* Scholarships in Science and Technology for Talented Low-income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2024,02/28/2029
* Joseph Onyilagha, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2029
* USD 999,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB). UAPB is an HBCU with
92% of students receiving Pell grants. Over its 5-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 18 unique students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in the Agricultural Sciences, Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics, Computer
Science, or Industrial Engineering and Management. First-year students, in two
cohorts, will receive four years of scholarship support. Activities include a
week-long orientation, regular advising and mentoring, peer-tutoring, and
academic-year research participation. Rising sophomores will have the
opportunity and financial support to take classes during the summer to help
maintain progress toward graduation. The project focuses on preparing students
for summer research, graduate school, and joining the STEM workforce.

The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Five
main objectives of the project are: 1) to recruit two cohorts of nine scholars,
2) to retain at least 95% of scholars through robust engagement activities, 3)
to graduate at least 90% of scholars within four years, 4) to place at least 25%
of scholars in graduate school to pursue STEM research careers, and 5) to
follow-up with scholars to support them in succeeding in the first year of
transition to industry or graduate school. An S-STEM Achievement Counselor and
faculty mentors will facilitate students' utilization of resources on and off-
campus. Assessment of the project will occur through an internal Advisory
Committee consisting of STEM chairpersons, as well as an external evaluator. The
evaluator will gather and analyze data from students and faculty related to
activities such as the orientation program, graduate school preparation, and
mentoring. Knowledge generation about STEM research and career preparation,
particularly at an HBCU with a largely rural student population, could be
beneficial to other institutions and STEM programs. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.