* 2329817
* PFI-TT: High-Throughput Digital Biosensing: Future Of Molecular Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 275,437.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in the development of a practical and
fast diagnostic technology platform. Areas like precision medicine and liquid
biopsies hold great promise in the field of healthcare. They rely on very
sensitive technologies that can detect tiny molecules in human bodies. One
exciting advancement is called "digital detection," which can analyze individual
molecules with incredible accuracy, even better than older methods. The proposed
single-molecule counting technology has the potential to revolutionize disease
diagnosis because it could make advanced diagnostic tools more affordable and
widely available. The project will create a practical and cost-effective
platform for detecting diseases early on, which will be incredibly beneficial
for various medical applications, like accurate and early diagnosis using small
samples from liquid biopsies. The team has a proven track record of prototyping,
technology translation, and commercialization. The project will make a
contribution to workforce creation by training 2 PhD students and 2
undergraduate students in technology development and entrepreneurship.

The proposed project builds on more than a decade-long cutting-edge basic and
applied research effort and develops a new paradigm of Digital Biosensing that
is affordable, practical, and broadly adaptable by exploiting multiple
innovations. The technology is based on Interferometric Reflectance Imaging
Sensor (IRIS), which can dynamically detect thousands of individual biological
nanoparticles (viruses, exosomes) or single biomolecules labeled with plasmonic
gold nanoparticles as they are captured on the sensor surface. Perhaps the most
significant innovation relevant to this Technology Translation effort is the
invention to address the limitations of the conventional interferometric
detection that requires acquisition of a stack of images, thus, necessitating
moving parts, to distinguish individual nanoparticles. The new modality of
digital detection, ʻpixel-diversityʻ (PD)-IRIS, that introduces encoding the
necessary optical signatures of target particles within a single image frame
rather than an image stack. This innovation eliminates moving parts and
drastically reduces the complexity of the reader enabling digital detection
directly in ubiquitous microwell plates – an industry standard for automation –
achieving an unprecedented capability of High-throughput Digital Biosensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.