* 2329919
* EAGER: Building a Provable Differentially Private Real-time Data-blind ML Algorithm: A case study on Enhancing STEM Student Engagement in Online Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Ashis Kumer Biswas, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic may be over, but transitions in course delivery
format—going remote, or hybrid—are still being used and universities appreciate
their potential to attract more diverse groups of students than purely on-campus
classes. This flexible education format in platforms like Zoom is here to stay.
To deliver better learning experiences, educators need to gauge students'
engagement in courses. But, while lecturing, it is challenging to assess
engagement online. Machine learning technology can help educators during
lectures so that the classroom engagement dynamics can be estimated, and proper
interventions can be taken in real time. However, data-driven machine learning
(ML) technology puts its users at risk of privacy loss, even with distributed
machine learning programs hosted in individual students’ personal workstations
that learn patterns of their users and report the patterns back to a global
learner that merges the resulting findings into a global ML model. Although no
private data is leaving local workstations, the individual patterns distributed
across the network can leak private data. This project will build innovative
privacy-aware student-engagement detection technology. The main novelty of this
project will be in its capacity to learn in real-time from various types of
student engagement data without directly accessing it. In platformized online
education, the project will add privacy guarantee to users, while
underrepresented STEM students can safely interact with educators and peers to
facilitate the community of inquiry model of learning.

The project aims to design a distributed machine learning paradigm that
introduces three hierarchical categories of learner nodes that will be
facilitated by a novel neural network architecture agnostic gradient sharing
algorithm that will make any coordinated attempt to reconstruct original data
from the partial gradients shared between nodes provably intractable. The
hierarchical organization of the framework makes it effective at providing a
level of obfuscation in partial gradients coming from partially observable model
architecture. The research methodology will be motivated by concepts of
differential privacy in gradient sharing algorithms. The project will introduce
new concepts regarding how to select the gradient components to distribute and
to optimize learnable parameters without incurring any additional computational
overhead in building a global model, compared to the state-of-the-art gradient-
based defense algorithms. The project will be driven by two research thrusts:
(1) design of a provable privacy-aware distributed machine learning framework,
(2) leveraging the novel framework in estimating student engagement in
platformized online STEM education at University of Colorado Denver. The
research effort will solve an open problem in the distributed machine learning
from a black-box perspective where both full gradients and model architecture
are unknown. Therefore, it has potential to be adopted in other areas where
privacy aware ML is a requirement. The project outcomes will provide immediate
benefits to 1) undergraduate STEM students while improving student retention and
overall learning experiences, 2) online STEM instructors who will be able to
gauge student engagement in real-time with an equitable, privacy-aware and
inclusive learning environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.