* 2329767
* PFI-TT: Novel ionic liquid lubricant for next-generation information storage technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Lei Li, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2025
* USD 267,287.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project are two-folds. First, the novel ionic
liquid lubricant developed will improve the reliability and areal density of
Hard Disc Drives (HDDs), which has great impact in numerous applications
involving information storage using electronic and consumer devices. Second, the
proposed research will educate the next-generation of engineers with both
engineering training and entrepreneurial mindsets and skills. The students,
particularly female and underrepresented minority (URM) students, will take the
entrepreneurial training, which provides them the in-depth knowledge on small
business development and prepares them for future careers in entrepreneurship.

The proposed project aims to close the technical gap to bring a novel ionic
liquid lubricant to the market. In Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording (HAMR),
which is the next-generation HDD technology, media lubricant needs to have high
thermal stability and high fly clearance. However, the state-of-the-art
lubricant, i.e., perfluoropolyether (PFPE), is not thermally stable enough and
has low fly clearance. In preliminary research, a novel ionic liquid lubricant
has been developed and industrial tests showed it has the desired high thermal
stability and fly clearance. In the proposed research, the plan is to: (1)
improve the reaction yield to ~80% by optimizing the reaction time and
temperature; (2) scale up the synthesis by ~20 times via a novel membrane-aided
simultaneous reaction-separation process; and (3) conduct drive-level industry
testing to fully qualify the ionic liquid lubricant. The novelty of the proposal
lies on the following two aspects. First, the membrane-aided simultaneous
reaction-separation makes large-volume production much more efficient. Second,
the drive-level industry testing is expected to fully demonstrate the advantages
of the ionic liquid lubricant with respect to the state-of-the-art PFPE
lubricant, which will greatly advance the HDD technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.