* 2329897
* Combined Effects of ElectroMagnetic Ion Cyclotron (EMIC) and Whistler Mode Waves on Relativistic Electron Scattering in the Earth's Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Xiaojia Zhang, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 216,586.00

The dynamics of the Earthâ€™s inner magnetosphere, and particularly the outer
radiation belts, are highly affected by wave-particle interactions. In these
interactions, certain electromagnetic wave modes can accelerate electrons up to
relativistic energies, while other are responsible for relativistic electron
precipitation into the atmosphere. The work will investigate this process, which
is important for predicting space weather effects on space craft. Early career
researchers and students will be supported.

The primary objective of this award is to investigate conjoint electronmagnetic
ion cyclotron (EMIC) and whistler wave effects on electron dynamics in the
Earth's inner magnetosphere. The methodology involves the use of statistical
observations of EMIC and whistler waves from the Van Allen Probes, the Time
History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms mission, and
Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission spacecraft to construct a new empirical model
of EMIC and whistler wave observations and quantify, analytically and
numerically, the resultant electron scattering rates. Simulation results, based
on the estimated scattering rates, will be validated by comparing with the
observed evolution of electron fluxes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.