* 2329988
* Understanding the effect of individual decision-making strategies on collective decision outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Chuqiao Yang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 09/30/2024
* USD 355,822.00

Collective decisions are central to societies, from committees to governments.
An important open question is how collective decisions are affected by
individuals who follow the choices of others (social learners) instead of
evaluating the merit of options on their own (individual learners). The three
central questions guiding this project are: 1) Will a collective choose the best
available option when many of its members are social learners? 2) How does the
collective outcome depend on the properties of individuals and the options? and
3) How will social learners affect societyâ€™s ability to adjust to new evidence?
This work expands the current understanding of collective decisions by examining
a variety of factors simultaneously rather than in isolation. It helps
anticipate and manage instabilities in important real-world collective decision-
making systems such as democratic elections, jury decisions, and teamwork in
companies. Moreover, the most pressing challenges facing humanity, such as
climate change, technological disruption, and pandemics, are critically subject
to global collective decisions.

The project investigates the effect of social learning on collective decision-
making using a transdisciplinary combination of three methods. First, the
program of research develops a dynamical-system model that studies how the
interactions of social and non-social factors affect collective decisions and
adjustments to new information. A preliminary model predicted a critical
transition in opinion composition as the proportion of the social learners
crossed a threshold. The current project expands this framework to include the
presence of committed minorities, the introduction of new evidence about the
merit of options, and the effect of network structures. The model derives
conditions under which groups can settle on the option with the most merit.
Second, the project tests the predictions of the model by collecting and
analyzing observational and survey data and estimates the effect of social
learning on beliefs and behaviors of real-world societies. Third, group-level
and individual-level human participant experiments test model predictions in
controlled conditions. The individual-level experiments uncover factors that
influence individuals to adopt social or individual learning. This research
informs a long-lasting debate on how individual learning strategies (individual
or social) affect collective decisions. It combines and synthesizes social
psychological principles and experiments, mathematical modeling methods, and
statistical analysis. Results inform a wide range of audiences with the purpose
of providing key insights for improving collective decisions in many real-world
domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.