* 2329017
* ExpandQISE: Track 2: Expanding Quantum Research and Education at Winston-Salem State University with Research on Hybrid Microwave-Optical Quantum Devices
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* John Yi, Winston-Salem State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,710,000.00

Non-technical Description: Quantum information science and engineering (QISE) is
an active area of research and development with significant potential to push
the fundamental performance limits for computation, networking, and sensing.
This project aims to establish integrated QISE research and education activities
at Winston-Salem State University (WSSU) in close collaboration with Clemson
University and the University of Rochester. The research activities are aimed at
facilitating the discovery of new materials and functionalities for quantum
computing and networking applications by establishing a quantum transduction
testbed. The educational components are focused on establishing an undergraduate
program in QISE with strong hands-on components to train a highly diverse and
proficient workforce. The collaborative nature of the project combined with the
core research facilities it enables not only brings WSSU faculty and students to
the forefront of QISE research but helps train generations of diverse QISE
workforce in the Carolinas.

Technical Description: The realization of quantum processor networks is crucial
for the advancement of scalable quantum technologies. Using current technology
to achieve high-efficiency quantum transduction (QTR) with minimal noise remains
a formidable challenge. In collaboration with experts in quantum research at
Clemson University and the University of Rochester, a team at Winston-Salem
State University (WSSU) aims to address the existing QTR bottlenecks by
developing a versatile testbed for high-throughput testing of hybrid quantum
materials and device configurations for high-performance QTR applications. The
Winston-Salem Hybrid Quantum Laboratory (WHQL) is established as the core
facility to house the testbed. This effort positions WSSU at the forefront of
quantum technology research, enabling rapid exploration and discovery of
multifunctional materials and devices for efficient, low-noise QTR via electro-
optical or electro-optomechanical microwave-photon coupling mechanisms. WHQL not
only enhances WSSU’s research capabilities but plays a crucial role in creating
a sustainable pipeline of a diverse workforce to support our nation’s growing
Quantum information science and engineering (QISE) research and development
activities. This effort is expected to serve as a model for integrated QISE
research and education activities to be utilized by historically black colleges
and universities across our nation with no or nascent QISE program.

This project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.