* 2329584
* Creating a Culture of STEM Research at a Two-Year College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Gwen Gilinger, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2028
* USD 1,258,941.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and implementing
an array of early undergraduate research experiences for students that begin
their academic pathway at a two-year college. Access to this type of high-impact
practice early in the STEM pathway at highly diverse institutions is critical
for expanding and diversifying the STEM workforce across the country. To address
this, the project team will create a unique STEM pathway for engaging students
in undergraduate research prior to transferring to a four-year university. As
part of this model, students will work directly with faculty mentors on shared
research projects that address issues of interest to student participants.
Students will also be supported by a dedicated advisor that will provide both
guidance and resources for academic success that complements the research
experiences. These activities will promote retention in two-year college STEM
pathways and will ultimately contribute to diversifying the STEM workforce in
the region.

The project team at the Community College of Baltimore County will carry out the
following project objectives: 1) Create and/or finalize the scope and sequence
for four research courses including the faculty-led research components; 2)
Support 15-30 students with research stipends and participation in STEM
conferences each year of the project; 3) Provide students with resources and
expertise to successfully transfer to a four-year university; and 4) Engage in
assessment and evaluation activities to gain a better understanding of the
impact that early research experiences have on student success both before and
after transfer. This study will extend current models for implementing early
undergraduate research experiences at two-year colleges by providing a multi-
level cross-disciplinary approach throughout the first two-years of STEM
introductory coursework. Additionally, this work will capture how sustained
research participation impacts student success, retention, transfer, and
attitudes towards science using a combination of qualitative and quantitative
methods. An external evaluator will partner with the project team to provide
both formative and summative feedback at regular intervals. The results of the
project will be disseminated to the two-year college STEM community via
publications, presentations, and professional networks. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM
education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes
innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-
year college.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.