* 2329006
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Light-controlled magnetism in Floquet-Bloch systems
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Paola Barbara, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Recent advancements in material synthesis and
nanotechnology have led to the discovery of new materials with superior
properties that arise from quantum confinement and electronic interactions,
opening the way to the field of quantum materials and attractive prospects to
establish new platforms for future high-performance electronics. In all cases,
the practical use of quantum systems brings the challenge of training the broad
and diverse workforce that is necessary to transform all this potential into a
reality. This project focuses on workforce training while exploring light-matter
interaction in quantum materials under irradiation with high-intensity optical
fields, in a regime where light can change the material properties and create
new quantum states on demand. This project combines transformative research with
the development of a new education program in quantum materials and technologies
at New Mexico Tech, under the Georgetown University mentorship, with the
possibility of involvement of students from other New Mexico colleges and
universities. The research activity, curriculum development, and collaboration
between institutions provide education and training in quantum materials to
Hispanic and other underrepresented minority students at different levels.

Technical Abstract: The project's scientific goal is to investigate light-
induced magnetism in Floquet-Bloch systems with a synergy of experiment (New
Mexico Tech, Georgetown University) and theory (University of Chile-Santiago).
Specifically, this project proposes experiments for the magnetometric
observation of Floquet-Bloch states in 2D materials (graphene, MoS2, WS2) and 3D
materials, e.g., graphite. Magnetometry is a novel and promising approach for
detecting Floquet Bloch states. The specific experiments on magnetometry studies
of Floquet-Bloch states proposed in this project focus on the development of a
sensitive magnetometric measurement technique for Floquet research towards
magnetic detection of: 1) Floquet edge-states-related currents in 2D materials;
2) the predicted occurrence of spontaneous non-equilibrium magnetism in
graphene; 3) the observation of magneto- valleytronic phenomena in transition
metal dichalcogenides and 4) magnetic detection of Floquet-Bloch states in 3D
materials.

This project is jointly funded by The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(MPS/OMA), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.