* 2329625
* PFI-TT: Expanding the Market Share of Domestically Produced Primary Phosphines
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Rory Waterman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2025
* USD 277,869.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the support for the economic
development resulting from a diversified chemical feedstock. Primary phosphines,
organophosphorus compounds containing a single organic substituent, are
important chemical precursors. Their use can benefit agriculture, biomedicine,
materials science, and consumer goods by supporting efficient preparation of a
wide range of known, useful products that benefit society as well as to help
develop new products. Current technology that produces primary phosphines is
highly wasteful and hazardous. This projectâ€™s technology provides these products
with increased safety and reduced waste, which can expand domestic chemical
production. This project leverages catalysis and supports further growth of this
environmentally friendly, multi-billion-dollar industry. The project team has a
strong record of involving individuals from marginalized identities in science
to expand the future STEM workforce. Such efforts will continue to serve
national and state workforce development goals. Additionally, part of this
project will aid in the long-term development of entrepreneurship education to
yield regional students who will be better prepared for technology transfer and
conversion of science to market-ready products in the future.

The proposed project seeks to transition an NSF-funded discovery to a viable
marketplace technology. To meet this goal, Lewis acid catalysis will be used to
prepare primary phosphines. Lewis acid catalysis has become a topic of
tremendous interest including recognition by the 2022 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Application of these cutting-edge discoveries will address the key challenge in
primary phosphine synthesis, which is to move away from hazardous metal-based
reducing agents. Goals of the project include expansion of the primary
phosphines that can be prepared by this method, exploration of alternative
catalysts including solid state catalysts, and preparations for growth to pilot
scale production. The applied research plan directly addresses the more
practical utilization of Lewis acid catalysis in the preparation of value-added
products. The project aims to support new technology and new products in the
marketplace. In meeting these goals, opportunities for Lewis acid catalysis in
the preparation of commodity chemicals will be expanded through a greater
understanding of their reactivity, especially at scale. The ability to utilize
alternative Lewis acids would also be realized through this project, and
additional aspects of phosphorus chemistry will be understood.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.