* 2329053
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: A Quantum Good Network Protocol (QGP) and Implementation for Security-Enhanced Network Authentication
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Andrew Childs, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Encryption is a key component for protecting the
security and privacy of today’s Internet. The current unbreakable encryptions
could be easily broken with future quantum computers. Therefore, it is
imperative to develop new cryptographic algorithms and systems that can resist
current and future cyber-attacks. This research aims to study and implement a
novel quantum and post-quantum secure network system that integrates strong
encryptions and quantum-safe security to provide improved security, integrity,
and privacy for data and communications. The research seeks to build a testbed
of quantum networks immune from cyber-attacks. The team applies research
outcomes in education in collaborating with universities, national labs, and
private sector companies to build pipelines of quantum information science and
engineering workforce. The technology has wide applications in securing email
privacy, enhancing network security, defending critical network infrastructure,
and protecting national security. Findings from this research have significant
impact on the security aspect of next-generation quantum Internet.

Technical Abstract: This project aims to develop an innovative Quantum Good
Privacy (QGP) protocol that extends Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) by incorporating a
photonic channel and post-quantum cryptography (PQC) algorithms. QGP expands the
TCP/IP protocol by adding a quantum layer (layer 0) at the bottom of the open
systems interconnection (OSI) model and transforming layer 7 with PQC-Dilithium
enhanced signatures for improved security, integrity, and privacy. QGP advances
theoretical study with an applied approach in building a testbed of Quantum
Internet. The photonic channel consists of two endpoints to set up a quantum
layer for cryptographic key exchange. A cutting-edge secure authentication
algorithm uses PQC-Dilithium signatures, advanced encryption standard (AES),
secure hash algorithms (SHA)-3, and hardware encryptors to request quantum keys
directly from photonic devices and to encrypt data for local network devices. A
quantum service channel acts as Software Defined Networks (SDN)’s control plane
to separate the network control logic from devices. This research promotes the
progress of developing next-generation quantum-safe networks, contributes to the
scientific community in security and privacy, builds better quantum information
science and engineering talents, engages in a broader audience, and benefits
society.

This project is jointly funded by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (MPS/OMA), and the Technology Frontiers Program (TIP/TF).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.