* 2329884
* PFI-TT: Concentrating Photodetector Chips for Next-Generation Optical Communication, Sensing, and Imaging Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* M Saif Islam, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 277,305.00

The broader commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in the integration of an ultra-fast
light detector system with an innovative light concentration technology in very
compact sensing and imaging systems. The developed system will have enhanced
light detector sensitivity, speed, and detection efficiency by reducing the
noise, crosstalk, size, and cost. The outcomes of this project have the
potential to deeply impact various industries, such as healthcare, environmental
monitoring, and communications, by enabling improved sensitivity to capture even
the faintest light signals and facilitating real-time applications like
autonomous driving and high-speed imaging. Moreover, the project's commercial
viability is notable, as the proposed technology will offer enhanced performance
and cost-effectiveness compared to existing solutions. To achieve these goals, a
collaborative team consisting of a PI, a postdoctoral scientist, a graduate
student, and an undergraduate student will receive training alongside a
technology commercialization expert. The team will focus on developing proof-of-
concept prototypes using different semiconductor systems and evaluating their
performance in practical systems.

The proposed project aims to address the challenges associated with
manufacturing highly sensitive photodetector arrays used in emerging
technologies such as LiDAR, optical communications, and medical and agricultural
imaging. Each pixel in a detector array contains a detector, along with control
circuits and other signal-processing elements. This leaves only a fraction of
each pixel available for capturing the incoming light, leading to reduced
detection efficiency. The proposed approach will increase the photon collection
capability by guiding the photons towards the detector region from the dead zone
outside the detectors. This will result in increased absorption efficiency and
reduced interference between individual detectors. This project will also design
an array of photodetectors with unique and distinct responses in each detector
element under identical illumination. This will be achieved by integrating
surface nanostructures with varying dimensions, periodicity, and shapes. Such
capabilities allow ultra-miniaturized imaging systems in silicon for
reconstructive computational imaging without the need for bulky components. This
research has the potential to significantly improve the performance and
efficiency of photodetector arrays, enabling advancements in various fields
where high sensitivity and miniaturization are crucial.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.