* 2329339
* CREST-PRP: Exploring the Quantum Potential Energy Surface of Water and Aqueous Solutions
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ali Eltareb, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 09/30/2025
* USD 345,148.00

The CREST Postdoctoral Research Program (CREST-PRP) provides two years of
support for research, training, and mentoring experiences for individual early
career scientists at active CREST Centers. The goal of the CREST-PRP awards is
to increase the STEM workforce presence of individuals who are members of groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. CREST-PRP awards recognize investigators with
significant potential and support their research experiences to broaden their
perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions, and prepare CREST-PRP
scholars for positions of leadership within the scientific community. The
research project, "CREST-PRP: Exploring the Quantum Potential Energy Surface of
Water and Aqueous Solutions," is in direct alignment with the CREST-PRP goals.
Submitted by a researcher affiliated with the CREST Center for Interface Design
and Engineered Assembly of Low-dimensional Systems at the City College of New
York, this project aims to extend the potential energy landscape (PEL) formalism
that was originally developed to describe the behavior of classical liquids at
low temperature to the case of quantum liquids. This project will generate
crucial insights into understanding how nuclear quantum effects can influence
the liquid to glass transition in water and aqueous solutions. The quantum
potential energy landscape formalism will also provide a theoretical basis in
understanding how quantum effects influence the physical and mechanical
properties of water. The formalism and numerical data obtained from this project
will be useful to the scientific and engineering community working on the
cryopreservation of biomaterials at low temperatures, pharmaceutical and food
industries interested in improving the shelf life of amorphous materials. The
codes and scripts used to generate and analyze the results from this project
will be made open source, user friendly and available to be used throughout the
scientific community.

The PEL formalism has been applied in the past to study the thermodynamics and
dynamics of clusters, atoms, biomolecules, glasses and in the calculation of the
equation of state of equilibrium systems. These computational studies were
performed using classical molecular dynamics, where the inclusion of quantum
effects are omitted. This project will extend the PEL formalism where nuclear
quantum effects are explicitly included, using path integral simulations to
study (i) supercooled and glassy water and (ii) aqueous solutions containing
water and ions (Li+, Cl-, Na+). By using the path integral formulation of
quantum mechanics, the quantum particle is mapped onto a fictitious ring-
polymer mapped up of P beads, connected by harmonic springs that depend on the
mass of the particle and the temperature of the system. In the path integral
approach, the PEL now becomes a function of the mass of the particles and the
temperature, distinct from the classical PEL, where the mass of the particle
plays no role in defining the PEL. This project will seek to answer how the
inclusion of quantum effects, influence the properties of the PEL (minima,
curvature, and depth of the PEL), calculate an equation of state for water and
aqueous solutions from the properties of the PEL, and how the inclusion of ions
in water affects the glass transition in water.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.