* 2329207
* Collaborative Research: FuSe: Thermal Co-Design for Heterogeneous Integration of Low Loss Electromagnetic and RF Systems (The CHILLERS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Jing Wang, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 10/31/2026
* USD 256,169.00

The aim of this project is to advance the tools and technology used to design
and build high frequency radar and communication systems. Of particular interest
are systems that operate at high power levels and require some form of cooling
to maximize operational lifetime and efficiency. The research will be conducted
with simultaneous consideration of electrical, mechanical and thermal design
using a team-based co-design methodology. The potential applications of the
proposed research include next generation wireless communications and sensing
(radar) for land- and space-based platforms, especially those operating in harsh
environments. A broader aspect of the research is understanding the
opportunities to harness advanced methods to accelerate the modeling and design
of such complex systems. Because of the uniqueness of innovation in this area,
it is of particular importance that a strategic educational training program is
integrated into the research effort. To support development of a diverse, well-
trained workforce the project will include an educational outreach program for
7th-12th grade students that is supported by undergraduate and graduate students
participating in service-based learning (SBL) activities. The SBL activities
will integrate the research and education activities into the outreach effort.
The activities will also leverage a national model for advanced manufacturing
education and include participants from historically marginalized groups, and
the outcomes will be evaluated using formative and summative assessments.

The project will focus on achieving advanced function and high-performance mm-
wave transmitter unit cells through heterogeneous integration of bare die power
amplifiers, packaged integrated circuits (e.g., beamforming IC for programmable
phased array), integrated passives for DC biasing, and advanced thermal
management systems. The investigation will include the co-design of the thermal,
3D interposer and electromagnetic front-end systems using a tool that combines
numerical thermal and electromagnetic simulators and provides a powerful new
specifications-to-CAD capability. The fabrication processes may include one of
multiple additive manufacturing and/or thin-film microfabrication methods. For
the packaged-integrated thermal management system, the project will build on a
foundational capability in additive manufacturing to investigate a new approach
intended to increase the achievable mm-wave power density by potentially
multiple orders of magnitude over current state of the art for the studied class
of low-cost 3D packages. In order to meet this goal, a formal co-design
methodology will be leveraged along with multi-fidelity Bayesian co-optimization
of thermal, interposer and EM sub-systems. This design and optimization process
will be a useful tool to advance the field of 3D mm-wave packages with
heterogeneous integration requirements. Environmental impact is a critical
objective function for the PIs and will be addressed through improvements to
system reliability (longer operational lifecycles and reduced premature
equipment retirement), material selection, minimizing energy consumption, and
2nd law efficiency analysis. The potential applications of the proposed research
include next generation wireless communications and sensing (radar) for land-
and space-based platforms, especially those operating in harsh environments. The
specifications-to-CAD tool will help to extend the packaging and thermal
management principles into a broad range of applications beyond those focused
upon herein. The research will also expand the utility of sustainable, low cost
and customizable additive manufacturing processes to new applications including
prototyping and potentially low- to medium-scale manufacturing for advanced mm-
wave systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.