* 2329405
* Preparation and Refinement of Postdocs in STEM for Disciplinary-Based Education Research (PROPS for DBER)
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Gregory Rushton, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,249,445.00

This organizational STEM education postdoctoral fellowship project will focus on
preparing graduates with doctoral degrees in a STEM field (e.g., mathematics or
biology), with recruitment focused specifically on members of underrepresented
groups, to conduct rigorous discipline-based education research (DBER) in their
respective fields. DBER scholars from disciplinary fields can have high impacts
on the quality of undergraduate STEM instruction, and currently there are few
professional development models focusing on how to train disciplinary scholars
as effective DBER researchers. The project team will implement a two-year
professional development program for a cohort of four postdoctoral fellows. In
the first year, the fellows will collaborate with faculty on an
interdisciplinary STEM education research project while engaging in professional
development activities to support development of their independence and skills
as DBER researchers, as well as strengthen their relationship with this
community of practice. In year two, the fellows will conduct an independent
research project related to undergraduate STEM faculty teaching professional
development. With strong domain knowledge in a STEM field and training in
education research methods, the fellows will be well-positioned for future
careers in STEM departments to conduct research that will support effective
instruction in their departments. As researchers from groups typically
underrepresented in STEM fields, their entry into the community of discipline-
based STEM Education research will position them as leaders guiding efforts to
improve retention of undergraduate STEM majors from similar backgrounds.

Advancing knowledge of evidence-based instructional practices relies on research
that combines the domain expertise of scientists/engineers with mastery of
learning theories and educational research methods called Discipline-Based
Education Research (DBER). This postdoctoral fellowship project will prepare
graduates with doctoral degrees in STEM fields to conduct DBER research through
a two-year training program. This project is led by faculty in Middle Tennessee
State Universityâ€™s Interdisciplinary Mathematics & Sciences Education Research
doctoral program and the Tennessee STEM Education Center with extensive
experience in developing STEM disciplinary scholars into effective education
researchers. The culturally-responsive mentorship of the fellows will be guided
by self-determination theory, which suggests individuals are motivated to grow,
change, and develop a cohesive sense of self by the three innate and universal
psychological needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Mentoring will not
only provide the fellows opportunities to develop autonomy and competence as
researchers, but also strengthen their relatedness to the wider DBER community
of practice. The project aims to increase the inclusion of postdoctoral scholar-
leaders with marginalized identities in the DBER faculty community, enhance the
STEM education research infrastructure both within and across the university,
and disseminate postdoctoral development models to enhance the transition of
disciplinary PhDs into the DBER fields.

This project is funded by the STEM Education Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
(STEM Ed PRF) program that aims to enhance the research knowledge, skills, and
practices of recent doctorates in STEM, STEM education, education, and related
disciplines to advance their preparation to engage in fundamental and applied
research that advances knowledge within the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.