* 2329885
* PFI-RP:  Novel Sensors for Efficient and Scalable Production of Indoor Crops
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ana Arias, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2026
* USD 333,333.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project lies on reducing waste and energy use,
while improving crop quality and yield. This will be done through the
development and implementation of a revolutionary sensor technology that uses
print-based manufacturing approaches. The technology will integrate nutrient,
temperature, and pH sensors that can be used directly in the growing media and
enable increased automation in controlled environments for outdoor and indoor
agriculture operations. This project enhances the scientific and technological
understanding of crop systems in a way that benefits both the public and
industry by providing continuous, robust, and reliable data collection at a
fraction of the cost of existing methods. Specifically, the proposed innovation
will give growers the information they need to make informed, effective, and
real-time decisions about fertilizer and water management. As agricultural lands
become less available and fertilizers become increasingly expensive, this
technology answers a critical need that will make practices sustainable. The
adoption of this novel sensor technology will enable streamlined processes,
improved productivity, resource optimization and food security, profitability,
and economic growth, and contribute to a sustainable and competitive future.

The proposed project addresses the pressing need for more efficient and reliable
data acquisition in existing agricultural workflows. Taking advantage of this
novel sensor technology, the project aims to overcome the limitations of manual
data collection, thereby minimizing human error and streamlining operations. The
research objectives of this project encompass the design, development,
manufacturing, and validation in controlled environments for outdoor and indoor
agriculture systems by developing nitrogen/phosphorous/potassium (NPK), and
electrical conductivity, hydrogen potential, temperature (EC/pH/T) sensors. The
participation of an industrial partner in the agriculture industry in the
project will ensure the developed technology is suitable for use in commercial
operations and adaptable to the various environmental conditions and
agricultural application scenarios. Experimentation and validation carried out
during the project will demonstrate the technical capabilities and benefits of
these sensors, including enhanced data accuracy, ability to provide continuous
in-situ monitoring, and improved maintenance procedures. Successful integration
of the NPK and EC/pH/T sensor technology will uncover new scientific knowledge
and will empower industries to achieve higher levels of productivity,
sustainability, and economic competitiveness, positioning them at the forefront
of innovation and growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.