* 2329273
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Developing and Optimizing Reflection-Informed STEM Learning and Instruction by Integrating Learning Technologies with Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Dominic Kao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 07/31/2025
* USD 196,500.00

This project aims to enhance student learning and engagement in large lecture
STEM courses by developing, optimizing, and evaluating a digital learning
environment called CourseMIRROR. CourseMIRROR uses Natural Language Processing
(NLP) algorithms and techniques to prompt and scaffold students to create in-
depth reflections on their learning experiences. By closely working with a
socially and culturally diverse group of students and instructors in public
universities and community colleges, the project will directly affect hundreds
of students through evidence-based pedagogies and the way educators provide
opportunities for learning and engagement. Since we purposefully selected to
work with diverse students across institutions, findings will be generalizable
to the college student population. Also, the multidisciplinary nature of the
project team and work ensures that our results will be reached across
traditional disciplinary silos, generating impact in multiple fields, including
NLP, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), learning
sciences, and STEM education. By examining students’ learning through purposeful
reflection and feedback loops, this work has the potential to provide a route to
personalized learning with innovative approaches to problems vital in the
increasingly global economy, thereby opening an important new direction of
research in learning sciences and emerging technologies.

The proposed project will explore the role of the reflection-informed learning
and instruction (RILI) model on students’ engagement and learning outcomes in
large lecture STEM courses. The research team will develop and optimize the
CourseMIRROR digital learning system that leverages NLP techniques to prompt and
scaffold students to write detailed reflections and generate reflection
summaries for each lecture. Specifically, this project will incorporate three
lines of research: 1) the role of the RILI model on students’ motivation,
emotions, and learning, 2) the effectiveness of NLP in creating personalized
learning experiences, summarizing reflections in a meaningful way, and
evaluating the quality of reflections, and 3) value and design of digital
learning tools to improve students’ engagement and learning. This project
leverages NLP and HCI techniques and connects them with the RILI model. The aim
of combining these approaches emerges to support the innovative and
unconventional approach to research, pedagogical strategies, and improved
student outcomes. How students learn through iterative cycles of critical
reflection and how to effectively utilize and optimize prompts and feedback is
not yet well understood or studied. Equally important is how instructors use the
process of reflective practice to inform and transform instruction. This project
is novel in this respect, as researchers have yet to conduct studies in which
these questions are jointly explored and help us explore how learning and
engagement can be enabled, improved, and supported across different classes
using digital tools, social interactions, and practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.