* 2329798
* PFI-TT: Novel Non-Contacting Position Estimation System for Long-Stroke Actuators
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Rajesh Rajamani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes technology commercialization of
a novel sensor that addresses a significant market need, potential to lead to a
future large company that generates significant revenues and employment,
education of a postdoctoral fellow providing them experience in both technology
development and technology commercialization, outreach to K-12 school students
through the ME Ambassadors Program, and outreach to a large number of industrial
companies who can be potential customers for the developed sensor technology.
This project will develop a prototype position measurement sensor useful for a
wide variety of piston-cylinder actuators. The project will build on previous
NSF research in which a position sensor suitable for small-stroke non-ferrous
actuators was developed. While the previous invention has been successfully
licensed to an industrial partner, it works well only for small stroke (up to 15
cm) applications. The fundamental research described in this proposal will
enable enhancement of the sensing technology so as to provide accurate
measurements over long stroke lengths. This will open up a large market for the
sensor, including the long-stroke ferrous hydraulic actuators utilized on
agricultural and construction vehicles.

The proposed project will conduct research to develop technology that enables
the non-contacting sensor to work for long-stroke applications in ferrous
actuators. This requires addressing several fundamental challenges, including
the lack of accuracy and lack of robustness of previous estimation algorithms
based on the extended Kalman filter which relied on linearization of nonlinear
magnetic field models. Other technical challenges include the presence of
significant hysteresis in the magnetic field model due to the ferrous cylinder
being made of soft steel which gets magnetized and demagnetized in real time
from the oscillatory motion of the internal magnet, and the requirement to
daisy-chain multiple sensors for a multi-output nonlinear system in which only
subsets of the sensors can be utilized in piecewise regions of operation of the
sensor system. Solutions to address these challenges will be developed in the
project. The proposed solutions include rigorous development of nonlinear-
observer-based estimation algorithms that provide both global asymptotic
stability as well as rejection of disturbances and noise, development of a new
analytical model for hysteresis that has significant advantages over the
traditional Preisach model, and a systematic design methodology to address
sensor switching and daisy chaining of sensors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.