* 2329678
* Advancing Gender Equity by Scaling Systemic Change in Community College Computing Programs with Research-Based Resources and Communities of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Nancy Binowski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2026
* USD 943,061.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by focusing on the computing
education and workforce development at two-year institutions. Recognizing the
increasingly crucial role of community colleges in education and workforce
development in computing and a significant gender gap in computing programs
within these institutions, the aim of this research and development project is
to address and investigate the systemic issues related to the recruitment and
retention of intersectionally diverse women in community college computing
programs. The National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT) and
its partners, the County College of Morris, and the University of Washington
will enhance and tailor existing research-based resources and tools for
broadening participation in computing developed and disseminated by NCWIT. These
resources are based on scholarly literature and applied experience in increasing
awareness and action that are oriented toward fostering gender diversity,
equity, and inclusion. This effort tightly couples the development of resources,
the facilitation of change through professional development and services, and
research into conceptualization and implementation of project activities at
local community college campuses. To advance knowledge, the project is pursuing
four objectives. First, is adapting existing research-based resources developed
for four-year institutions to the two-year institutional context and create new
research-based resources. Second, is mapping the resources to the NCWITâ€™s
Undergraduate Systemic Change Model, a framework based on the organization
change literature. Third, is to curate and integrate the resources into a ready-
to-use online platform and guidance system modified for the two-year college
context. Fourth, and finally, is to facilitate Learning Circles and faculty
professional development for department action teams from nine community
colleges across the country for use in developing plans for systemic change in
their computing programs. Based on the complexity of the proposed effort, a
comprehensive mixed methods evaluation is guided by in-depth knowledge of NCWIT
current efforts and organizational change model; commitment to gender diversity,
equity, and inclusion; and tightly coupled research and development activities.
The set of evaluation questions are aligned with project activities and their
implementation, data collection and analyses, and outcomes. Drawing on this set
of informational resources, the quantitative and qualitative evaluation includes
six components. First, is resource adaptation review and focus group analyses to
assess relevance and remaining gaps in the new NCWIT resources. Second, is beta
testing of the Tech Inclusion Journey platform and guidance. Third, is a
midpoint survey of Learning Circles to assess organizational change processes
and outcomes. Fourth, is a final survey of participants to assess changes in
knowledge, motivation, and action over time. Fifth, are bi-monthly project team
meetings with review of documents to report on challenges for formative
purposes. Sixth, and finally, is assessment of the extent to which resources are
filling the need for increasing gender diversity, equity, and inclusion in
computing. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in
Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education
supports project that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges.
This program description promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in
undergraduate STEM education at two-year colleges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.