* 2329626
* Travel: Student Travel Support for 2024 IEEE Radio &amp; Wireless Week (RWW)
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2024,06/30/2024
* Chung-Tse Wu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The IEEE Radio & Wireless Week (RWW) covers a broad range of emerging research
topics in radio wireless technologies, from theory to practical implementation,
from integrated chips to large-scale systems, from kilohertz (kHz) to terahertz
(THz), and from communications to sensing and space applications. It is
sponsored by the IEEE Microwave Theory and Technology Society, with technical
co-sponsorships from the IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society, the IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society, and the IEEE Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Society. The 19th annual IEEE RWW will be held in San Antonio, TX on
January 21-26, 2024. To support the training of the next-generation scientists
and engineers working on 6G Wireless, this NSF grant will provide travel support
for 25 students to present their research papers at the conference and learn the
cutting-edge research and development of wireless technologies, systems, and
applications. The travel grants will be awarded competitively to graduate
students from U.S. universities who will present their accepted papers at the
conference. The awardees will be selected by a committee of the conference and
the paper quality will be considered in the selection process. The proposed
travel support will have long-term and broad impacts on the participating
students' career developments and contribute to the U.S. STEM workforce
development.

The IEEE RWW in 2024 consists of five co-located sub-conferences: Topical
Conference on Power Amplifiers for Wireless and Radio Applications (PAWR),
Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems (SiRF),
Topical Conference on Wireless Sensors and Sensor Networks (WiSNet), Space
Hardware and Radio Conference (SHaRC), and Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS).
Students attending the conference will learn about the latest state-of-the-art
wireless technologies in these topical areas covering devices, integrated
circuits, antennas, system architectures, and emerging applications such as 6G
Wireless and space communications/sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.