* 2329804
* PFI: TT: A Handheld Virtual Reality-Based Device for Realistic Power Tool Feedback for Manufacturing Skills Training
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in its direct impact on hands-on
skills training for the use of power tools in the manufacturing industry. By
bridging the gap between scientific research and practical application, the
project aims to translate cutting-edge scientific discoveries into tangible
solutions that address real-world challenges in manufacturing skills training.
Our partnership with industry and commercialization experts in the manufacturing
sector will result in increased productivity, accessible tools, and reduced
costs, bridging the skills gap faced in the manufacturing industry. This
partnership aims to target, recruit, and train individuals who can contribute to
entrepreneurial education in high technology applications of virtual reality in
the manufacturing workforce. To ensure a sustainable pipeline of skilled
individuals, the project will collaborate with the K-12 education resources
institute, women, and minority engineering program. We will not only enhance our
understanding of how virtual skills training can be practically implemented but
also have the potential to revolutionize industries and improve lives by scaling
hands-on skills training.

The proposed project aims to create effective learning environments utilizing
haptics and artificial intelligence (AI) in virtual reality (VR) to replicate
physical reality to address the pervasive skills training gap in the
manufacturing industry. The focus is on developing an immersive learning
environment that facilitates the development of muscle memory and reduces the
learning curve for using tools in real-life situations. To make the system more
accessible to end-users, a low-code no-code authoring process will be developed.
The research will involve capturing the movement patterns of both users and
experts in 3D, providing valuable feedback to enhance their skills. Feedback
modalities such as haptic, visual, and auditory cues will be developed to reduce
cognitive load, measure progress, and enhance the fidelity and value of the
hands-on PowVRtool training experience. A generalized haptic device, capable of
rendering realistic feedback for various power tools, will be developed and
tested. This will be achieved by utilizing machine learning algorithms that
replicate the vibrations of real hand tools within a virtual environment.
Through these efforts, the project anticipates technical results that will
improve training experiences, increase skill acquisition, and enhance the
effectiveness of hands-on power tool training in virtual environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.