* 2329230
* AF: Small: Algorithms for Graph Cuts
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Debmalya Panigrahi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 10/31/2026
* USD 299,990.00

Graphs are ubiquitous in nature and in the sciences, and model a broad array of
objects and activities ranging from telecommunication and transportation
networks to social interactions to biological and artificial neural networks.
Unsurprisingly, the algorithmic study of graphs has a long history tracing back
to the earliest days of computer science; today, graph algorithms are routinely
used in applications ranging from online maps to medical imaging to VLSI design.
Fundamentally, graphs connect entities, and many of the core questions in graph
algorithms seek to understand how robust or fragile these connections are in the
presence of link failures. This project aims to design new algorithms that are
faster, simpler, and help better understand the connectivity properties of a
graph. The newly designed algorithms have the potential of significant real-
world impact in areas such as image segmentation and design of reliable
networks. On the educational front, the project will train graduate and
undergraduate students, with an emphasis on participation of underrepresented
groups.

The project has two main thrusts: the design of deterministic algorithms for
graph cuts and the study of graph connectivity under random edge failures. Over
the last few decades, progress in problems such as minimum cut has largely been
driven by the design of new (Monte Carlo) randomized algorithms. These
algorithms, while often very elegant and highly efficient, suffer from the
shortcoming that they provide answers that are inconsistent across multiple
runs, and that are occasionally incorrect. This prevents their use in many
downstream applications, both in theory and practice. The first thrust of the
project is to design derandomization tools that help bridge the gap between the
best randomized and deterministic algorithms for fundamental graph connectivity
problems. The second thrust is motivated by the observation that in many
practical scenarios, edge failures are random, rather than adversarial, events.
Traditional graph connectivity measures such as minimum cuts do not provide a
faithful estimate of the resilience of a network to such random failures. The
project aims to design new paradigms and algorithms to study connectivity
properties in networks that are subject to random edge failures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.