* 2329020
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Collaborative Optimization and Management for Iterative and Parallel Quantum Computing
* MPS,OMA
* 11/15/2023,10/31/2026
* Ying Mao, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 10/31/2026
* USD 690,583.00

Non-technical Abstract: Quantum computing is advancing rapidly, pushing the
boundaries of classical computing. Due to limited quantum resources on any
single machine, recent research attempts to integrate multiple quantum machines
and classical computing nodes into large-scale, multi-node systems. However,
existing applications and management schemes need to be optimized with respect
to these systems. Focusing on iterative and parallel quantum applications, this
project studies collaborative optimizations and management approaches that aim
to fully exploit the potential of a multi-node quantum-classical system.
Building on popular open-source projects, such as Qiskit and Kubernetes, the
proposed system creates an accessible entry point for researchers from diverse
computer science backgrounds to explore quantum computing. Moreover, the team is
committed to promoting quantum computing to underrepresented students through
multi-institutional workshops and hackathons. These collaborative workforce
developments and capacity-building activities will provide opportunities for
students at a non-R1 institution to develop their quantum knowledge base, paving
the way for a more diverse and skilled workforce in the emerging field of
quantum computing.

Technical Abstract: The research objective of this project is to investigate a
quantum-classical system that can collaboratively optimize iterative and
parallel quantum applications. The proposed system combines multiple quantum
machines with classical computing nodes, operating in three modes: simulation-
only, quantum-classical, and quantum-only. Specifically, it supports
collaborative optimizations which utilize a circuit analyst to identify
iterative and dependent operations automatically. It further generates
application-specific logical and physical optimization plans to fully leverage
the available quantum and classical resources within the system. Additionally, a
collaborative management pipeline is developed with a visualized representation.
The system considers multiple quantum and classical nodes as a unified system
and optimizes input-output roundtrip loopback between quantum and classical
computing components. It utilizes an online-offline combined approach to address
the imbalanced executions. Furthermore, it incorporates hardware-informed
optimization and management, which seeks to effectively gather the hardware’s
noise, calibration, and connectivity information in an efficient way to optimize
the quantum application’s fidelity. It queries the hardware to track parameters
of importance to the desired quantum algorithm. Ultimately, this project
provides a comprehensive approach to tackling the challenges faced in multi-
node, quantum-classical systems, ensuring efficient resource utilization and
seamless integration.

This project is funded by The Computing and Communications Foundations (CCF)
Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.