* 2330696
* I-Corps:  Development of Self-healing, Fiber-reinforced Composites
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jason Patrick, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of self-healing fiber-reinforced composites (FRC). The proposed
technology may be used to autonomously repair delamination damage during
service, thereby enhancing the durability and longevity of modern structures.
Globally, FRC represent one of the largest and fastest growing sectors of
advanced materials technology. This growth stems from the numerous high-
performance applications for FRC in a broad range of industries that include
aerospace, defense, green energy, automotive, marine, infrastructure and
electronics. Many of the composite structures used in the highest value
applications are multi-layer laminates that are exposed to repeated stresses
over multiple years (up to 30) of service. The proposed self-healing composite
is specifically aimed at preventing premature failure in these laminated
composite structures and extending service life. In addition, self-healing FRC
also provide a more sustainable pathway that prolongs service life and enhances
resilience and durability, making such materials particularly attractive in
composite industries where maintenance and replacement and associated downtime
are costly. Industries such as Aerospace also may benefit from enhanced safety,
where end-users have reported issues with delamination-susceptible parts
including rotorcraft blades and other components featuring ply-drops and
fastener holes where stress concentrations arise.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a self-healing fiber-
reinforced composites (FRC) platform that achieves in situ self-healing via
thermal re-mending. The proposed approach relies on mendable thermoplastic (TP)
that is 3D-printed directly onto woven fiber reinforcement and co-laminated with
carbon-based resistive heaters. The patterned TP exhibits high melt-flow and
self-pressurization for confined micro-crack delivery at temperatures below the
glass-transition of the composite thermoset matrix. Rapid (minutes-scale) in
situ thermal re-mending is accomplished via resistive heating. Printing TP
directly on the reinforcement increases interfacial bonding, resulting in a
cohesive failure through the thermoplastic interphase. Test results show a four-
fold increase in mode-I fracture toughness over a plain composite, and a
consistent self-healing performance (up to 100%) via dynamic re-bonding for
sustained cycle counts (100+). The prolonged recovery made possible via this
proposed in situ thermal re-mending strategy represents an order of magnitude
leap in self-healing repeatability compared to prior technologies. In addition,
the composite augmentations for self-healing preserve mechanical properties and
are compatible with existing manufacturing processes, both of which are critical
for eventual commercialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.