* 2330004
* RAPID: Monitoring subsurface water storage dynamics associated with the 2023 extreme snowfall events in precipitation-limited systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,677.00

Many areas in mountainous regions are experiencing more frequent and extreme
weather conditions, such as heavy snowfall and drought, due to global warming.
The impacts of these changing weather patterns on water resources available to
society and ecosystems are still not fully understood. In spring 2023, many
cooler regions in the western US received extremely heavy snowfalls, and in some
locations, the recorded snow water equivalent exceeded historical values. This
research aims to determine how mountain hydrological systems respond to such
exceptionally heavy snowfall. This research will focus on determining how much
of the melted snow water seeps into the ground during the wet season and how
plants utilize the water stored in the soil and rocks during the dry summer. The
scientific data collected through this study will provide valuable insights into
how groundwater mitigates the adverse effects of climate change. Additionally,
this project will offer training opportunities for one graduate student and
produce educational materials for a course offered to hydrology graduate
students from approximately ten universities. The valuable data collected for
this project has potential to improve computational simulation techniques, which
could inform future water resource management and benefit society.

This research will use advanced geophysical imaging techniques to understand how
anomalously wet conditions impact how meltwater enters and travels through the
subsurface, and how subsurface water becomes available for use by vegetation,
streamflow, and groundwater recharge. The study will be carried out at two sites
in the Dry Creek Experimental Watershed near Boise, Idaho, where existing
hydrometeorological information will supplement new geophysical imaging methods.
Time-lapse electrical resistivity tomography will be used to monitor the daily
or weekly resistivity variations related to subsurface water storage changes. A
newly developed resistivity inversion scheme incorporating critical zone
subsurface structure will be used to reconstruct the spatiotemporal resistivity
distribution along a transect at each study site. The site-specific
petrophysical relationship between resistivity and water content will also be
determined such that the subsurface water dynamics can be estimated from
resistivity data. The study will complement ongoing efforts investigating water
uptake strategies by plants, streamflow generation, and groundwater recharge to
enhance understanding of how extreme weather events impact hydrological
processes in mountain systems.

This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Geophysics programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.