* 2330509
* Global Centers Track 2: Developing Solutions to Decarbonize Emissions and Fuels
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Efrain Rodriguez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This Global Centers Track 2 Design award advances multidisciplinary, use-
inspired approaches to tackle climate change by advancing the science of
decarbonization of our energy streams. The world energy demand continues to
increase due to an expanding human population and a concomitant rise in our
standards of living. The energy-intensive needs of housing, transportation,
industry, and agriculture all rely today on a mixture of energy sources. The
continued dominance of fossil fuels—coal, natural gas, and petroleum in our
energy stream calls for urgent transition toward decarbonization to avoid
extreme climate change. An international team from the U.S., Japan, Israel, and
Ghana brings together their expertise to identify and begin to address the key
scientific and engineering challenges to successfully implementing
decarbonization. Together with stakeholders from academic, industry, research
and policy-making in four countries, the multidisciplinary Global Center design
team explores several pathways, from direct carbon capture from the atmosphere
to the carbon-frese production of so-called "green" hydrogen to identify the
best science, policy, and engineering solutions for decarbonization. The design
team will conduct a series of workshops, develop a course on energy and
sustainability for students and early career researchers, and promote student
professional development through international study opportunities. This design
award is focused on three major thrusts. The first thrust is carbon capture,
utilization, and sequestration. Researchers explore the use of nanoporous
materials, mesoporous materials, and other porous media as optimal pathways for
the absorption of CO2 gas. These materials should be cost-effective, scalable,
and have the capability to either convert CO2 to a useful product or one easily
sequestered. The second thrust is in the production of blue hydrogen—which is
defined as hydrogen fuel formed by steam reforming of methane while capturing
the CO2 byproduct. International experts in chemical looping methods and oxygen-
carrying materials will strategize how to utilize these approaches to produce
blue hydrogen efficiently and cost-effectively. The third and final thrust is in
the production of green hydrogen through the thermochemical or photochemical
splitting of water, an emerging technology. The global partners will use solar
thermochemical splitting of water as a novel way to achieve green hydrogen. A
cross-cutting aspect of award activities is the employment of machine learning
to tackle materials discovery. Through all three major thrusts, the Global
Centers design team will enhance our knowledge on global solutions for
decarbonizing our energy streams. This award is funded by the Global Centers
program, an innovative program that supports use-inspired research addressing
global challenges related to climate change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design
awards support U.S.-based researchers to bring together international teams to
develop research questions and partnerships, conduct landscape analyses,
synthesize data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to advance their use-
inspired research at larger scale in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.