* 2330367
* CRII: OAC: Enabling Quantities-of-Interest Error Control for Trust-Driven Lossy Compression
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Xin Liang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2025
* USD 151,695.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

Scientific simulations and instruments are producing data at volumes and
velocities that overwhelm network and storage systems. Although error-controlled
lossy compressors have been employed to mitigate these data issues, many
scientists still feel reluctant to adopt them because these compressors provide
no guarantee on the accuracy of downstream analysis results derived from raw
data. This project aims to fill this gap by developing a trust-driven lossy data
compression infrastructure capable of strictly controlling the errors in
downstream analysis theoretically and practically to facilitate the use of data
reduction in scientific applications. Success of this project will promote the
progress of science in multiple disciplines via effective data reduction, and
contribute to resolving important societal problems including electric
generation, weather forecasting, material design, and transportation. Moreover,
this project will contribute to the growth and development of future generations
of scientists and engineers through educational and engagement activities,
including development of new curriculum and recruitment of K-12 students.

Existing lossy compression techniques either overlook error quantification or
provide error control only for raw data, leaving uncertainties in the outcome of
downstream quantities of interest (QoIs) computed from the raw data. This
greatly concerns many computational scientists who wish to reduce their data
while preserving necessary information, preventing them from adopting lossy
compression in their applications. This research will address these problems
through an integration of theory and implementation via three tasks. First, a
novel theory enabling error control on downstream QoIs will be developed. This
will fundamentally address the trustability issues of existing error controlled
lossy compressors that provide error control only on raw data. Second, an
optimization method ensuring tight error control will be applied based on
rigorous analysis, to achieve higher compression ratios under the same
requirements. Third, a scalable infrastructure will be built through a careful
integration with advanced compression frameworks and tailored parallelization
based on target QoIs, in order to take full advantage of existing compression
algorithms and computational patterns in the target QoIs. The project will
enable application scientists to store the most valuable information in their
data based on their unique needs, creating opportunities for novel findings in
multiple scientific disciplines including climatology, cosmology, and
seismology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.