* 2330311
* D-ISN/RAPID: Data Collection for Human Trafficking Recruitment and Responses in Forced Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Renata Konrad, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,006.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will support collection of time-
sensitive qualitative and quantitative data regarding online trafficking
recruitment and response activity for a vulnerable population subject to
involuntary displacement because of the conflict in Ukraine. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that man-made and natural disasters create and exacerbate
vulnerabilities that lead to exploitation by human trafficking networks. Since
late February 2022, over 8 million Ukrainians have sought refuge outside the
country's borders, 90% of whom are women and children; an additional 10 million
are internally displaced. Loss of stable housing, employment, and social support
networks are all key risk factors for human trafficking. As a result of the
invasion, a myriad of websites and social media chat groups have emerged
targeting housing and employment opportunities. While such online forums connect
millions to much needed information, they also pose fertile ground for
trafficking recruitment. This project has three main aims, namely (1) to collect
data on where and how people are being recruited; (2) to document which
services/resources potential trafficking targets are seeking; and (3) to
interview and collect data on evolving interventions used by international and
local organizations operating hotlines and shelters.

The investigators will use their established connections to collect the
following quantitative and qualitative data: public bulletin websites that offer
information on housing and job information, social media websites, and
international assistance organizations. The project will deploy web scraping
tools to collect data from the online sources and will conduct structured
interviews with non-governmental assistance organizations. The generated
datasets will be collected, curated, and archived at computing facilities at
Worcester Polytechnic Institute and shared widely with the broader research
community. The project will involve graduate students and provide them exposure
to interdisciplinary research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.