* 2330046
* CEDAR: Characterization of Upper Atmospheric Effects of Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Erdal Yigit, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 01/31/2027
* USD 425,403.00

Hurricanes are among the most powerful recurring weather events and play a
crucial role in redistributing atmospheric energy. This project will study
hurricane-induced changes in the upper atmosphere, tens of kilometers above the
Earth’s surface. Satellite observations as well as mathematical models will be
used to characterize the impact of hurricanes on the atmosphere by quantifying
changes in winds, temperature, and atmospheric waves in unprecedented detail.
Gaining a better understanding of atmospheric changes caused by hurricanes has
important benefits for both the scientific community and the general public.
This research can contribute to space-born hurricane prediction and inform
efforts to mitigate the potential impacts of these disastrous events on human
activities and technological systems. The activities will benefit Science
Technology Engineering and Math (STEM) education within and beyond George Mason
University. This project will support a graduate student and provide summer
internships to several undergraduate students. The research material produced in
this project will be integrated into various courses taught by the PI and will
be shared on a website with the broader community. The PI and the graduate
student plan on visiting a local community college to promote science.

This project is an observational and modeling study of hurricane-induced changes
in the upper atmosphere. A suite of satellite observations from COSMIC-2, ICON,
GOLD, and TIMED will be used to characterize variations in neutral temperature,
horizontal winds, O/N2, and electron density in the thermosphere-ionosphere
during hurricanes, and to quantify the associated Gravity Wave (GW) activity. To
aid the interpretation of the observed behavior of the large-scale atmosphere GW
activity during hurricanes, the team will perform general circulation model
simulations from the tropopause to the thermosphere, driven by MERRA-2 lower
boundary forcing and incorporating subgrid-scale gravity waves. Overall, this
work aims to offer meaningful insight into hurricane-induced vertical coupling
between the lower and upper atmosphere. Topics under study include (1) the
influence of hurricanes on the mean structure and variability of the
thermosphere, (2) the characterization of gravity wave activity during
hurricanes, and (3) propagation, dissipation of gravity waves and the resulting
dynamical and thermal effects in the thermosphere during hurricanes. The
observational work could be useful in helping refine the procedure of retrieving
GW signatures as a proxy for hurricane intensity evolution in the upper
atmosphere.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.