* 2330582
* Global Centers Track 1: U.S.-Canada Center on Climate-Resilient Western Interconnected Grid
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Ilkay Altintas, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2028
* USD 5,000,000.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------



Extreme climate events, such as heat waves or wildfires, often disrupt the power
grid. These disturbances affect the lives of many and impede enterprise
productivity. It is thus critical to modernize the Grid and ensure that it can
withstand or recover quickly from the intensifying effects of climate
disturbances. Engineering a climate-resilient Grid is, however, challenging. It
requires better understanding and forecasting of climate-driven disturbance
risks. Grid stability also depends on end-user energy demand. Furthermore, grids
in the western U.S. and Canada are interconnected which adds to the complexity
and requires international collaboration. The U.S.-Canada Center on Climate-
Resilient Western Interconnected Grid brings together an international team of
researchers to assess the risk of extreme event for power grids using state-of-
the-art modeling tools. The Center develops new technologies and design
adaptation and mitigation solutions to overcome disturbances. The Center
leverages multi-faceted partnerships across academia, industry, government, and
communities and expertise and resources in both the U.S. and Canada. It engages
stakeholders beyond academia to ensure foreseeable applications of the research
outcomes. By leveraging cross-border collaboration, it creates knowledge and
technologies that can be applied beyond the context of the western U.S. and
Canada region, globally. This award also provides support for undergraduate and
graduate students at the Universities of Utah and New Mexico and other
professionals in California and Nevada, as well as outreach and educational
activities to local communities in the western U.S.

The Center pursues four major use-inspired research priorities: (a) create
customized models for risk quantification and forecasting of regional extreme
disturbances to better prepare for potential disruptions to power grids; (b)
establish a comprehensive understanding of community needs, capacities, and
adaptation processes towards climate-driven extreme disturbances, in order to
develop effective climate-resilience strategies; (c) build a federated
cyberinfrastructure for collecting, governing, and sharing climate and grid
data, in order to facilitate collaboration and information exchange among
stakeholders; (d) develop new models for short-term operation and long-term
planning of power systems that are informed by the aforementioned data and
insights. This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative
partnership with funding agencies in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom,
to jointly support use-inspired research addressing global challenges in climate
change and clean energy. Partnerships with the Commonwealth Science and
Innovation Research Organisation (CSIRO), Natural Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada (SSHRC), and UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) leverage
resources to tackle challenges at a larger scale than would be possible for one
funding agency alone. This Center is jointly supported by NSF and NSERC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.