* 2330199
* Large-Scale Optical Ultrasound Transducer Arrays for High-Speed and High-Resolution 3D Acoustic Tomography
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jun Zou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 406,900.00

Ultrasound imaging is essential in the clinic for early detection, diagnosis,
and prognosis of many diseases. It provides real-time imaging speed, has no
harmful ionizing radiation, and is low cost. However, current ultrasound imaging
systems mainly produce two-dimensional planar images that may be inaccurate
and/or difficult to interpret. Therefore, a three-dimensional (3D) imaging
capability is essential for visualizing, navigating, and investigating patient
anatomy and pathologies that are naturally 3D. To produce 3D images in a timely
manner, an ultrasound imaging system must be able to capture the whole acoustic
wave field emitted by the imaging target, such as a tumor. This requires a large
array of ultrasound sensors or transducers, massive electrical cables, and
sophisticated and expensive data acquisition electronics. Unfortunately, because
of high system complexity and cost, 3D ultrasound imaging is still very limited
in terms of performance and availability. In this project, a new optical
technology will be developed to detect and convert the invisible acoustic wave
field into a visible optical light field, which can be readily recorded by a
camera. This “seeing the sound” approach is expected to address the performance
and cost issues and open the door for many applications of 3D ultrasound
imaging. This project will also provide unique multidisciplinary learning and
training opportunities in microsystems, optics, acoustics and medical imaging
for students and the general public.

This project aims to achieve large-scale optical ultrasound transducer (OUT)
arrays for enabling high-speed and high-resolution 3D acoustic tomography.
Different from their electrical counterparts, OUTs convert ultrasound waves into
optical signals through optomechanical modulation. This makes it possible to
maintain high sensitivity even with a small element size. What’s more,
ultrasound signals can be read out “wirelessly” via optical means without
physical interconnects. However, one of the fundamental challenges in existing
OUTs are their poor optical uniformity. Reading out ultrasound signals from
multiple elements requires continual optical tuning, which is a tedious process
and seriously limits the data acquisition speed. This project aims to address
the fundamental bottleneck issues in current OUTs by exploring novel optical
detector design, fabrication, and readout methods. Particularly, new
mechanical/optical co-design and modeling will be combined with precision
micromachining and tuning processes for achieving large-scale OUT arrays with
controllable and uniform optical and acoustic properties. In addition, a new
parallel approach based on pulsed illumination and camera capturing will be
developed for fast ultrasound data acquisition. With wireless optical readout
and natural immunity to electromagnetic interference, the OUT array could enable
new acoustic imaging capabilities not possible before from tetherless, wearable,
or remote imaging to seamless fusion with other mainstream imaging modalities.
In addition, the high optical transparency of the OUT array can greatly
facilitate the integration of hybrid optical and acoustic imaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.