* 2330859
* Developing Competencies for the Future of Data and Computing: The Role of  K-12 Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Amy Stephens, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,196,249.00

The National Academy of Sciences will conduct a consensus study on the role of
K-12 education in supporting the development of competencies for data and
computing. There are many skills and competencies for the various computing-
related disciplines, like computer science, data science, artificial
intelligence, and even computational skills in other STEM disciplines more
broadly. However, there has been little attention to identify which set of these
skills are foundational competencies required for students to succeed in a
computational world. This project aims to serve the national interest by
identifying these foundational skills and describing K-12 education's role in
teaching these skills. The project intends to produce a National Academies
report that identifies the foundational competencies needed for data and
computing, the learning progressions needed to reach these competencies, and
provide guidance on the design of the relevant learning experiences so that
students can navigate and succeed in the changing computational landscape. The
project will adopt a systemic approach toward advancing equity in computing
related fields and will identify promising directions for changes in policy and
practice, for pedagogical improvement, and areas where additional research is
needed.

The project hopes to advance understanding of the the role of K–12 in supporting
the development of competencies for data and computing. The proejct will be
conducted according to the consensus study format of the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The Board on Science Education in
collaboration with the Board on Higher Education and the Workforce will convene
an expert committee to conduct a consensus study to: 1) identify the
foundational competencies needed for data and computing (including basic
literacy) and consider the relationship to other STEM fields; 2) consider the
learning progressions needed to reach these competencies (basic literacy and
career pursuit) and the design of relevant learning experiences; 3) provide
guidance on implications for K–12 curricula and program/pathway development; and
4) identify research needs to provide an evidence base for the development of
computing-related competencies. During the course of the project, extensive
outreach will be carried out to gather input from stakeholders and to cultivate
relationships that will broaden the impact of the final report. The NSF CSforAll
Program supports supports partnerships and research that seek to provide U.S.
students with the opportunity to engage in computer science and computational
thinking education at the preK-12 levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.