* 2330607
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Mechanical Implications of  Agricultural Specialization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Steven Kuhn, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 13,725.00

This project focuses on economic and technical specialization with the adoption
of agriculture in a Neolithic society between 12,000 and 8,000 years ago. The
origins and spread of agriculture is arguably the most important economic
transition in human history. It is widely believed that one consequence of the
development of agricultural economies is the elaboration of economic
specialization and division of labor, two central aspects of modern economies.
This specialization is thought to be reflected in technology, leading to a
proliferation of special purpose tools used for the processing of agricultural
products such as grains. However, in some cases when agriculture is adopted
there is a great deal of continuity in artifact forms between hunting and
gathering cultures and succeeding farming groups: the tools used by early
farmers are very similar to the ones used by their hunter-gatherer forebears,
suggesting that assumptions about specialization may need to be modified.
Archaeology is well placed to provide insight of this topic because it can trace
technological and functional changes through time to reveal changes in social
and economic organization associated with major economic transitions. This
research provides new information relevant to local community interests in
understanding the history of traditional food systems, and for teaching courses
on local history and world prehistory.

This project investigates whether economic and technological specialization is
inevitably associated with adoption of food production, or whether it was simply
what happened in the few areas. The investigators are examining how a range of
stone tools were actually used before and after the transition of agriculture.
The data comes from a site which documents this transition. This locality is
particularly suitable for the project because it was the center of early millet
agriculture, and because the site contains cultural components dating to before
and after the transition, in the same locality. Artifact functions are
investigated using two independent sources of evidence. One is use-wear,
microscopic traces of damage to ancient artifacts. Such physical alteration
provides insight into the motions involved in artifact use, as well as about the
physical properties of the materials contacted. The other source of clues is
minute residues of starch grains adhering to working parts of artifacts.
Starches can provide direct evidence of the kinds of plants that people were
cutting, grinding and scraping with the stone artifacts. By examining evidence
for artifact function directly, the project can determine whether in fact
artifacts were used in more specialized ways over time, even while the forms
stayed the same, or whether one needs to rethink assumptions about
specialization and the origins of agricultural economies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.