* 2330009
* The Role of the Mean-State Atmospheric Circulation in Future Projections of Regional Hydroclimate and Cloud Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kevin Grise, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2026
* USD 184,959.00

Efforts to mitigate climate risk rely on model simulations to determine how
climate will change on a regional basis, for instance whether it will rain more
or less in a given region as the world warms. But in many regions climate models
do not produce consistent answers, for instance in the US Southwest some models
project more summer rainfall while others project less. The lack of consensus
could mean that either outcome is in fact equally likely, and the range of
projections across the ensemble of available climate models is an accurate
representation of the range of likely outcomes. Alternatively, perhaps some
portion of the range should be discounted because the projections in that range
are influenced by specific model biases which have a clear dynamical connection
to the projected changes. For instance a recent study by the Principal
Investigator (PI) connects projections of future precipitation over the
Southwest to the moisture flow around a mid-tropospheric ridge over the central
US in present-day simulations from the same models. The models which produce the
strongest precipitation increases show excessive ridging which is not consistent
with present-day observations, thus casting doubt on their projections of
rainier summers in the Southwest.

Research under this award continues the PI's effort to identify present-day
atmospheric circulation features which affect future projections of regional
precipitation change, as well as projections of regional cloud cover change
which can amplify or reduce the warming effect of greenhouse gas emissions. The
work uses statistical analysis of model simulations to identify relationships
between future projections and present-day circulation features, followed by
specialized simulations using the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM), the
atmospheric component model of CESM, the Community Earth System Model. The
simulations use "nudging" to produce present-day simulations which mimic several
climate models, paired with simulations in which a uniform warming is applied to
the ocean surface so that the effects of the differing present-day circulations
can be assessed.

The project is of societal as well as scientific interest given the need for
better information to guide efforts to assess and respond to climate risk. The
project provides support and training to a postdoctoral associate and a graduate
student, thereby promoting the future workforce in this research area. In
addition, the project hosts a summer undergraduate student through the Virginia-
North Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation's summer research program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.