* 2330705
* I-Corps:  Microfluidic chamber for ex-vivo tissue electrophysiology
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Jordan Renna, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a life science research tool designed to improve ex-vivo
electroretinography. The electroretinogram (ERG) is a full field
electrophysiological technique that measures light-evoked activity in a variety
of retinal tissues. This technique is used to give an overview of retinal health
and viability, and can be used in conjunction with pharmaceuticals, stem cells,
and transplantation. Currently available devices, however, fail due to the
formation of bubbles in the enclosed chamber. These bubbles can impede the path
between the tissue and electrodes. The proposed device eliminates a common
source of bubble adhesion and may reduce experimental waste. In addition, the
proposed device may be used with tissues of different shapes and sizes including
mouse, rabbit, zebrafish and human tissue. The proposed device may improve the
quality and reliability of data in retinal electrophysiology, supporting
advancements in the understanding and potential treatment of retinal diseases
and provide a valuable addition to the toolkit of vision research.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a device designed to improve
ex-vivo electroretinography in dissected biological tissue. Rod and cone
photoreceptors hyperpolarize in the presence of light and are experimentally
detectable using electroretinograms (ERGs). ERGs may be performed using an ex
vivo configuration, where retinas are isolated and transretinal photovoltages
are recorded at high signal-to-noise ratios. The proposed device design adds a
taper to the junction between the perfusion port and the tissue chamber and
eliminates a common source of failure due to bubble adhesion. Tests of the
device showed a reduced experimental failure rate from 1 out of every 5
experiments to 1 out of every 20. In addition, initial testing of this device
allowed recording signals as small as 5 microvolts. The proposed device may
enhance the practicality and efficiency of retinal electrophysiology research
while supporting a variety of experimental setups, enhancing its potential
usefulness across a range of vision research studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.