* 2330583
* IUSE/PFE:RED Two-Year: Engineering Pathways for Access, Community, and Transfer (EPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Ann-Marie Vollstedt, Truckee Meadows Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,696,448.00

Community colleges (CCs) play a crucial role in US higher education and are an
important pathway to providing educational opportunities for students from
diverse populations. Since over half of CC students are low-income, from
underrepresented groups, and/or first-generation, CCs must play a prominent role
in broadening participation in engineering to meet workforce needs and to solve
societal problems. Unfortunately, despite the educational opportunities provided
by CCs, there are significant gaps in the transfer process to university
engineering Bachelor’s degree programs that impact CC students’ identity as
engineers, their ability to complete their course of study in two years, and
their success in securing employment after graduation. In Nevada, this problem
is significant and the transfer process for engineering students needs
revolutionary change. Engineering students who transfer from CCs to the
University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) have low graduation rates due to structural,
cultural, and organizational challenges that CC students face that affect their
graduation and post-graduation success. The program entitled Engineering Pathway
for Access, Community, and Transfer (EPACT), is a partnership among Nevada
System of Higher Education (NSHE) institutions. The EPACT revolution aims to
catalyze change in NSHE by removing barriers to academic advancement experienced
by CC engineering transfer students. EPACT will create revolutionary change by
1) Serving as a model change project to help other systems of higher education
make transformational cultural, structural, and organizational changes in the
engineering student transfer process; 2) Using the knowledge gained from EPACT
research to address a national need to promote a diverse and well-prepared STEM
workforce; 3) Developing student-centered engineering education focused on the
professional formation of engineers, 4) Disseminating the lessons learned from
the project to promote engineering transfer student success at other systems of
higher education 5) Providing information to local, state, and federal partners
on the value of programs like EPACT for the growing number of underrepresented
groups that encounter barriers to transferring into engineering degree programs.

The EPACT team will use the Foundations for Institutional Transformation (FIT)
Model as a guiding change theory to carry out this project. The FIT change
model, based on John Kotter’s theory, is grounded in five values: equitable
structures and outcomes, student-centered institutions, implementation at scale,
data-informed decision-making, and system-wide collaboration. The FIT model will
guide the EPACT team to address cultural, structural, and organizational
barriers to engineering transfer student success and study the impact of
policies and procedures on transfer student self-efficacy, engineering identity,
and belongingness. EPACT activities will advance knowledge by addressing the
following research questions: 1) How effectively can the EPACT vision,
overarching goal, objectives, and activities achieve cultural, structural, and
organizational change within NSHE?; and 2) How strongly is the implementation of
EPACT linked to the broader ecosystem that affects CC and university engineering
teaching faculty development and the resulting CC engineering transfer students’
educational environment, leading to academic success, and retention in their
CCs, transfer to university engineering degree programs, and changes in self-
efficacy, engineering identity, and belongingness? Research findings will be
disseminated to a wide audience both internally and externally to NSHE. Once the
EPACT vision is executed, cultural, structural, and organizational changes made
at the NSHE and institutional levels will produce real, quantifiable benefits
for CC faculty and students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.