* 2330722
* RAPID: Impact of Sargassum Decomposition on Air Quality in South Florida
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jiayu Li, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,530.00

In this project the research team will gather new laboratory and field
observations of sulfur-containing compounds and bioaerosols that are expected to
be emitted from an exceptionally large Sargassum brown algae bloom that is
anticipated to reach Florida coastlines in June or July of 2023. It is expected
that this year’s plume will be larger than in previous years and the
accumulation of Sargassum on coastlines, called strandings, has the potential to
negatively impact southern U.S. states’ coastal ecosystems and communities.
While Sargassum blooms have occurred previously, the exceptionally large size of
the expected 2023 plume represents a unique opportunity to take samples and
measure the likely atmospheric, environmental, and ecological impacts from the
accumulation of Sargassum on coastlines and their subsequent decomposition.

In order to assess the impact of the Sargassum bloom, this project team will:
(1) quantify hydrogen sulfide, dimethyl sulfide, and dimethyl disulfide emitted
during Sargassum decomposition from samples collected in the field and observed
within a laboratory chamber; (2) quantify air pollutants and bioaerosols at the
site of the stranding; and (3) assess the concentrations and diversity of
bacteria within air, water, sand, and Sargassum biomass samples via rRNA
sequencing. The overall objective is to quantify both the short-term and the
long-term impacts of Sargassum strandings on air quality and to provide new
insights for researchers and policymakers. The knowledge gained during this
project will increase our understanding of potential risks associated with
Sargassum strandings and enable coastal communities to better prepare for and
prevent adverse environmental and health impacts. Two graduate students will be
supported over the course of the project and outreach to local affected
communities via collaboration with the local Frost Museum of Science will be
conducted.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.