* 2330257
* Conference: NSF Workshop: Expanding Capacity and Diversity in AI Education
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Razvan Bunescu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,804.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming into a versatile set of
tools with far-reaching implications for individuals, society, and the economy.
This workshop serves as a platform for exchanging ideas on the imperative to
expand the scope of educational programs and curricula in AI. The expansion of
AI education aims to bolster the capacity to equip students with the knowledge
and skills necessary for pursuing careers in AI while fostering diversity and
inclusivity in AI education. A comprehensive approach to increasing diversity
involves offering inclusive learning opportunities in AI education for learners
of all ages, from kindergarten to adulthood, and developing learning materials
that encompass AI knowledge, skills, ethics, and responsible utilization.

The workshop on AI education will be held at the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte. It aims to gather thought leaders in AI education to develop and
document guidelines for AI education curricula. The workshop discussions will
consider the competencies and needs of the workforce; guidelines on how to
direct efforts and resources to increase the capacity for future AI
professionals and a more AI literate workforce in general; guidelines on how to
measure and increase capacity and diversity of people engaged in AI education.
The workshop will be structured to include presentations on three main topics:
educational resources, capacity to produce graduates, and measuring quality of
programs. In addition to these presentations, breakout groups will be formed to
brainstorm specific topics. The outcome of the workshop will be a report on
discussions and recommendations. It will detail the existing educational
resources, including model curricula, concept inventories, and AI education
initiatives, illustrating the current landscape of AI instruction. It will
document participants' insights about how to measure the capacity of
institutions to produce graduates with AI-related degrees, certifications, and
skills. It will outline the criteria discussed for measuring an institution's
excellence in AI education, with a particular focus on their ability to attract
and retain a diverse student population in STEM fields, including women,
minorities, and individuals with disabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.