* 2330602
* Conference: 2023 NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Daniel Herr, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2024
* USD 162,843.00

Held annually since 2001, the National Science Foundation’s Nanoscale Science
and Engineering (NSF-NSE) Grantees Conference is a two-day annual event that
brings together educators, researchers, and experimentalists within nano science
and engineering from academia, government, and industry to highlight information
on the research and education activities funded by nanotechnology grants. The
2023 conference will be held in-person in Alexandria, Virginia, 7-8 December
2023, with a virtual attendance option, and will explore the timely topic of
sustainable nanotechnology solutions to challenges in the life sciences and
nanoscience applications in biotechnology. Specifically, it will raise awareness
of this emerging global issue and consider visionary directions and breakthrough
options for addressing this challenge. The conference will foster interactions
among academic, government, and industry leaders across a diverse array of
nanotechnology fields. Final versions of the conference materials, e.g.,
videotaped keynote, panel, and poster presentations, panel discussions,
abstracts, and bios, will serve as conference proceedings. The global audience
may access this material, following the event, at
http://www.nseresearch.org/2023/, along with archival information from previous
events. The discussions on grand challenges in and potential convergent
solutions for nanotechnology in the life sciences will foster creative
interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration during the event. Additionally, the
poster sessions provide opportunities for one-on-one interactions between
presenters and participants. Finally, this event will identify and explore
emerging trends in nanotechnology and biotechnology; societal, ethical, and
economic implications; and accessible workforce training considerations. These
collective perspectives will help to enable academic researchers, industry,
government, and communities prepare for and proactively capitalize on targeted
breakthrough solutions and systemic high-impact opportunities. This conference’s
primary goals are to promote dissemination of innovative research progress in
diverse nanotechnology fields, with a focus on Nanobiology, or nanoscale science
and engineering of biological phenomena across different applications, to
facilitate research partnerships, and to identify future research directions.
The first day of the conference will emphasize “Nanobiotechnology and Nano
biomanufacturing”and the second day will focus on “Nanobiomedicine, nano-
neuroscience, and workforce development.” Keynote speakers, panel discussions,
and poster sessions serve to promote inter-university and academic, industry,
government, and national-laboratory interactions. These interactions represent a
vital step toward the advancement of the goals of the National Science
Foundation, US National Nanotechnology Initiative, and the 21st Century
Nanotechnology Research and Development Act. To achieve these goals, the 2023
Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees conference will feature keynote and
panel presentations, panel discussions, and posters that highlight visionary and
strategic breakthrough opportunities in nanobiotechnology, nanobiomanufacturing,
nanobiomedicine, and nanoneuroscience. Specific session topics include Quantum
Biology and Quantum Sensing; Recent Breakthroughs in Synthetic Biology;
Nanoscale phenomena in plants and agricultural systems, with applications on the
bioeconomy; multi-scale and bioinspired assembly, i.e.. nano-bio architecture;
cell-based and distributed biomanufacturing; Nanotechnology for regenerative
medicine; bioprinting technologies; the future of nanomedicine in pandemics (and
the role of targeted drug delivery); neurological processes at the nanoscale;
and education and infrastructure for the nanobiology research community and
(nano)bioeconomy.. Each keynote address, panel presentation, panel discussion,
and poster session will serve as a training opportunity for all attendees, as
the expert conference presenters will provide in-depth intra- and
interdisciplinary insights across a broad array of nanotechnology fields. NSF-
funded researchers and NSF Program Directors will moderate panel discussions.
Additionally, the poster sessions will foster in-depth conversations with poster
team representatives, as well as additional discussions of the Conference
presentations. Questions addressed in the panels include: What innovations have
arisen in these topics in the last decade? What are the critical gaps in
advancing these areas? What are the opportunities for the future? This shared
information provides a wealth of knowledge that can catalyze new collaborative
and convergent research directions and opportunities. It also will enable an
enhanced body of teaching nanobiology related materials at the K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. Following the event, the global audience may
access final versions of the conference materials at
http://www.nseresearch.org/2023/, along with archival information from previous
events. The organizers will strive to ensure that conference related
publications properly acknowledge NSF support.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.