* 2330434
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 Fifth Annual Symposium of Applications of Contextual Integrity
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Marshini Chetty, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 07/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Researchers and practitioners from multiple disciplines have drawn on the theory
of contextual integrity to address challenging privacy issues. More recent
efforts in contextual integrity include operationalizing contextual integrity
and what it means, discovering contextual norms for privacy, capturing users’
privacy expectations in varied contexts, as well to analyze regulations and
using contextual integrity to establish research ethics guidelines. Given the
diverse interests, perspectives and challenges, it is important to bring this
diverse community of researchers using contextual integrity together to discuss
what has been learned from the projects using contextual integrity theory and
how to move forward to leverage contextual integrity for enhancing privacy
preserving systems and policies.

This is the fifth iteration of the Annual Symposium of Applications of
Contextual Integrity that assembles computer scientists, engineers, legal
scholars, social scientists and ethicists to foster communication between the
various communities of researchers and practitioners using the theory of
contextual integrity as a framework to reason about privacy and use it as a
common language for sharing of ideas. The Symposium develops new collaborative
interdisciplinary research partnerships around the theory of contextual
integrity with existing communities in industry, academia, and government, and
establishes a body of significant literature for future work on privacy
enhancing systems. It also facilitates interdisciplinary connections amongst
privacy researchers in social science, law, computer science, ethics, and policy
to produce more reliable and readily adopted privacy-enhancing technologies. The
Symposium broadens participation in computing by providing travel grant awards
and in-person mentoring opportunities to a diverse set of students primarily
from under-represented and marginalized populations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.