* 2330317
* Global Centers Track 1: Understanding Climate Change Impacts on Transboundary Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Kyle Whyte, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 12/31/2028
* USD 4,978,887.00

The Global Center for Climate Change Impacts on Transboundary Waters leads
research focused on understanding and mitigating water crises in transboundary
jurisdictions. Water resources around North America are under threat as climate
change intensifies floods and droughts, worsens water quality, exacerbates
shoreline erosion, and damages infrastructure and homes. Communities must learn
to adapt to increased extremes, but the tools and knowledge for adaptation are
often non-existent or fragmented across jurisdictional boundaries. This problem
is complicated in transboundary water systems which intersect multiple sovereign
nations, including those of Indigenous Peoples. Managing water resources in
multijurisdictional settings requires a diverse perspective on governance
structures, stakeholder groups, and management strategies as well as
dissemination of scientific resources, including data and models. The Center
studies water resources spanning U.S.-Canada geopolitical boundaries, leveraging
U.S. and Canadian expertise. The Center aims to increase the resilience of
vulnerable coastal communities by integrating research across three organizing
clusters focused on 1) reliable projections of the expected frequency and
intensity of climate change impacts; 2) understanding of climate change impacts
on ecological and social systems and outcomes; and 3) building capacity for
governance and management systems that increase disaster resilience in
communities across multiple scales. The Center is a partnership among University
of Michigan, Cornell University, College of the Menominee Nation and Red Lake
Nation together with McMaster University, Toronto Metropolitan University, and
the Six Nations of the Grand River. It also trains graduate and undergraduate
students and supports postdoctoral associates. The knowledge developed through
the Center has international relevance and will be disseminated to benefit
communities around the world.

The international team focuses on understanding and mitigating an intensifying
water crisis by addressing regional needs for water resources management
guidance and preparing communities and ecosystems within transboundary water
systems for hazards accompanying climate change. The Center will apply a unique
social science framework that emphasizes engagement with communities across
transnational watershed boundaries to develop new insights into risk tolerance
and management practices, climate change monitoring strategies, and community
resilience. The interdisciplinary Center will integrate knowledge from multiple
fields to create a comprehensive understanding of the challenges facing
communities accessing transnational waters. The Center's use of statistical
modeling, state-of-the-art process models, and novel, data-driven observational
studies allow for testing of hypotheses about future climate change
trajectories, providing critical insights to our stakeholders. This approach is
designed to be flexible and responsive to community needs, ensuring that
research outcomes are relevant and useful to the communities it serves and
enabling for the development of a national model for transboundary watershed
management in subsequent years. The scientific and community-engagement models
developed by the Center will initially be focused on the Great Lakes region, and
will be replicable and scalable, amplifying the Centerâ€™s impact across
transboundary water systems and communities globally.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative partnership
with funding agencies in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, to jointly
support use-inspired research addressing global challenges in climate change and
clean energy. Partnerships with the Commonwealth Science and Innovation Research
Organisation (CSIRO), Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC), Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC), and
UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) leverage resources to tackle challenges at a
larger scale than would be possible for one funding agency alone. This Center is
jointly supported by NSF and SSHRC. The NSF award is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program in the
Directorate for STEM Education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.