* 2330802
* Metasurface-based Ultrafast Optical Metrology
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Chunlei Guo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 09/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Ultrafast lasers have a wide range of applications, from enabling high-precision
material processing and high-speed communication networks to advancing medical
procedures and capturing ultrafast events. Metasurfaces are arrays of tiny
optical structures that can manipulate light in remarkable ways, offering
compact and lightweight optical components and enabling advancements in portable
electronics. Despite that metasurfaces have been used for a wide range of
optical elements and devices, there has been no attempt to utilize metasurfaces
in ultrafast laser pulse characterization. This project aims to develop
miniaturized metasurface-based ultrafast pulse characterization devices,
enabling a broader adoption of ultrafast laser sources. The graduate and
undergraduate students participating in this research will receive comprehensive
training across various research disciplines. The diversity and inclusion will
be promoted by actively involving female and minority students in the research
projects. As part of this initiative, the Principal Investigator is committed to
organizing open house events to showcase the research to pre-college students.
The scientific findings of the proposed research will be broadly disseminated
through regular scientific channels, community outreach, and media outlets. This
project will develop compact metasurface-based devices capable of accurately
characterizing both the temporal and spatial properties of the ultrafast optical
pulses. These devices require a combination of linear and nonlinear
metasurfaces. The ultrafast optical metrology requires nonlinear response of the
components to demonstrate simultaneously high efficiency, wide bandwidth, and
high directionality. This combination of requirements poses significant
challenge for metasurface design. This project will provide a systematic
solution to overcome these challenges and advance the field of ultrafast
metrology. The project consists of three thrusts: 1) developing a nonlinear
multipolar dielectric metasurface with high nonlinear efficiency,
directionality, and broad bandwidth, 2) developing compact and accurate
metasurface-based autocorrelator and frequency-resolved optical gating devices
for temporal characterization of ultrafast optical pulses, and 3) developing a
metasurface-based shearing interferometer for characterizing the spatial
wavefront of ultrafast optical pulses. The designed devices are expected to have
excellent signal-to-noise ratios.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.