* 2330450
* Global Centers Track 1: Electric Power Innovation for a Carbon-free Society (EPICS)
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 10/31/2028
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Electric Power Innovation for a Carbon-free Society (EPICS) Center unites
global scientific leaders and practitioners with the mission to transition power
grids to 100% clean energy sources. Adapting the grid to renewable energy
resources is challenging. Unlike centralized synchronous generators, renewable
energy resources are often geographically distributed and require inverters to
convert battery DC current to the grid AC current. These resources include wind
turbines, photovoltaic panels, controllable electric appliances, electric
vehicles, and batteries. EPICS researchers will investigate what improvements in
theory, computational methods, policies, and market designs are required to
adapt future power grids. EPICS builds a global cradle-to-grave innovation and
implementation ecosystem that teams engineers, mathematicians, and social
scientists with industry, policy, and public stakeholders. The goal is to
accelerate research-to-practice transfer. This approach is essential for
achieving 100% clean-electricity goals in the US and UK (by 2035) and Australia
(by 2050). The Center transfers fundamental scientific principles into practical
tools. It engages global stakeholders and industry — represented by the Global
Power System Transformation Consortium, Future Power Markets Forum and Energy
Systems Integration Group — to adapt these tools to local politico-economic
conditions and needs. EPICS is led by Johns Hopkins University. The Center also
leverages expertise and resources from the U.S. (Georgia Institute of
Technology, University of California-Davis, Resources for the Future), the UK
(Imperial College London, Newcastle University, University of Strathclyde,
University of Edinburgh) and Australia (CSIRO, University of Melbourne, Monash
University). As affiliates, EPICS engages the U.S. National Renewable Energy
Laboratory; the Electric Power Research Institute, which has a presence on five
continents; and academics in the U.S., Canada, Denmark and Ireland. This NSF
award also supports the training of undergraduate and graduate students at U.S.
institutions. EPICS focuses on overcoming the core scientific challenge of
guaranteeing the physical ability to economically and reliably balance power
consumed with power produced by variable and distributed energy resources, on
time scales from milliseconds to decades. The two intellectual contributions
are: (1) development of high-fidelity and computationally efficient tools for
simulating and optimizing deployment of transition-critical solar, wind power,
and storage resources; together with (2) their integration with understanding of
techno-economic principles to enable stakeholders to manage the grid’s evolution
towards 100% clean-energy goals worldwide. EPICS’ technical work and outreach,
in collaboration with its partners, will benefit society by raising
technological readiness of power grids to adopt transition-critical solutions;
by informing policy makers; and by training the next-generation of climate and
clean-energy leaders. This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an
innovative partnership with funding agencies in Australia, Canada and the United
Kingdom, to jointly support use-inspired research addressing global challenges
in climate change and clean energy. Partnerships with the Commonwealth Science
and Innovation Research Organisation (CSIRO), Natural Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada (SSHRC), and UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) leverage
resources to tackle challenges at a larger scale than would be possible for one
funding agency alone. This Center is jointly supported by NSF, CSIRO, and UKRI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.