* 2330150
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): National Testing Facility for Enhancing Wind Resiliency of Infrastructure in Tornado-Downburst-Gust Front Events (NEWRITE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2027
* USD 14,025,452.00

This Mid-scale Research Infrastructure-1 award will support the design phase for
a university-based National Testing Facility for Enhancing Wind Resiliency of
Infrastructure in Tornado-Downburst-Gust Front Events (NEWRITE). The design of
NEWRITE will consider realistic wind fields (speeds up to 225 miles per hour
(mph)) in non-synoptic windstorm (NSW) events (tornado/downburst/gust-front) to
enable physical testing of their loading and damaging effects on civil
infrastructure at mid-to-full model scales (1:10 to 1:1). These weather events
cause considerable property damage and numerous fatalities annually in the
United States. Damage to infrastructure will only increase with growing
urbanization and increased intensification and frequency of such windstorms due
to the changing climate. As evidenced in the past, major tornadoes with an
intensity of Enhanced Fujita 3 (EF3) or greater (136 mph or greater, 3-second
gust) have struck large population centers, causing multiple fatalities and
significant damage to residential and engineered structures. Property damage
from downbursts and gust fronts are equally significant. NEWRITE will be
designed to be a state-of-the-art research and testing platform to mitigate the
impacts of NSW hazards on the built environment and significantly reduce
fatalities and economic losses. Iowa State University will lead this design
project with participation from Clemson University, Missouri University of
Science and Technology, Northeastern University, Texas Tech University,
University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, University of Florida, University of
Washington, and University of Wisconsin at Madison. This design project will be
a component of the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) and will contribute to the NSF role
in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). Data produced during
this design project will be archived and made publicly available in the NHERI
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

The design of NEWRITE will consider desired capabilities to generate wind fields
associated with EF1 to EF5 tornadoes (86-225 mph), moderately intense downbursts
(100-125 mph), and gust fronts (80-100 mph). NEWRITE will be designed to
investigate NSW hazards on civil infrastructure at scales large enough to study
near ground wind fields, wind loading, wind-borne debris impact, and structural
damage mechanisms in NSW events. These design parameters would allow the wind
engineering community to conduct research to understand the impact of wind and
debris in NSW events on the built environment from individual structures to
groups of structures at the community scale. The design of NEWRITE will consider
capabilities to (a) advance the current knowledge of the transient
characteristics of non-synoptic winds and the hazards they pose from the extreme
wind and wind-borne debris, (b) advance the understanding of the mechanics of
the wind structure and debris-structure interactions in NSW events, such as load
distribution, load paths, and component stresses in structures, (c) enable
better detection of NSW events on the ground through the integration of wind
speed and ground pressure-sensors and radar data for improved warning, and (d)
integrate experimental data with computational mechanics to improve structural
modeling and damage prediction, enabling the development of resilient
structures. The facility will be designed to physically simulate NSW hazards at
mid-to-full model-length scale and velocity scale required to faithfully
reproduce the damaging effects of these hazards on civil infrastructure and
assess potential solutions to enhance their wind resiliency through robust
design. During this design project, a smaller scale (1:20) physical prototype of
NEWRITE will be designed and constructed at Iowa State University and a digital
twin of NEWRITE will be developed to assist with the full-scale NEWRITE design.
While the outcome of this project will be final design documents for
construction of the full-scale NEWRITE, this award is not a commitment to
support the construction phase of the full-scale NEWRITE. This project is
jointly funded by the Mid-scale Research Infrastructure-1 Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.