* 2330984
* I-Corps:  Software platform to construct career resources for college students
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Hyo Jung Song, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software solution that addresses critical gaps in career
counseling and support for college students. The software is designed to address
the limitations of existing digital application tracking systems (ATS). While
numerous ATS tools are available to assist candidates in resume creation and
analysis, they often fall short in generating resumes that accurately showcase
the candidate's skill set and providing a comprehensive career action plan. By
providing accessible career awareness and planning tools, the proposed
technology has the potential to empower underrepresented groups, promotes
equity, and enhance enrollment in public higher education by offering
comprehensive career development support. In addition, it may meet the needs of
higher education and job placement sectors, including the expanding talent
acquisition software market, by connecting early-stage underrepresented
candidates with professionals, bridging the service gap that exists in current
platforms. By leveraging this software platform, institutions and agencies may
address their specific diversity recruiting needs and create pathways for
individuals from marginalized communities to achieve career success. This also
may provide students with better career awareness, enabling current students to
plan their careers effectively from an early stage.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a software platform to
assist individuals in resume creation and analysis. The proposed technology
employs auto-prompting of large language models (LLM) based on classification to
generate personalized career resources for individuals, encompassing customized
resumes, tailored career plans, and valuable mentor connections. In addition,
the technology is designed to assess the quality of generated resources by
comparing them to the desired resume format, preferred job positions, and a
portfolio of successful professionals with similar backgrounds. Based on this
assessment, the software automatically builds prompts that target areas of
improvement, enhancing the overall quality of the career resources provided. The
goal is to enable individuals, regardless of their background or available
resources, to make informed career decisions and receive the necessary tools and
support to succeed in their chosen paths.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.