* 2330211
* Global Centers Track 2: Building the Global Center for Forecasting Freshwater Futures
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 11/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Climate change is degrading water quality in lakes and reservoirs around the
globe, motivating the urgent need for new approaches to predict future ecosystem
and drinking water conditions for management. This Global Centers Track 2 Design
project will create the groundwork for developing a global center to provide
scientists, managers, and the public in the U.S. and Australia with state-of-
the-art, real-time water quality forecasts and decision support tools for lakes
and reservoirs. The system will be deployed and tested at four lakes facing a
range of climate change threats. Daily forecasts will be generated for a suite
of water quality variables and methane emissions, which can inform adaptive
monitoring and preemptive management (e.g., divert water from other reservoirs,
increase water flows to reduce methane production). Interactive educational
materials will be developed and assessed to train managers and community members
on freshwater forecasting. A broad community of American and Australian
students, academic researchers, government officials, industry representatives,
water managers, and the public will be engaged in all center activities, setting
the stage for future global engagement via partnerships with multiple
international initiatives. The project’s overarching goal is to develop the
foundation for an international forecasting center that predicts lake and
reservoir water quality across the U.S. and Australia to enable climate change
adaptation and mitigation. Lakes in both the U.S. and Australia are experiencing
severe, detrimental effects of climate change, motivating the need for a future
Global Center that integrates unique water quality models, sensor networks, and
research networks across the two countries. As part of the center’s design and
planning activities, researchers from six U.S. and Australian organizations will
work together to scale existing resources (forecasting software, lake ecosystem
models, sensor networks, translational tools, and training programs) to create
forecasts for four focal lakes in the U.S. and Australia that are experiencing
extreme water quality changes due to altered climate. The center will advance
fundamental understanding of the effects of altered climate on lake ecosystems
and enable managers to increase climate change resilience. This project will
result in six major advances: 1) an established American-Australian community of
water researchers, managers, industry officials, and government representatives
working together to mitigate the effects of climate change on lakes and
reservoirs; 2) lake forecasting systems generating real-time predictions of
water quality and methane emissions to inform management; 3) water quality and
methane forecasting models for each lake; 4) forecast visualizations and
decision support tools; 5) open-access teaching modules; and 6) critical
knowledge on the responses of freshwater ecosystems to climate change.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that
supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate
change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers
to bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.