* 2330895
* Conference: Mathematical Opportunities in Digital Twins (MATH-DT)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Seibold, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,948.00

Recent advances in physics-based modeling, data-science, sensor technology, and
computational mathematics have made it feasible in many areas to produce a
'Digital Twin' of a complex real world system. Such twins have shown significant
promise to better understand, monitor, predict, and control real-world systems,
particularly in cases where not every aspect about the system can be observed or
modeled. This can improve safety, comfort, maintenance and, also the health and
well-being of humans. However, many fundamental questions and challenges remain,
particularly regarding a rigorous (mathematical) foundation for this emerging
field. This award provides support for a workshop titled “Mathematical
Opportunities in Digital Twins” to be held on December 11-13, 2023, in the
George Mason University's campus in Arlington, VA. The workshop brings together
key experts working in many aspects of mathematics, key application fields, and
industry with the goal to determine the ways in which mathematics can contribute
to the research on Digital Twins and how Digital Twins can open up new
mathematical directions, as well as to identify connections, synergies, and
organizational efforts within the mathematical community, and to/with other
disciplines. Digital Twins can lead to new developments in many applications,
such as: engineering by e.g., determining weaknesses in structures such as
bridges, nuclear plants, or wind turbines; medicine, where Digital Twins of
organs may lead to better cures and understanding; society, where Digital Twins
of large-scale events like sport games can improve safety. A broad impact of the
conference is facilitated by the conference website featuring videos and slides
of talks and a technical report that will be shared with the entire scientific
community. Students and early career researchers are invited to the workshop,
with special attention given to groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM.

Mathematical models and computations have always played a significant role in
simulating, understanding, and predicting physical phenomena. While
traditionally, many models have been based on first principles via a rigorous
mathematical foundation, such approaches face limitations: Not everything in a
physical system can be captured using physical principles, and the available
computing resources and algorithms may be unable to model an entire complex
system, particularly in real-time environments. Significant advances in sensing
technology have enabled the equipment of complex real-world systems with sensors
and to employ the sensor data to inform the workings of the system. Moreover,
recent developments in data science and machine learning have strengthened the
interest and confidence in empirical methodologies. However, purely empirical
approaches do not take advantage of the physical principles and may require
measurements and data generation at a cost that is not feasible. This workshop
focuses on 'Digital Twins', which aim to combine physics-based models with data-
driven models, with the goal to leverage the best of both worlds. Digital Twins
bring together several research areas in mathematics (including: modeling,
analysis, control, optimization, numerical analysis, and scientific computing).
This workshop is expected to stimulate new developments in these important areas
and to initiate new collaborations, and strengthen the existing ones, among the
researchers with diverse background on mathematics of Digital Twins.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.