* 2330126
* I-Corps: Electric Fleet Management
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Venkatasubraman Viswanathan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to provide electric vehicle data prior to their deployment. Thus, there are a
multitude of customer segments that can be addressed. These segments include:
Electric vehicle fleet resellers and manufacturers that want to sell electric
vehicles to fleets; Fleet managers that want to intelligently plan this
transition; Fleet software companies that want to electric vehicle analysis in
their offerings; Utility companies that need to understand what infrastructure
upgrade requirements; Charging station providers and government agencies that
want to intelligently place their charging stations; and insurance agencies that
want to scope new electric vehicle policies. Within each of the segments, this
project can span across all vehicle types, such as drones, and all power
options, such as hydrogen, propane and electric. The fleet software market is
currently $18.2 Billion and expected to grow to $67.4 Billion by 2029. Within
the US, it’s currently $7.16 Billion and commercial electric vehicles currently
account for 2% of the market; however, this is expected to significantly
increase over the next decade. By providing simulated electric vehicle data,
this project will help customers make informed decisions on their sustainable
transition and avoid disrupting their services.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of software that allows fleets
and utilities to simulate the performance of different electric vehicles for
their use case and analyze their tradeoffs; determine charging infrastructure
requirements; determine the battery life cycle throughout their operation;
forecast the power load of charging stations; and explore the associated
economics all within a digital environment. This tool provides an inexpensive
opportunity to de-risk the electrification transition and facilitate the green
transportation revolution. This patented technology works by integrating vehicle
power dynamics, battery dynamics and real-world data from the location to
provide realistic predictions on the performance of the vehicles and the
subsequent infrastructure requirements. The route of each vehicle is determined
using the customer’s telematics data or can be generated using any routing
algorithm. The results from each of the vehicles are then gathered and used to
provide both individual vehicle and fleet performance metrics for design
decisions. The software’s modularity allows it to handle multiple types of
vehicles, including aircraft, and any type of power source, including hydrogen.
Therefore, mixed fleets can seamlessly integrate into the software, and it can
provide additional insights to the performance and services such as climate
impact reports.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.