* 2330247
* I-Corps:  High thermal conductivity polymers and phase change materials based on graphene
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Jivtesh Garg, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of high thermal conductivity polymers and phase change materials.
The proposed high thermal conductivity polymers may replace metals in wide range
of thermal management technologies leading to advantages including ease of
processing, corrosion resistance, lower weight, and lower carbon footprint as
polymers require less energy to process compared to metals. These polymers may
improve thermal management in mobile electronics such as laptops and mobile
phones, in high brightness light emitting diodes (LEDs), in automobiles and
aerospace applications, and in offshore heat exchangers where such polymers, due
to their corrosion resistance, would be able to replace expensive metals like
titanium. Similarly high thermal conductivity phase change materials may enable
superior thermal management in batteries, by absorbing thermal energy generated
during charging process, mitigating the increase in temperature during these
periods, thus improving the life of the battery. Batteries with improved thermal
management are essential to the successful design and development of next-
generation electric vehicles. High thermal conductivity phase change materials
also have tremendous potential as next generation energy storage materials, key
to the efficient utilization of renewable sources of energy.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of high thermal conductivity
polymers and phase change materials through use of optimally prepared expanded
graphite. Intercalating agents used in preparing expanded graphite have been
shown to have a significant impact on thermal conductivity of resulting polymer-
graphite composites. Further, different intercalating agents lead to different
degrees of oxidation of graphite, thus impacting the oxidative damage to
graphite, which in turn results in different graphite thermal conductivities.
The effect of different intercalating agents results in different thermal
conductivities of the polymer composites and phase change materials. Overall,
the use of an optimum intercalating agent leads to a maximum enhancement in
thermal conductivity. In addition, this leads to a decrease in the amount of
graphite needed for achieving a desired enhancement in thermal conductivity,
which may lower the cost of the composite. These composites also are found to
impact thermal conductivity of phase change materials where the optimum
intercalating agent may result in 50 to 60% higher thermal conductivity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.