* 2330028
* EAGER: DNA polymerase theta and the processing of double strand breaks
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Anne Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

New varieties of crops are developed by crossing two different lines, each with
their own, unique qualities (and problems) and then deriving plants from among
their descendants that combine the good traits of both ancestors while at the
same time eliminating any genetic deficiencies unique to one or the other parent
line. The genes encoding these beneficial or harmful traits are physically
carried in a linear series on chromosomes. When a beneficial version of a gene
is located very close to a detrimental trait on the same chromosome, the good
and bad traits will virtually always be inherited together- reducing the benefit
of the “good” trait, as the harmful trait is always inherited along with it.
“CRISPR” technology allows geneticists to cut a chromosome at virtually any
chosen location. The goal of this project is to determine whether CRISPR can be
used to separate closely-spaced beneficial and harmful versions of genes,
effectively unlinking the two traits and allowing them to be inherited
separately.

CRISPR-induced DNA double strand breaks are repaired via a variety of host-
encoded DNA repair pathways, each producing a different class of repair product.
Direct end to end ligation (Nonhomologous end-joining, NHEJ) is thought to be
largely error-free, microhomology-mediated joining (MMEJ) creates deletions and
insertions, and homology-based recombinational repair (HR), which employs an
undamaged template (such as a homologous chromosome, a sister chromatid, or a
homologous transgene) to replace nucleotides adjacent to and including the site
of the break, can result in targeted allelic substitution or chromosome arm
exchange. The goal of this project is to determine whether the rate of homology-
based repair of CRISPR induced breaks can be enhanced in Arabidopsis through the
elimination of the KU-dependent end to end rejoining pathway and/or the DNA
polymerase theta (TEB)-mediated microhomology-mediated end joining pathway. A
second goal is to determine whether DNA polymerase theta is required for CRISPR-
based mutagenesis in Arabidopsis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.