* 2330162
* RAPID: Investigating spatiotemporal groundwater variations in the Wasatch Front using geophysical methods
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* D. Kip Solomon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,979.00

This RAPID project focuses on geophysical data collection to capture the runoff
and groundwater flows from the anomalous 2023 Spring melt in Northern Utah. This
yearâ€™s snow depth maximum is greater than 200% of the historical average and
comes after more than 20 years of megadrought conditions for the region. The
goal is to test the ability of geophysical techniques to capture the physical
hydrological processes to improve estimates of the water budget of the Great
Salt Lake (GSL) and the ecosystems of its wetlands. Research in the last decade
demonstrates that Wasatch Mountain snowpack melts in the spring and is split
between soil moisture and groundwater before becoming available as surface
water. Geophysical observations can provide independent constraints to the
hydrological system. This project aims to demonstrate that the geophysics data
are uniquely suited to quantify the amount and time scales of water storage in
seasonal snow, soil moisture, groundwater, and ultimately surface water storage
in reservoirs and the Great Salt Lake. This project will contribute to a better
understanding of the path that water takes from the mountains to the valley and
may potentially help to guide decision/policy making for water use and
consumption. The project supports undergraduates participating in data
collection and analysis. The data collected through this experiment will be
archived and made openly available through the SAGE-GAGE facility and the
University of Utah data repository.

The RAPID project will yield new continuous seismic and episodic gravity and
electronic resistivity tomography (ERT) observations at a high spatial
resolution that will be used to determine the advantages and limitations of
these geophysical techniques for investigating the transport and storage of
water in the Wasatch Mountain/Salt Lake Valley hydrological system. Monitoring
subsurface seismic velocity changes will allow investigations of groundwater and
soil moisture variation. Using gravity along with geodetic surface deformation
modeling to determine changes in water mass over different but hydrologically
connected (and physically proximal) regimes is a new and potentially valuable
technique to monitor water mass transport from the mountains to the valley. ERT
monitoring can be used to detect the migration of the fresh/saline interface at
the edge of the Great Salt Lake as the snowmelt moves into the valley. By
leveraging the complementary sensitivity of the geophysics observations, the
proposed project will advance the spatial and temporal resolution of the
measurements in the Wasatch Mountains and the Salt Lake Valley.

This project is supported by the Geophysics Program, the Hydrological Sciences
Program, and the Division of Earth Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.