* 2330888
* Conference: Midwest Programming Languages Summits 2023, 2024, 2025
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Cyrus Omar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2026
* USD 15,000.00

The team supported by this grant is organizing an annual research workshop,
called the Midwest Programming Languages Summit (MWPLS), to bring together
researchers and students from the greater Midwest region. In contrast to more
formal conference and workshop venues organized by the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE), this informal research workshop will serve as a valuable forum for
researchers and students to share in-progress research ideas and receive timely
feedback to influence subsequent work. This will be particularly valuable
because of the high concentration of programming languages researchers in the
Midwest, and because it will provide graduate student researchers opportunities
to network and further develop their research and presentation skills. The
workshop will be organized at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, MI in
Fall 2023, and in yet-to-be-determined locations in 2024 and 2025.

The main focus of the annual one-day event will be to present and share research
ideas. The event will include approximately fifteen presentations on specific
research projects, as well as a poster session that will accommodate many more.
These talks and posters will span a variety of timely and relevant topics in
programming languages research, such as type systems and program logics for
software verification; program synthesis and its applications in different
domains; high-performance compiler implementations for parallel and multi-core
hardware; tools and techniques for software engineering, web application
security; and the application of programming language technology to diverse
settings such as quantum computing and human-computer interaction. Many of the
presentations, conversations, and collaborations that take place at the Midwest
Programming Languages Summit are likely to facilitate high-quality research
results to be presented at formal conferences and workshops in the future. This
grant will provide travel grants to students who may not otherwise be able to
travel to MWPLS. The organizers will reach out to institutions that serve
underrepresented groups to broaden participation.

The Midwest Programming Languages Summits will foster the programming languages
research community in the Midwest region, by providing networking opportunities
for researchers to develop collaborations across organizations and for students
to develop connections with senior researchers and other graduate students that
will help with their future careers. By strengthening the intellectual ties
among researchers in the Midwest region, the graduate students will develop a
community that will support them in their subsequent careers in research,
industry, or other sectors. The workshops will also bring together students and
researchers from a variety of organizations (research-focused universities,
industrial research labs, and teaching-focused colleges), which will help new
research ideas flow into classroom settings and vice versa.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.