* 2330011
* Naming names: How, and how early, does object naming influence infants' fundamental object representations?
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sandra Waxman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,651.00

Language is unique to our species. Its power comes not only from its complexity,
but also from its link to human cognition. This language-cognition link gives us
exceptional conceptual flexibility. For example, we can readily represent any
object (e.g., my family dog) either as a unique individual (Magic) or as a
member of an object category (eg., a dog), and we switch effortlessly among
these different representations. This cognitive flexibility is supported by
language: how an object is named - either as a unique individual or a member of
a category – influences how we represent that object in our minds. This
language-cognition link has powerful downstream consequences: it guides how we
learn and reason about, guiding our learning and reasoning. Striking new
research reveals that this link may be in place early enough to guide infant
development, even before infants have begun to talk. For example, by 12 months,
even before infants say more than a few words, naming a group of objects (e.g.,
a dog, a horse, a duck) with the same, consistently-applied name focuses
infants’ attention on what is common about them and supports object
categorization (animal). But providing a different name for each of those same
objects has a very different effect, focusing infants’ attention on what is
different about them and supporting their representation of each as a unique
individual. This is compelling, but it leaves open an important question. How do
infants acquire this uniquely human language-cognition link in the first place?
And how does this link fuel infants’ ability to learn about objects and their
names? This project answers these inter-related questions. The first goal is to
discover whether infants as young as 7 months can establish the tight link
between how an object is named and how they represent it. To address this
developmental question, the study tests the effect of naming objects on infants’
representation and memory of those objects. The second goal is to discover
whether infants’ early representations of objects are strong enough to help them
reason about objects in the real world. To address this representational
question, the study tests infants’ memory and representation of objects when
they move around, hiding and reappearing in dynamic events. the stage for
building an increasingly precise and flexible link between object naming and
object representation. The third goal is to answer questions about stability and
change over development. To do so, we combine all data from all infants who
participated in the study. We supplement this vocabulary assessments of these
same infants, collected at 3-month intervals until they reach 18 months. Armed
with this rich data set, the study examines whether infants’ language-cognition
ilink at 9 months and 12 months of age is related to their vocabulary growth
across the first eighteen months. This project sheds light on early language
acquisition, cognitive development, and the relation between them. The outcomes
may help to identify very young infants at risk for language delay or
impairment, and to design interventions to advance their language and cognitive
advances. The project also has a strong training mission. It supports training
of women and members of other historically underrepresented communities. It also
deepens partnerships with families, trainees and staff in our racially and
ethnically diverse community

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.