* 2330264
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Towards Safeguarding the Emerging Miniapp Paradigm in Mobile Super Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Zhiqiang Lin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The rapidly evolving miniapp paradigm within mobile computing is revolutionizing
user engagement with mobile applications. Super apps, functioning as hosts with
multiple services, facilitate the installation and operation of miniapps within
their platforms, thereby cultivating an ecosystem akin to that of Google Play
and Apple App Store. This approach, already adopted by leading social apps like
WeChat, TikTok, and SnapChat, greatly enhances user convenience and
interactivity. However, alongside these advancements, the miniapp paradigm
ushers in distinct security and privacy challenges demanding urgent resolution.
As the prevalence of miniapps continues to escalate, the establishment of proper
safeguards struggles to keep pace. Existing security policies for managing
system resources across modern mobile operating systems (OSs) often exhibit
opacity and dispersion, impeding effective isolation of miniapps and concealing
complexities inherent to diverse mobile OSs. Additionally, super apps, with
their capacity to amass substantial user data from numerous miniapps, frequently
avoid recognizing themselves as data controllers. This lack of transparency in
data practices generates potential privacy threats and regulatory issues. This
proposal aims to take the first step towards systematic understanding and
safeguarding of the security and privacy of the emerging miniapp paradigm in
mobile super apps. We recognize the pressing concerns related to this paradigm
and aim to investigate new security and privacy threats, such as cross-platform
support, the design and implementation of miniapp APIs, and the management of
sensitive data with respect to access control and security and privacy policies.
Our research will also explore innovative techniques for risk assessment and
vulnerability detection within the miniapp ecosystem. Moreover, we propose to
employ formal methods to rigorously reason about these policies and standardize
the design and implementation of the APIs, enabling a more secure and privacy-
compliant miniapp ecosystem. Our research is expected to pave the way for the
development of practical solutions that can be rapidly adopted by super apps and
miniapp developers to tackle the urgent security and privacy challenges in this
field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.