* 2330793
* Conference: 2024 Summer Research School on Fluid Dynamics: Topics in Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2024
* Johan Larsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Very few universities have the resources to offer graduate instruction to train
aspiring fluid dynamics researchers beyond basic introductory courses. The
Burgers Program for Fluid Dynamics at the University of Maryland has been
addressing this situation for several years by organizing Summer Research
Schools, where about 40-50 graduate students from all over the country spend one
week at the University of Maryland for an intense series of lectures and hands-
on tutorials by invited experts. The Summer Research Schools are designed
primarily for advanced PhD students, i.e., students who have had an introductory
course on turbulence and who have the desire to go deeper into the subject. The
students benefit from the Schools in two different ways: (i) they are exposed to
lectures from a range of experts that would not be possible in other settings;
and (ii) they build a large network and community of other young turbulence
researchers across the country.

The 2024 Summer Research School will focus on recent developments in the
understanding of turbulence, its prediction and control using modern
experimental and analytical techniques and powerful numerical simulation
capabilities. Lectures will cover turbulence theory, experimental and simulation
methods, turbulent transport in single and two-phase flows, transition to
turbulence, compressible turbulence, the control of turbulence, and some
applications. Hands-on tutorials are offered in the afternoons and evenings,
where students interact with datasets. Students also have the opportunity to
present their own work in a poster session. The format of the school is
specifically designed to promote interactions among the students and between
students and instructors, with social coffee breaks, lunches provided in a
private area, and evening social events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.