* 2330794
* EAGER: Robust Data-Driven Robotic Manipulation via Bayesian Inference and Passivity-Based Control
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Aykut Satici, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2025
* USD 262,193.00

Robots usually move objects by firmly holding on to them. Some tasks cannot be
done this way, because the object may be delicate, or large relative to the
robot's arm or hand. For example, we use firm holds when moving a closed book,
but delicate finger motions when turning a page. Since the robot's "hand" may
move relative to the object, the contact type between the robot, object, and
environment can change during manipulation. Forces applied on the object create
different motions when contact conditions are different. Conversely, different
motions may lead to different contacts in the future. Planning computational
methods can identify the right sequence of forces and contact conditions that
could complete a task. Small errors that crop up during execution of planned
motions would normally be reduced by taking corrective actions. However, these
corrective actions often do not account for changing = contacts, and the errors
instead are more critical due to unanticipated contacts, ultimately leading to
failure on tasks. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project will study techniques to create plans for robot motion that mitigate
instead of amplify errors during execution of such tasks. Such manipulation
tasks involving significant contact events can be found in robotic applications
such as loading dishwashers, fetching hard-to-reach objects from cluttered
cupboards, or moving furniture.

The project team will study new data-driven methods to train robust motion
controllers that are derived from Bayesian neural networks with special
structure informed by robotics and control principles. To account for the
contact-rich nature of the task, the network will consist of a mixture-of-
experts, where each expert is either a controller or a storage function used to
derive a passivity-based controller. A gating network chooses which controller
to use given the input to the network. Bayesian networks will provide a
distribution over motor commands given an input, allowing the motion controller
to account for uncertainty. The project will proceed in three overlapping
stages: The investigators will use tools from formal verification to synthesize
controllers that provably locally stabilize contact-rich motion plans, and use
these controllers to initialize a prior distribution for the weights of the
Bayesian neural network using knowledge distillation. This initialized network
will be trained from task-based rewards in an end-to-end manner using data from
differentiable simulators, where the robot-object-environment system parameters
are uncertain. The trained network will be tested in experiments involving a
robot arm pushing a large box over step-like obstacles designed to require
changes in contact conditions during manipulation. The project, if successful,
will identify a controller synthesis paradigm that simultaneously overcomes the
simulation-to-reality gap and the data-inefficiency plaguing purely data-driven
approaches for contact-rich object manipulation. This project will also advance
knowledge in scaling up computational controller synthesis, and contribute new
tools for GPU-accelerated simulation of stochastic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.