* 2330801
* Collaborative Research: Genetic-epidemiology framework for malaria mosquito and disease
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Abba Gumel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 188,577.00

Malaria is one of the deadliest diseases affecting mankind. The disease, which
is caused by the protozoan Plasmodium parasites, is spread between humans via
the bite of infected adult female mosquitoes and creates severe public health
and socio-economic burdens in regions inhabited by almost half of the world’s
population. Each year, malaria infects an average of over 230 million people and
causes over 400,000 deaths (mostly in children under the age of five) in endemic
areas globally. The widescale use of insecticides-based interventions, notably
in the form of long-lasting insecticidal (LLINs) nets and indoor residual
spraying (IRS), during the period 2000-2015, has resulted in a dramatic decrease
in malaria burden in endemic areas, prompting a concerted global effort to
eradicate the disease by 2040. Unfortunately since 2015, the malaria mosquito
has developed widespread resistance to all five chemicals used in LLINs and IRS.
Insecticide resistance and changes in climatic variables are two of the main
impediments to malaria eradication. Since LLINs and IRS are the cornerstone
interventions for malaria control, one of the most crucial challenges in the
malaria ecology community is to determine whether insecticide resistance affects
malaria epidemiology. This project will use mathematical modeling approaches,
backed by novel empirical data collected in the laboratory as well as in the
field, to provide realistic insight into the impact, control and mitigation of
the impediments. The project will provide strategies for realistically achieving
malaria eradication using existing insecticides-based control resources. The
methodologies and results generated will be made available for broad
application, and for studying the transmission dynamics and control of other
vector-borne diseases such as chikungunya, dengue, Lyme disease, West Nile virus
and Zika virus. The project will support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as the participation of local high school
students and teachers.

The project will develop a genetic-epidemiology modeling framework for providing
realistic insight into the malaria transmission dynamics and control, subject to
insecticide pressure. The modeling framework extends the classical Ross-
Macdonald compartmental modeling framework for malaria by adding, inter alia,
the detailed lifecycle and population genetics of malaria mosquitoes (i.e.,
genetics of insecticide resistance) and the complex host-vector-parasite
interactions. The models will allow for the assessment of the impacts of local
changes in climatic variables (notably temperature) on the population abundance
of the malaria mosquitoes by genotype. The approach of modeling the host-vector-
parasite dynamics, in the context of malaria, will offer significant advances in
applied mathematics and numerical analysis, particularly in designing and
applying dynamical systems and numerical discretization theories and techniques
for studying the transmission dynamics and control of diseases caused by vectors
(such as mosquitoes and ticks). Specifically, PIs will (i) design a modeling
framework for assessing the role of insecticide resistance on the fitness costs
of insecticide resistance at different environmental conditions, (ii) evaluate
the role of insecticide resistance on the ability of resistant mosquitoes to
transmit malaria and (iii) assess the role of natural environmental factors on
the abundance of insecticide resistance genotypes and how it relates to malaria
incidence. This project will generate hard-to-get data on the fitness costs of
insecticide resistance and impact of resistance on malaria parasite development
in mosquitoes, which are so invaluable to the design and parametrization of
realistic mathematical models for studying the role of insecticide resistance on
the dynamics of malaria mosquitoes and disease. This will provide a realistic
framework for the design and testing of resistance management strategies for
malaria-endemic areas that only have a small chemical arsenal left to fight the
disease. Ultimately, this project will generate conditions, in parameter space,
for the effective control or elimination of malaria using existing insecticides-
based resources, thereby contributing to the global malaria eradication efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.