* 2330168
* CEDAR: Observational and Modeling Studies of Thermosphere-Ionosphere Metal (TIMt) Layers over Boulder
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Xinzhao Chu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 11/30/2026
* USD 600,124.00

With tons of cosmic dust falling on Earth every day, metal atoms and ions are
released via meteor ablation and sputtering into the upper atmosphere, forming
permanent metal layers (~75–105 km) that have been known for nearly a century.
Recent lidar observations in Antarctica in 2011 have revealed the existence of
thermosphere-ionosphere metal (TIMt) layers. Regular occurrence of TIMt layers
in Na species (TINa) was reported for the first time from lidar observations in
2021 over Boulder, where TINa layers occur before dawn and after dusk nearly
every night. This project will use modeling and observations to investigate
Boulder TIMt layers that open a new door to study the fundamental processes in
the space-atmosphere interaction region. The project will significantly enhance
our understanding of metallic ions and atoms, plasma-neutral coupling, and
thermospheric tides at mid-latitudes. The enhanced understandings will help
advance space weather research. This award will support graduate and
undergraduate students involved in this project. The team will conduct outreach
activities such as making YouTube videos and organizing science field trips for
K-12 to inspire the younger generation in science.

This project will use observations and modeling approach to address the
following key science questions: 1) What are the formation mechanisms for the
pre-dawn TINa layers with regular occurrence over midlatitudes like Boulder?
What roles do neutral winds, ionospheric electric fields, gravity, diffusion,
meteor ablation, and chemistry play in the TIMt formation and evolution? 2) How
can TIMt layers be used to help delineate/validate tidal winds, provided by CTMT
and ICON (Ionospheric Connection Explorer), in the thermospheric gap region of
100-200 km? 3) Which transport plays the major role in ion transport at
midlatitudes—regional or global transport? Does plasma instability affect TIMt
layers via impacting electric fields?

A regional TIMt model, adopted from an Antarctica TIFe model, will be modified
for the northern midlatitudes to study the Boulder TINa layers as well as ion
transport. The team will carry out in-depth analyses of lidar data and finalize
the preliminary observational results. They will compare the pre-dawn TINa
phases, volume mixing ratios, and their variations with those of neutral winds
(tidal winds and mean winds) provided by various models or measurements (e.g.,
CTMT, ICON, HWM, TIEGCM-driven by ICON, and SD-WACCM-X + DART), with those of
electric fields at northern midlatitudes provided by models or measurements
(e.g., TIEGCM, Millstone Hill measurements), and with those of meteor input flux
(MIF), to help interpret the observations. The comparison results will guide the
selection of input parameters to drive the TIMt model in later years of the
project. A new regional TIMt model developed from this project will be
instrumental in quantifying the understanding of individual contributions from
various factors. It will become a powerful tool for studies in a world of ever-
increasing lidar observations. The new knowledge gained from this project about
the regional & vertical transport and chemistry will assist the future
development of general circulation models. The team will also conduct several
major outreach and diversity activities: Recruit and train one female
undergraduate student, YouTube videos, science field trips, and press releases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.