* 2330370
* Travel: NSF Student and Researcher Travel and Registration Grant for 2023 NITRD/SEI Workshop on US Leadership in Software Engineering and AI Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* William Scherlis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,560.00

This grant supports travel to attend the 2023 NITRD/SEI Workshop on US
Leadership in Software Engineering and AI Engineering, taking place in
Alexandria, Virginia on June 20-21, 2023. The workshop brings together
government agencies, academia and industry to present and discuss ideas for
accelerating progress on the Software Engineering of AI Systems. The workshop
will be a forum to discuss national needs and R&D priorities in the intersection
of Artificial Intelligence and Software Engineering. US competitiveness depends
on learning/knowing how to build AI systems efficiently and productively and so
that they perform their intended functions to meet requirements.

AI systems present new challenges for building systems that are reliable,
verifiable, producible and maintainable. Builders of AI systems will need to be
able to design, build, sustain and evolve AI systems. Software Engineering
researchers will need to develop new notions and capabilities in areas of
verifications, testing, configuration, etc. The increasing prevalence of AI
systems, and recent developments (such as ChatGPT) make it necessary to gain a
deeper understanding of deep learning, large language models, and other
technologies that are becoming embedded in everyday software-intensive systems.
A report will be written and made publicly available to disseminate the results
of the workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.