* 2330328
* PIC: Navigation grade chip scale gyro enabled by weak value amplification
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Jordan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 08/31/2026
* USD 449,999.00

Gyroscopes with high sensitivity and stability are essential components for
navigation and motion sensing used in drones, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs),
and satellites, especially as an alternative Positioning and Navigation
technology for situations where GPS signals are jammed or unavailable. However,
state-of-the-art technology is based on optical fiber gyros that contain spools
of fiber several kilometers long or mechanical gyros that have very limited
dynamic range. The sensitivity and stability of a gyroscope must be
fundamentally traded off between its size and weight. As drones, UAVs, and
satellites become smaller and more ubiquitous, the need for ultracompact
navigation grade gyroscopes will become critical. State-of-the-art miniaturized
gyroscopes are compact and robust but suffer from a performance deficit that
hinders their use in navigation. This program will provide the sensitivity level
of bulk optical gyroscopes on a small, handheld photonic chip, potentially
transforming how navigation is done today. The proposed effort will ignite the
passion for science and increase retention in STEM among underrepresented
populations at the high school level. The PI will work with the David T. Kearns
Center for Leadership and Diversity in Arts, Sciences, and Engineering to
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups through research
experiences for high school students from the Rochester City School District
that spark their desire for a career in STEM.

Weak value amplification has proven to offer a phase sensitivity advantage in
optical interferometers when comparing equal detected optical power. Weak value
amplification amplifies the signal of an interferometric measurement without the
cost of amplifying time correlated noise, systematic noise, and other technical
noises. However, previous demonstrations of weak value amplification also
require complex laboratory setups with exquisite alignment. This proposal will
develop the theory that describes weak value amplification in optical gyros and
their performance parameters. The theory will also model a novel technique of
locking the laser to the sensing cavity while simultaneously measuring rotation.
This stabilization strategy is enabled by the rejected light of the weak value
scheme, which contains a negligible amount of information relating to the
rotation, to separate the stabilization from the measurement on the same cavity.
This theoretical background will guide the experimental side of project that
will implement weak value amplification on a photonic chip with a high quality
factor ring resonator. The proposed gyro will meet navigation grade performance
metrics and improve over state-of-the-art by one hundred fold. The photonic
structures that will be developed to implement weak value amplification,
including multimode couplers, tunable higher order mode couplers, and multilevel
photonics, have applications beyond the proposed gyroscope.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.