* 2330308
* Global Center Track 2: Climate Risk and Resilience: Southeast Asia as a Living Lab (SEALL)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Csaba Varga, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This Global Centers Track 2 Design award undertakes activities aiming to assess
the risk, evaluate impacts, design adaptation and mitigation strategies, and
build resilience for communities living in coastal low-land regions in Southeast
Asia. Southeast Asia (SEA) is a critical manufacturing hub in the global supply
chain supporting a large and culturally and ethnically diverse population in
densely populated urban areas in vulnerable coastal regions and deltas. A team
of experts from six U.S. universities working in collaboration with researchers
from universities in Vietnam, Thailand and Singapore plans to design a global
center with Southeast Asia as a Living Lab (SEALL) to develop mitigation and
adaptation strategies for vulnerable communities in the changing climate. The
project seeks to build resilience to a changing climate using strategies that
range from basic research to technological advancement, education, outreach, and
workforce development and adopting approaches that are use-inspired and
interdisciplinary. The SEALL center will develop community-centered and science-
based adaptation and mitigation policies for low-lying regions. SEALL will
transform the specialized education of engineers, computer scientists,
biologists, and social scientists through an integrated approach to better
prepare for such disasters, thus mitigating the human and financial costs and
disrupting the global supply chain. Lessons learned from building resilience to
climate change in SEA will be valuable for other regions with extensive
coastlines, large rivers, low-lying land, and tropical weather, such as India,
Bangladesh, and the American Southeast. This project has three research and
education themes: Theme 1, carbon-neutral sustainable urban development; Theme
2, low-impact and resilient agriculture; and Theme 3, health impacts of climate
change and adaptation. This planning grant will complete the following
activities: 1) a workshop in Hanoi that brings together researchers,
policymakers, industry experts, students, and communities from the US and SEA to
share knowledge and develop further collaboration on climate risks and building
resilience; 2) three exploratory projects over 18 months to further develop the
partnerships built at the workshop; 3) a design plan for a center-scale
collaboration that would allow participants to apply the lessons learned from
the SEA living lab, one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change, to
other coastal regions. The outcome of this design stage is to build capacity for
future research, education, and implementation of mitigation and adaptation
strategies for coastal communities in the changing climate. A global center on
climate change and clean energy with SEA as a living lab would have potentially
profound impacts on building intellectual, educational, and implementation
capacities on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and resilience. U.S.
students from diverse backgrounds and with limited international travel and
education resources will be recruited for this project.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that
supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate
change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers
to bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.