* 2330981
* I-Corps: Educational game based on research from Jurassic and current coral reefs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Rowan Martindale, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an educational game based on understanding how coral reefs
survive environmental change. This proposed game is a learning tool that guides
players through the processes of evolution and extinction using real-world
examples. Integrating science with gaming encourages active learning via
collaboration and strategizing. The goal is to increase scientific literacy and
encourage engagement with conservation. Understanding how coral reefs might
react to real-world scenarios (as modeled in a game) may provider an
understanding of how modern ocean communities may be protected using guiding
conservation, laws, and remediation. An educated and engaged public is key to
conservation. The accessibility and popularity of mobile and computer games may
make their adoption easier and more enjoyable. Most educational games are
marketed towards young children or are focused on biology, chemistry, or
physics. The proposed technology incorporates Earth science principles and
examples in a well-designed, well-tested game aimed at high school, college, and
adult audiences.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an educational Earth science
mobile, web, or computer game using the understanding how ecosystems survived
past environmental change. The benefits of collaborative learning and game-based
learning have been well established, but very rarely do games incorporate new
scientific discoveries or concepts. The proposed game is designed to incorporate
Earth sciences, evolution, and the fossil record. The proposed educational
electronic game has been tested as a board game that teaches the player about
environmental change, reef ecology and evolutionary mechanisms as well as how
these systems interact to cause major community change through time. The game
incorporates environments, biotas, and climate change scenarios from research on
Jurassic-aged reefs in Morocco and coral reefs alive today in Jamaica. The game
and associated material have been assessed in undergraduate geoscience,
oceanography, and biology classes and show the potential to teach students about
coral reefs and how they change through time in response to their own evolution
as well as environmental shifts on our planet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.