* 2330015
* Inclusive Graduate Programs: An AGEP Pilot in Physics
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Bennett Goldberg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 570,185.00

Culture describes the customs, norms, social institutions, and ‘normal’
interpersonal behaviors of a particular social group. Culture can be inclusive
and equitable, accepting of a wide range of prior experiences, identities, and
histories. Unfortunately, studies have shown that the culture of physics
graduate programs is not inclusive or equitable, and that racial and gender
inequality and the unequal distribution of resources, power, and economic
opportunity are prevalent in STEM disciplines. These inequalities systemically
advantage some people over others, hindering our scientific, technological, and
economic advancement as a nation through the lack of diverse perspectives. The
underrepresentation of women and individuals from minoritized and marginalized
racial and ethnic communities persists in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM). Among STEM, physics is the field with the poorest diversity
in graduate education. The culture of STEM and physics, in particular, is
characterized by a dominant culture that favors norms of success based on
stereotypical characteristics of competitiveness, individualism, assertiveness,
and arrogance, which leads to the marginalization of groups of people who are
underrepresented in STEM. Despite robust literature documenting the experiences
of marginalized students in graduate education, little progress has been made
toward creating more welcoming and inclusive physics programs. This Inclusive
Graduate Programs: An AGEP Pilot in Physics project will target both changing
program practices and policies, as well as the mindsets of institutional and
powerful actors in departments. The goal of this project is to create systemic
and lasting cultural change in a cohort of leading physics graduate programs to
lay the foundation for expansion across STEM. The researchers aim to support
physics graduate programs to become more inclusive and equitable, creating and
sustaining a welcoming and supportive environment specifically for historically
excluded groups, who in turn will matriculate, graduate and advance to academic
faculty positions in far greater numbers, diversifying the discipline. By
diversifying physics, the least diverse discipline, the researchers aim to
create a model for STEM graduate programs nationwide.

This project uses a novel structure that initiates deep and systemic change
within a single STEM discipline across multiple, high-ranking institutions and
in close collaboration with the national disciplinary society–the American
Physical Society. The research team, comprised of experts in intersectionality
in physics, systemic change in higher education, inclusive faculty practice in
advising, teaching and mentoring, and inclusion and equity research and practice
within the American Physical Society will collectively engage with leading
physics department teams. Acting as a research and practice backbone structure,
this team will provide training in equity, change leadership, community buy-in,
intersectionality, and action planning. The convening and post-convening
activities center on a community of practice model, infused with equity and
inclusion learning, sharing of evidence-based interventions, and supported with
comprehensive data collection, analysis, and contextualization. By housing the
curation, dissemination, and scalability in the American Physical Society, data
and lessons learned will be documented and disseminated through conference
presentations, publications, and the American Physical Society Effective
Practices for Physics Programs (EP3) Guide that will inform researchers and the
physics community and other STEM disciplines on effective institutional change
approaches to advance equity culture in graduate program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.