* 2330278
* I-Corps: Personalized AI-Driven Training for Construction Workers with Non-Intrusive Measures
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Behzad Esmaeili, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform in combination with wearable sensors for
training construction workers. Currently, construction companies rely on
training programs to improve construction workers’ skills. However, traditional
classroom-based training environments may not adequately prepare workers for the
current challenges in the construction industry. The proposed software platform
is designed to capture performance and personalize learning in non-invasive ways
that may enable rethinking of the current pedagogical approach. The proposed
technology provides smart training systems that observe human metrics to
strengthen workplace and academic educational practices and knowledge
acquisition among diverse learners. In addition, the adaptive systems may
incorporate mixed reality that provide context-dependent support from multiple
sources of information and include personalized tracking of the individual
worker’s capabilities, work history, goals for the task, and prior performance
on the task. The project is aimed at architecture, engineering, and construction
worker training; however, the proposed platform may be adapted for other labor-
intensive industries.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of personalized artificial
intelligence (AI)-driven training for construction workers that includes non-
intrusive measures. The proposed technology uses the Human-Error Detection
Framework that harnesses real-time psychophysiological data collected from
wearable sensors (e.g., eye tracker, electroencephalogram, electrodermal
activity, and photoplethysmography). The sensors are designed to measure, track,
and predict workers’ performance and capabilities using the multimodal
heterogeneous sensor data. Predictive models resulting from this study may
contribute to significant accident reduction as well as provide a critical
validation measure to confirm the effectiveness of training programs on
enhancing workers' risk-analysis skills. Validated at real construction
jobsites, the algorithms, classifiers, and predictive models developed by the
research reveal which physiological metrics characterize training effectiveness.
Since the results of this study link training proficiency to direct measures of
cognitive load and attentional demands, it lays the foundation for developing
personalized training environments that provide the optimum amount of challenge
for each user in dynamic and hazardous workplaces such as construction. These
results challenge the passivity paradigm of construction training by creating
methods to boost workers’ cognitive abilities by considering their individual
differences to overcome challenges on work sites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.