* 2330413
* Global Centers Track 2: Nature-based Urban Hydrology Center
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Bridget Wadzuk, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 12/31/2025
* USD 249,977.00

Climate change continues to exacerbate environmental challenges associated with
urban growth. To help minimize these challenges for urban hydrologic systems
around the world, nature-based solutions (NbS) are becoming a popular strategy.
The Nature-based Urban Hydrology Center (NUHC) will provide globally relevant,
sustainable, holistic, transferable, and community-driven approaches to respond
to urban hydrology challenges. Aligned with the goals of the Global Centers
Program, this award supports the planning phase of the NUHC to bring together an
interdisciplinary team of domestic and international partners to perform use-
inspired research. Working with urban communities, the NUHC will share knowledge
and make broadly transferable advances that leverage NbS to meet the challenges
brought by climate change on urban hydrology. The NUHC will establish a
clearinghouse for easily shared data and findings that does not currently exist,
as well as enable better modeling and data analysis. Through global
collaboration, the NUHC will broaden understanding of the potential benefit of
NbS on urban hydrology, increase NbS ecosystem services and resilience, advance
understanding of these systems to influence policy, and aid in improving the
urban environment and social equity. The NUHC planning phase will build a
framework to engage students, urban communities, and industry and academic
colleagues to promote issues of fairness and sustainability within urban
hydrology. As climate change exacerbates environmental challenges associated
with urban growth globally, nature-based solutions (NbS) are rapidly becoming
the prevalent strategy to mitigate the varied impacts on urban hydrology
systems. However, currently there is no common data portal or controlled
language around NbS, there is inconsistent terminology, differing design and
performance goals, and challenges in scaling and transferring findings inhibit
widespread sharing of knowledge. The goal of this project is to plan and design
the NUHC to bring together a group of domestic and international partners that
have deep knowledge on diverse aspects of urban hydrology and NbS that will
enable significant advances in design and policy practices to develop approaches
for restoration, and protection that consider broader contexts, such as
ecosystem health, stream health, soil health, social health, and emergency
management. A key outcome will be to create a data structure to leverage
existing data and to easily share data and findings to advance modeling and
analytical techniques to determine NbS and urban hydrology trends,
commonalities, and differences based on climate, policy, design, and
physiographic parameters. As part of this planning project, a framework for how
global partners can work together, choose relevant research projects, train
students, and engage urban community members and industry and academic partners
will be developed. Through global collaboration, this project will broaden the
communityâ€™s understanding of NbS and urban hydrology, increase NbS ecosystem
services and resilience, advance understanding of these systems to influence
policy, and aid in improving the urban environment and social equity. This award
is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that supports
use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate change
and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers to
bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.