* 2330212
* EAGER: Understanding complex wind-driven wildfire propagation patterns with a dynamical systems approach
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Ali Tohidi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Intense and long wildfire seasons have unfortunately become a normal routine in
certain parts of the US. Dangerous wildfires are often driven by intense winds.
The chaotic nature of wind patterns makes prediction and fundamental
understanding of wildfire growth a challenging task. Current wind-driven
wildfire models are difficult to simulate and interpret. In this exploratory
project, the key objective is to uncover hidden coherent patterns in wind data
that could be used to better understand and predict wildfire growth driven by
wind. The project will benefit society as it provides guidelines for wildfire
management, which will save lives and reduce the financial burden on communities
exposed to wildfires.

In this study, dynamical systems theory will be employed to define coherent
structures customized to the transport problems used to model wind-driven
wildfire growth. A set of benchmark problems motivated by the field of dynamical
systems and chaotic advection together with more complex realistic wind patterns
will be leveraged to study the role of coherent structures in wildfire growth.
Specifically, the hypothesis that generlized Lagrangian coherent structures
could be defined to provide a template for wildfire growth under certain
scenarios will be explored. Outreach activities in Utah will use visualization
to demonstrate the importance of computer modeling in managing wildfires. This
study will provide a new theory that not only simplifies our understanding of
wildfire growth under complex wind patterns but also guides wildfire management
and mitigation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.