* 2330164
* The Construction of a Pulsar Interstellar Medium Array Detector
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Michael Lam, SETI Institute
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 111,280.00

Interstellar space is filled with a rich medium of gas and dust. Most
astronomers take images of large structures in the interstellar medium (ISM).
However, observations of radio waves from pulsars traveling through the ISM
allow access to much smaller scales. These pulsars act as probes within the
Galaxy's active environments. Astronomers use pulsars to understand turbulence
in the ISM, identify clouds and filaments, and even understand the wind of
particles streaming from the Sun. The investigators will combine observations of
hundreds of pulsars by many telescopes around the world. These will be combined
to create Galaxy-sized detector known as a "Pulsar ISM Array." This work will
connect pulsar astronomers around the world with many other communities to
create a detailed picture of our dynamic Galaxy. The investigators will also
build classroom laboratory and outreach demonstrations. These will engage
students and the public in understanding the complex phenomena of the ISM.

The investigators will construct a "Pulsar ISM Array" (PISMA) analogous to a
pulsar timing array (PTA) used in the study of low-frequency gravitational
waves. Since all pulsar emission is dispersed by the ISM, all pulsars can
contribute to the PISMA and not just the ultra-precise ones used in PTA
experiments. In combining a wide-range of observables, including but not limited
to pulsar dispersion measures, scintillation parameters, flux-density
variations, secondary spectra, along with non-pulsar observables such as sky
maps from H-alpha surveys, the PISMA will provide key insights into
understanding the processes that govern the transfer of turbulent energy from
kiloparsec to sub-AU scales; the formation, morphology, and population of
compact plasma structures and larger-scale over-densities; and the extreme
environmental conditions around pulsars themselves. Advancing understanding in
these areas will also benefit understanding in the broader astronomical
communities researching Fast Radio Bursts and extragalactic transients, space
weather, and intraday variability of radio quasars, and provide input into the
most sophisticated Galactic electron density maps yet created.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.