* 2330179
* I-Corps: Deployment of antibacterials as seed treatments
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Clemencia Rojas, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 11,935.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to alleviate the impact of Bacterial Panicle Blight
(BPB) by providing a seed coating treatment that will kill the pathogen before
it can cause damage throughout the plant. Rice is a food staple for more than 3
billion people around the globe. Rice diseases affect rice production worldwide,
and as a result, represent a significant threat to global food security. Among
rice diseases, Bacterial Panicle Blight, caused by the pathogen Burkholderia
glumae, is particularly problematic as there are not effective methods to
control it. The deployment of this technology may reduce yield loss to farmers
due to this disease, while also reducing the costs associated with the purchase
and use of antibacterial chemicals that are not effective. This technology may
benefit rice farmers in the United States and across the world. Although this
project focuses on a specific bacterial disease in rice, it is possible that its
impact can be expanded to other crop diseases.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an environmentally-friendly
and effective seed coating treatment to control Bacterial Panicle Blight (BPB).
Plant diseases caused by microorganisms such as fungi and bacteria significantly
affect agricultural productivity. Traditionally, fungal plant diseases have been
controlled by synthetic fungicides that while effective, pose significant threat
to the environment. In contrast to fungal diseases, effective methods to control
bacterial diseases in crops are unavailable, mostly because the use of synthetic
antibiotics in crops can increase the likelihood that antibiotic resistance can
be transmitted to human bacterial pathogens. There is a critical need to find
antibacterials effective against plant diseases without detrimental effects to
human health or the environment. Bacterial Panicle Blight (BPB) has
significantly decreased rice production worldwide. The proposed technology is
based on the secreted fraction of the environmental bacterium Pseudomonas
protegens strain PBL3. Because the P. protegens PBL3 secreted fraction contains
a mixture of molecules with diverse modes of action, the likelihood that
bacteria develop resistance is very small. This technology has the potential to
provide an effective, long-lasting, environmentally-friendly and consumer-
accepted method of reducing BPB in rice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.