* 2330910
* Conference: Envisioning STEM Education for the Green and Blue Economies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jacqueline DeLisi, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,873.00

Climate change is one of the most formidable challenges of our time. Countries
are experiencing record heat, wildfires, drought, and powerful monsoons. These
natural disasters have created an urgent need for a workforce that can build
stronger green and blue economies. Green economies emit low levels of carbon,
use resources efficiently, and advance social equity; blue economies use ocean
resources sustainably and support the oceans' health. Unfortunately, K-12
education systems are not fully equipped to help young people develop the
technological skills, types of knowledge, and human dispositions that green and
blue economies require. Education Development Center (EDC) is organizing a
conference that will convene a wide group of stakeholders to synthesize what is
currently known and still needs to be known to help young people--particularly
those from communities that have been historically marginalized and excluded
from STEM--gain the STEM skills and competencies that they need to actively be
part of green and blue economies. Through this conference, the project aims to
develop a vision and launch a network of stakeholders to prepare young people
for greener and bluer ways of living and working. By focusing in particular on
needs and opportunities for youth from historically marginalized groups, the
conference also aims to benefit families and communities that are most
vulnerable to climate change.

The conference will address three guiding questions: (1) What knowledge and
skills from STEM and other disciplines do students need to learn to prepare them
to join and contribute to the green and blue economies? (2) What types of
partnerships among educators, industry, and other sectors already exist, and
what can we learn from them about the opportunities and barriers that cross-
sector collaborations face to prepare young people for green and blue
occupations? (3) What strategies may be most effective in ensuring that young
people from historically marginalized communities gain the knowledge and skills
needed to join and help construct green and blue economies? To address these
questions, the conference will involve two days of panel discussions and broader
group conversations among conference participants. Panelists and participating
stakeholders will include economists, industry leaders, K-12 educators in
classroom and out-of-school settings, and community and public leaders who have
been studying or working actively to prepare young people for more
environmentally sustainable ways of life and work. Conference outcomes will
include: (a) meeting proceedings that identify important skill sets, promising
educational approaches, and priority research questions for building a diverse
workforce for the green and blue economies; (b) a network of interested
stakeholders who can share information and build partnerships to develop this
workforce; (c) public commitments from conference participants to propel
conference-generated ideas into concrete actions; and (d) a website for
disseminating conference products and connecting stakeholders with parallel
initiatives to support green and blue economies around the world.

This conference project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts, and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.