* 2330048
* AF:Small: Algorithms and Limitations for Matrix Multiplication
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Virginia Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Matrix multiplication is among the most basic and fundamental mathematical
operations. It finds applications throughout science, technology and beyond. For
instance, matrices need to be multiplied whenever trajectories or changes of
coordinates need to be computed: in graphics, computer animation, physics and
chemistry simulations, map routing computations, machine learning, economics and
more. The study of matrix multiplication algorithms seeks to develop the fastest
methods for computers to multiply matrices. With today's world of big data, the
matrices of interest are larger than ever, and very fast matrix multiplication
methods are of great importance. An important educational goal of the project is
to mentor undergraduate and graduate students in research, with a particular
emphasis on building expertise in matrix algorithms and their applications. The
investigator will also continue developing courses on the topics of this
project, with a large research component. The lecture notes and project
materials will be available on the course website for the general public.

For decades the trivial approach to multiplying matrices was thought to be
optimal until a 1969 breakthrough by Strassen and the subsequent development of
deep theory led to significant improvements. The theoretical study of matrix
multiplication algorithms aims to pinpoint the exponent omega of matrix
multiplication: the smallest real number for which there is an algorithm that
multiplies two n-by-n matrices over a field using n^{omega+o(1)} operations
(additions and multiplications of field elements). Since the output is of size
n^2, in the worst case, omega is at least 2. The best known published upper
bound omega<2.37286 was obtained by Alman and the investigator, and a recent
preprint on the arXiv gives an improvement to omega<2.372. The main goal of this
project is to investigate new approaches to improving the bound on omega and
related parameters, and to design a practical algorithm with a provably low
runtime exponent. To complement this, the investigator will also explore the
limitations of the new approaches, aiming to pinpoint both their strengths and
weaknesses. A second goal of the project is to consider variants of the matrix
multiplication problem, such as multiplying matrices over other algebraic
structures with applications in graph algorithms. Both algorithms and
conditional lower bounds will be considered.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.