* 2330956
* I-Corps: Surface Modification of Complex Structures by Self-Limiting Electrospray Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Jonathan Singer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a self-limiting electrospray deposition manufacturing technology.
Material coatings are ubiquitous, from bio-compatibilizers for implants, to
anti-corrosion applications in aerospace. However, most techniques for micro and
nanoscale manufacturing are not economically feasible. The proposed technology
is designed to process nanoparticles and biomaterials and may implement these
materials in devices and structures where they would otherwise be prohibitively
expensive. The advent of widespread additive manufacturing (AM) has led to 3D
printed parts that are more intricate and customizable than ever before. The
proposed technology may be used to coat and upgrade these parts with a high
level of automation. In addition, interest is growing in biomimetic materials as
a new class of extraordinary materials, and the proposed technology represents a
low-cost way to generate these structures. Also, the proposed technology may be
used in medical applications that may expand the reach of advanced therapeutics
and functional implants to a much wider range of patients.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a self-limiting electrospray
deposition technology, which is a manufacturing technique that uses
electrostatic forces to perform highly targeted conformal coatings. The proposed
technology is designed to coat 3D objects in ambient conditions using a single
stationary spray nozzle and a similar effect allows for targeting of micron-
scale 2D conductive patterns on insulating substrates. The compatibility of the
self-limiting electrospray deposition technology has been demonstrated with
several industrially relevant materials including polymers, therapeutic
molecules (e.g., immunomodulators, DNA vaccines, proteins), nanoparticles, and
hermetic barriers. It is also highly compatible with additive manufacturing (AM)
parts and small 2D and 3D features. While standard electrostatic sprays are
ubiquitous in automotive and pharmaceutical manufacturing and can even achieve
non-line-of-sight coatings, the proposed technology is designed to achieve true
conformal coatings with uniformity on the micro and nanoscale. In addition,
results achieved efficiencies approaching 100%, allowing for low waste
processing of expensive materials. Collectively, these capabilities make the
proposed technology ideal for implementing high-tech solutions across industries
where they would otherwise be cost prohibitive.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.