* 2330000
* I-Corps:  Soil Fines Content Measuring Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Mohamed Mahgoub, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to accurately measure fines content in the field. The
proposed technology is aimed at the geotechnical engineering industry to reduce
the time and cost of traditional laboratory testing methods. The amount of fines
in soils often controls the microscopic behavior as well as the macro response
of geologic formations. A wide spectrum of applications in geotechnical
engineering can be appreciably affected by the presence of fine material in
soils, e.g., foundation design, seepage analyses for earth structures,
evaluation of well permittivity, material suitability for borrow sites, and
liquefaction potential of foundations. Therefore, field identification of soil
types and their basic characteristics is of great importance in geotechnical
engineering. The proposed device is a portable, low-cost solution to provide
real-time data, allowing faster and more efficient decision-making during site
investigations. Data analysis and interpretation of the soil particle size
distribution is included do, which will be helpful to engineering firms,
material testing businesses, regulatory organizations, and environmental
monitoring organizations. The proposed technology may help site investigation
and environmental monitoring efficiency, accuracy, and cost-effectiveness. This
will ultimately result in higher quality and safety for infrastructure projects
and environmental management.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a technology to assess the
principle of estimating fines in soil content by measuring relative volumes of
coarse-grained to fine-grained soil fractions. Currently, for evaluation of soil
characteristics, extensive laboratory testing comprised primarily of grain size
analysis is needed. A dedicated device was developed and tested comparing the
proposed volume-based principle to measure fines to the standard sample washing
methods to verify the measurements. The study indicated the device provided high
accuracy of ± 5 and showed that the device is comparable for measuring fines
content in soils. In addition, compared with the results of the standard wash
tests that take a few hours to perform, the proposed device was found to be time
efficient, taking 5 to 15 minutes to complete. The proposed device's volume-
based principle may reduce the need for extensive laboratory testing, reducing
reliance on traditional testing methods and providing rapid results in the
field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.