* 2330030
* Conference: 2023 Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Evan Flach, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Mammalian synthetic biology is the design of genetic devices that enables the
study and control of biological processes in mammalian cells to provide the
tools and design strategies to accelerate the advancement of various therapies;
therefore, many of the technologies being developed will be useful for eventual
medical use in the long term. The 2023 International Mammalian Synthetic Biology
Workshop (mSBW) will bring together leaders in synthetic biology with experts
from other relevant fields to highlight and inspire cutting-edge synthetic
biology and cellular research. The program features talks on foundational
technologies, reporters and recorders, circuits and dynamics, regenerative
medicine and organoids, and immunoengineering that encourages the participation
of students in order to train a new generation of engineers. This research
positively impacts society by helping us to better understand and diagnose
diseases, more rapidly discover effective therapeutics and develop precision
medicine for individuals. By focusing on mammalian synthetic biology across a
broad range of applications, the meeting creates a unique environment to gather
researchers with varying expertise, skillsets and levels of experience. This
allows for the exchange of ideas, knowledge and opportunities for collaboration
between people who rarely have the opportunity to interact. Funding for the
conference will also support the attendance of underrepresented groups in
engineering.

The workshop will emphasize novel computational tools/methods to aid in
predicting and quantitatively studying system behavior. The advances in
fundamental science, engineering techniques, and computation models will be
critical for the development of medicinal products in the long term as it will
be useful for improving understanding, monitoring, and treatment of disease. The
workshop will contain five technical sessions: (1) Foundational advances, (2)
Applications in stem cells, (3) Immunotherapy and cell therapy, (4) Gene
regulation, (5) Sensors and multi-input logic. The workshop will also host
several Q&A discussions, networking breaks, as well as poster sessions that
allow students to present their work. It is our hope that the various networking
opportunities will give the attendees the ability to discuss the state-of-the-
art technology being presented, and that the discussions will lead to potential
collaborations that may accelerate development in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.