* 2330153
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Advancing Probabilistic Fault Displacement Hazard Assessments by Collecting Perishable Data from the 2023 Turkiye Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Clinton Wood, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The 300-km-long magnitude (M) 7.8 earthquake rupture along the East Anatolian
Fault in Türkiye is one of the largest strike-slip ruptures instrumented
globally. At the same time, the 150-km-long M7.5 rupture of the largest
aftershock on the Sürgü fault, produced surface displacements on the order of 8
m, exceeding, on average, the displacement-length relations used for the 2023
National Seismic Hazard Model (NSHM) update by more than fifty percent. These
ruptures share a similar tectonic setting with the San Andreas Fault System
(SAFS) in California, so evaluating the NSHM by comparison with the Türkiye
fault ruptures is important in the context of risk reduction in the US. A
similar rupture on the SAFS, often referred to as 'The Big One' in California,
will threaten the population and economy of major urban centers, national
defense installations, and other critical infrastructures. Observing and
documenting displacements along these exceedingly long and rare ruptures is
therefore critical to understanding and reproducing earthquake rupture
processes, empirically and numerically; to reducing uncertainty in regional
hazard models; and reducing the risk of distributed infrastructure systems that
are vital to the health and prosperity of communities, and vulnerable to ground
deformation, such as water and gas pipelines. Findings and open-source datasets
from this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) fieldwork will guide public
policy and engineering design codes through future improvements of the NSHM, as
well as decision makers for a greater extent of societal well-being and national
defense. To complete this work, partnerships between academia and government
agencies in both the US and Türkiye have been established; the team is diverse
and includes a balance of early-career scientists and senior scientists,
geotechnical earthquake engineers and earthquake geologists, US-based and in-
country collaborators, and scientists from underrepresented backgrounds.

The intellectual merit of this work lies in setting a new paradigm in fault
rupture field mapping for engineering applications. While there is field,
laboratory and numerical evidence that shallow geological conditions affect
fault displacements, the evidence is at best qualitative, and thus the
documented data cannot be integrated in engineering models for risk reduction.
In order to capture these effects in predictive empirical models for engineering
applications, new kind of dataset is needed that associates each fault
displacement measurement site with geotechnical site characterization
measurements. The primary field objectives include characterization of the 2023
ruptures by means of: (1) mapping the main fault rupture with high-resolution
(cm-scale) GNSS surveys, photographs, ground-based lidar, and UAV-based terrain
models, (2) documenting discrete and perishable offsets of cultural and
geomorphic features, (3) characterizing the width and style of the deformation
zone, (4) accompanying the measurements of the transient deformation zones with
dynamic site characterization measurements on a sub-km scale using active source
and ambient wavefield surface wave methods, along with horizontal to vertical
spectral ratio (HVSR) measurements, (5) providing geological context (e.g.,
dominant geological processes and depositional units) for site characterization
efforts, and (6) identifying secondary effects such as gravitational failures
and liquefaction. Insights and scaling behaviors stemming directly from the
field data will provide the first of what is envisioned to constitute the next-
generation fault displacement datasets that will allow future PFDHA models to
capture repeatable effects associated with local geologic conditions and fault
geometry among other parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.