* 2330240
* EAGER: SaTC: Sweaty Digits: Bridging Chemistry and AI-Empowered Imaging for Secure and Trustworthy Human Identity Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Emanuela Marasco, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Compared to current biometric technologies, sweat can better represent human
identity with more discerning characteristics, overcoming limitations of
existing systems such as demographic differentials (e.g., lower accuracy in
women) and vulnerability to spoof attacks. This research aims to define human
identity through richer signals, not only spatial features but also associated
chemical content, captured by a hyperspectral imager without the use of
reagents. This proposal aims to create a new representation of human identity
based on the analysis of sweat through hyperspectral imaging (HSI), which
enables further research to explore sweat as a solution for efficient, accurate,
and secure biometric human identity verification. Sweat can provide a meticulous
perspective on identity by incorporating chemical properties of a biometric
trait. By focusing on an HSI perspective of sweat as biometric modality, this
project builds a deeper profile of the identity makes the link between the
genuine person and the digital representation stronger and, subsequently, the
system processing it less prone to errors and more resilient to spoofing. The
project's broader significance and importance is to bridge advances in chemical
sweat analysis to imaging that builds foundations for reasoning on HSI learning
techniques applied to sweat.

The projectâ€™s novelties include creating profiles of sweat metabolites using
HSI, thereby creating a digital human identity based on sweat. To accomplish
this objective, this project focuses on confirming that metabolites can be
extracted from sweat excreted from human fingertips, confirming their
reproducibility, and creating an HSI reference for each metabolite of interest.
Due to diversity in the sensing approach, spectral references obtained through
traditional spectroscopy for sweat metabolites cannot be used as HSI reference.
The research investigates important aspects such as how to acquire appropriate
sweat samples and whether the deposited sample and the capture process are
repeatable - with the application of HSI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.