* 2330331
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Geospatial Cyberinfrastructure Workshop: Building High-Performance, Ethical, and Secured Geospatial Software
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Weichen Wong, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,925.00

Geospatial software plays an essential role in acquiring, transforming, and
using geospatial information and knowledge, thus facilitating the understanding
of coupled human-natural systems. High-performance Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) software are often produced using advanced Geospatial
Cyberinfrastructure platforms. However, the measurement of quality is still in
the gray area. For example, user satisfaction, usability testing, and human-
centered computing are the major factors contributing to the acceptance and
popularity of high-performance geospatial software tools. As the complexity of
many systems continues to grow, ensuring security, safety, and reliability
becomes imperative. This workshop provides a valuable platform to scientists and
engineers from industry and academia and different communities, including
Geoscience, computer science, and software engineering, to present the
challenges faced in research and workforce development. The workshop consists of
keynote presentations, a training session, paper sessions, and panel discussions
to discuss the best and most efficient techniques for developing secure, safe,
and reliable geospatial software systems. The workshop will prioritize minority
students when selecting the participants for the workshop. Minority and socially
disadvantaged students and educators will be recruited to the workshop through
the travel award program. The workshop material will be disseminated to diverse
research communities through collaboration networks.

The proposed workshop will enhance practices and processes for developing
ethical and secured geospatial software within computer science, engineering,
and Geoscience research domains. Through the workshop, the proposed work aims to
strengthen the software research workforce development by providing lectures,
training, and presentation at the conference and sharing results with diverse
research communities through collaboration networks. The workshop covers topics
such as Geoethics, high-performance software development, geospatial software
usability testing, and software dependability. The project team has partnered
with national and regional professional societies and public and private
institutions to translate Cyberinfrastructure enabled geospatial software
development practices into diverse organizational contexts to promote
cyberinfrastructure education among Geoscience, Engineering, and Computer
Science research communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.