* 2330066
* Research Infrastructure: Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): SPHERE - Security and Privacy Heterogeneous Environment for Reproducible Experimentation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2027
* USD 15,214,829.00

Cybersecurity and privacy (CS&P) threats increasingly impact our daily lives,
our national infrastructures and our industry. Recent newsworthy attacks
targeted nationally important infrastructure, government systems, researchers,
and research facilities. The landscape of what needs to be protected and from
what threat evolves: new technologies are released and the threat actors improve
their own capabilities through experience and close collaboration. Meanwhile,
defenders work often in isolation, using private data and facilities, and
producing defenses that are quickly outpaced by new threats. To transform CS&P
research into a highly integrated, community-wide effort, CS&P researchers need
a common, rich, representative research infrastructure, which meets the needs
across all members of the community, and facilitates reproducible science.

The SPHERE research infrastructure will offer a novel mix of experimentation
capabilities, uniquely tailored to the needs of CS&P researchers and educators.
SPHERE’s novel offering of diverse, rich hardware infrastructure, configurable
network substrate and safe network policies will support novel CS&P research in
emerging areas, such as IoT, cyber-physical systems, programmable networks, edge
computing, Internet measurement and human-centric CS&P. SPHERE’s novel user
portals will democratize access to CS&P research, and will facilitate practical
CS&P education of broad student populations. SPHERE’s novel support for
representative experimentation and reproducibility, tight collaboration with
researchers and close alliances with artifact evaluation committees, will enable
vertical progress in the science of CS&P. The SPHERE research infrastructure
will transform CS&P research, from piecemeal and opportunistic to highly
integrated, by unifying the community’s experimentation efforts on a common,
rich, highly usable infrastructure. Integrated research efforts will increase
the pace of innovation and improve the success and sophistication of CS&P
research products. Thus, SPHERE will significantly advance scientific discovery
and the Nation’s research capabilities in CS&P.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.