* 2330074
* I-Corps: Advancing access equity and user safety through bio-inspired all-terrain mobility solutions
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Henry Astley, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make
physical access more equitable for people with mobility limitations, increase
cane user safety, and mitigate financial barriers to mobility aid access. This
project enhances scientific and technological understanding by providing
biomechanical evidence to validate the functionality of a new cane design. This
will both encourage disclosure of experimental justification for mobility aid
designs (which has been lacking in the field) and highlight the potential of
nature-inspired design to contribute to solving societal challenges. This
innovation specifically offers a novel biomechanical approach to designing
stabilizing mobility aids to increase their versatility and safety. This
provides a clear contribution to helping millions of Americans achieve mobility
independence in safe and effective ways, increasing access equity and user
confidence. The high number of mobility aid users in the US alone and the
evidence that this technology can operate with more comfort and versatility than
standard devices indicate its significant commercial potential. Moreover,
marketing directly to users and to community spaces where shared devices can be
available decreases many financial and logistical barriers that often limit
access to aids. Exploring the latter niche market will also enhance this
technology’s potential commercial impact.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a bio-inspired all-terrain
cane that increases the device’s stability on uneven, natural terrains and
decreases impact to a user’s body. Currently marketed canes rely heavily on a
user’s physical capability and have been linked to an increased risk of fall-
related injuries and overuse injuries. They also lack publicly available
scientific evidence that supports the effectiveness of their designs. The bio-
inspired cane design supported by this project has undergone extensive
biomechanical testing to verify its potential to increase functionality in a
variety of user scenarios and minimize the risk of user injury as compared to an
industry standard cane. The research supporting this technology centered around
testing functionally-relevant characteristics in environments commonly
encountered by users, thus offering a model for future biomechanical testing of
mobility aids. Furthermore, the nature-inspired design approach to this research
exemplifies the potential of transferring principles from natural models to
engineered technologies to streamline the design process. The hope is that this
will inspire other engineers and designers to look to natural systems as design
models to solve future technological challenges in mobility aids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.