* 2330157
* I-Corps: 3D Scanning Tool for Reconstruction Via Uncertainty Quantification
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Qixing Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an interactive 3D scanning tool that targets novice users. The
goal of the proposed technology is to bridge 3D reconstruction via 3D scanners,
which typically require extensive expertise, to novice users with no background
in geometry processing. 3D scanners generate depth scans that are partial
surfaces of the underlying object. A 3D reconstruction typically requires
registering depth scans under different camera poses, known as the registration
procedure, and reconstructing a complete surface from the registered scans,
known as surface reconstruction. The performance of registration heavily depends
on the structure of how scans overlap with each other. The proposed technology
uses a principled uncertainty quantification framework that may accurately
predict the uncertainties of 3D reconstruction from depth scans. It was
determined that the predicted uncertainties provide an effective means to guide
scan planning that minimizes the number of scans and improves reconstruction
quality. This technology may reduce the 3D acquisition time and improve the
reconstruction quality. Applications include reconstructions of human teeth for
dentists to perform surgery planning, reconstructions of buildings, bridges, and
other architectural artifacts for damage inspection, 3D reconstructions of
traffic accidents for crime analysis, and 3D reconstructions of mechanical parts
for model checking.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of uncertainty quantification
algorithms for multi-scan registration and reconstruction and view planning
algorithms based on quantified uncertainties. The proposed technology is
designed for quantifying the uncertainties of the current 3D reconstruction,
automating reconstruction completeness checking, online scan planning to reduce
the uncertainties of reconstruction, enhancing completeness, and minimizing
scanning time. The goal is to integrate the proposed technology into existing
software packages for 3D reconstruction, making them easy to use for novice
users with no background in geometry processing. The proposed technology
addresses the limitations of existing scan-based 3D reconstruction techniques,
especially the long acquisition period and the lack of effective reconstruction
quality assessment methods, problems that have been well-documented in the
research literature. Research findings examining the proposed technology suggest
that efficient uncertainty quantification techniques may enhance the quality of
3D reconstruction and reduce scanning time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.