* 2330387
* NSF Global Centers Track 2: Energy Sovereignty for Indigenous Peoples (ESIP)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Haochi Zheng, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 12/31/2025
* USD 249,998.00

This Global Centers Track 2 Design grant supports solutions-based research and
planning to develop renewable energy and microgrid technologies, along with
associated economic and sustainability data for use by Indigenous communities to
support energy sovereignty. Indigenous communities often consist of rural,
remote, spread-out populations with distributed, smaller-scale power, heat, and
fuel energy systems, which are less reliable and less resilient to anticipated
shifts in weather patterns and severity due to climate change. To assist in
addressing this issue, the University of North Dakota in collaboration with
North Dakota State University, Kansas State University, the University of Leeds
(UK), and the University of Manitoba (Canada) will work with the local
indigenous communities with whom team members have connections and will build
new connections as the project matures. The goal is to develop the plans needed
for an Energy Sovereignty for Indigenous Peoples (ESIP) global center. ESIP
plans a suite of research tasks in four key technology areas to provide
sustainable, reliable, and efficient engineering infrastructures and solutions
for Indigenous energy sovereignty around the globe. ESIP will work directly with
Indigenous community members and practicing Indigenous scientists and engineers
to shape the ESIP research agenda. The award will focus on three main
components: 1) listening sessions from Indigenous members, 2) feedback and
regular meetings with an external advisory board, and 3) refinement and
alignment of the center’s research goals and tasks to reflect the needs of our
current and future Indigenous community partners. The project also plans
opportunities to engage Indigenous students in STEM research and professional
development. ESIP will plan a suite of long-term transformational and short-term
solutions-based research tasks to develop renewable energy and microgrid
technologies, along with associated economic and sustainability data for use by
Indigenous communities to support their energy sovereignty. ESIP research focus
areas are: 1) small-scale power, heat and fuel generation, 2) combined
autonomous/integrated power distribution systems and supply resiliency, and 3)
social, policy, and socio-economic aspects of energy sovereignty. ESIP will
provide support services for each research task, including techno-economic,
sustainability, and chemical analyses. It is envisioned that ESIP transformative
track 1 research will focus on thermal energy systems, microgrid advancements,
process intensification for small-scale waste-to-energy processes, and advanced
knowledge in assessing economic and environmental benefits to Indigenous
communities. Track 1 solution-based research will be planned to expand the
capabilities of rural remote smart grid technologies coupled with advancements
in photovoltaic heat pump applications. Research tasks will be planned with
feedback from surveys, focus group interviews, and consensus from Indigenous
community members within the ESIP Global Center. This award is funded by the
Global Centers program, an innovative program that supports use-inspired
research addressing global challenges related to climate change and/or clean
energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers to bring together
international teams to develop research questions and partnerships, conduct
landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to
advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in the future.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.