* 2330213
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Mark Hempstead, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to request travel support funds that will help
undergraduate and graduate students from US-based institutions to attend and
participate in the 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Workload
Characterization (IISWC). The conference will be held in October 2023 in Ghent,
Belgium.. IISWC is the premier forum for understanding and characterization of
workloads that run on all types of computing systems. Topics of interest include
but are not limited to characterization of applications in domains; emerging
workloads and architectures; implications of workloads in design issues;
benchmark creation and evaluation; characterization of OS/VMM, middleware and
library behavior; measurement tools and techniques.

The award is to provide travel support for around 20 U.S.-based students
attending this event. The selection process will give priority to US citizens
and permanent residents, with special consideration to members of under-
represented groups and participants from universities that do not have a strong
tradition in the topical areas covered in the conference, in order to expand the
scope of the conference participation. Students attending this workshop will
benefit from the rich interactions and networking/mentoring opportunities
afforded by their presence at the event.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.