* 2330898
* I-Corps:  Developing polymerized hemoglobin using enzymatic ligation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Pedro Cabrales, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a blood substitute for use in veterinary and human applications.
The demand for donated blood is rising due to global catastrophes such as war,
natural disasters, and pandemics/endemics. Additionally, the military may have
interest in field-ready oxygen (O2) carriers that can provide an alternative
solution to impractical blood transfusions for cases of hemorrhagic shock in the
field that may lead to severe blood loss. The current clinical standard for
resuscitation from trauma and the absence of blood is the use of crystalloids,
such as lactated Ringer’s solution. Crystalloids are widely available, safe, and
inexpensive. These solutions are used to restore blood volume and blood
pressure, allowing blood flow to continue, but do not have (O2)-carrying
capacity and have varying negative effects on blood flow and O2 delivery. The
ideal resuscitation fluid needs to be able to maintain blood volume and blood
pressure, without excessively diluting O2-carrying capacity, and plasma
proteins, or reducing blood viscosity. The proposed technology offers an
alternative approach to blood substitutes, termed “O2 bridges”, or hemoglobin-
based oxygen carrier (HBOC). HBOCs have the potential to be engineered to
replicate, or even optimize the critical biophysical parameters of circulating
blood, enabling the production of a life-sustaining product. The proposed
technology is designed to transport O2 to tissues as effectively as whole blood
or packed red blood cells. In addition, this HBOC solution may perform this
function without the risk of disease transmission, transfusion reactions, or
other transfusion-related complications.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a hemoglobin-based oxygen
carrier that is produced from expired donated human blood. The proposed
technology uses enzymatic ligation (transglutaminase) to produce large-size
polymerized human hemoglobin (PolyhHb). In this process, red blood cells are
stripped from their membrane leaving the hemoglobin protein to be purified and
processed into a functional biocompatible solution. Large, polymerized
hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier (HBOC) solutions have the advantage of longer
circulatory half-life indicative of the difference in markers of systemic and
reticuloendothelial iron transport. This technology has been tested in small
animals and has shown promising results in anemic conditions. In addition, it
has been tested against other HBOC designs and other blood products. The
proposed technology may be used to create a functional HBOC solution that has
practical use in uncontrollable hemorrhage environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.