* 2330533
* Global Centers Track 2: Center for Household Energy and Thermal Resilience (HEaTR)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sarah Besky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 242,393.00

Many of the most glaring health, economic, and social effects of climate change
are experienced through housing. Access to efficient sources of energy can make
the difference between life and death in vulnerable communities, but sustainable
household energy use remains a major global challenge. Sustainable energy
strategies will only be effective if there is a clear understanding of how
people who live in the places most vulnerable to extreme heat and cold interact
with energy systems, thermal technologies, and housing itself. This award to
design a global center for Household Energy and Thermal Resilience (HEaTR) will
develop scalable, community-driven solutions to the vexing question of how
housing can be converted from a space where marginalized groups experience
climate vulnerability to one where they can ensure climate resilience. While
poor and marginalized people spend a greater proportion of income on household
energy, those same people have developed creative solutions to energy
challenges, from low-cost cooling and insulation using locally-sourced
materials, to heat and cold action plans that leverage social networks to
protect the most vulnerable. The award supports multidisciplinary research on
how households use energy, how community-driven home building and repair
practices can save energy, and how regional and global energy and housing market
dynamics enable or impede net-zero living. HEaTR will assemble research teams in
the US and four international locations (Ghana, India, Singapore and United
Kingdom) to develop an approach to household-level climate change mitigation
that foregrounds the perspectives, idioms, materials, and socio-economic
realities of the communities that are most vulnerable to climate extremes. The
teams will foster a bottom-up approach to climate change and to the technologies
that work to protect individuals and communities. HEaTR brings together
researchers from anthropology, geography, spatial data science, labor studies,
and architecture to analyze the social dynamics of household energy use. The
research will develop transferable, adaptable models of sustainable and
equitable behaviors that foster household-level climate resilience. It will
deploy comparative, qualitative methods to analyze the social forces that shape
how people use energy to heat and cool their homes, as well as how household
energy use is situated in systems of kinship, gendered divisions of labor, and
vernacular architectural and climate control practices. It will integrate this
qualitative approach with quantitative and spatial analysis of the distributions
of housing and climate risk. In this way, HEaTRâ€™s research will lead to novel
and robust understandings of how the process of constructing and maintaining
housing, from individual practices to community action to long-range urban
planning, might contribute to climate resilience. HEaTR will result in a
multimodal platform (texts, computer models, data sets) focused on best
practices for addressing heating and cooling challenges. This award is funded by
the Global Centers program, an innovative program that supports use-inspired
research addressing global challenges related to climate change and/or clean
energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers to bring together
international teams to develop research questions and partnerships, conduct
landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to
advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.