* 2330505
* Global Centers Track 2: Climate-Smart Food-Energy-Water Nexus in Small Farms
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* David Ader, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 11/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Globally, more than 2 billion people live on 570 million small-scale farms with
40% of them on incomes of less than 2 U.S. dollars per day. The United Nations
projects that small farms are key to achieving the goal of 70% increase in food
production required to feed 10 billion people by 2050. Unfortunately,
smallholders are highly vulnerable to extreme climate, water scarcity, and high
costs of agrochemicals, energy, and labor while lacking access to innovative
technologies and equipment. It is imperative to develop a climate-smart circular
smallholder farming system; however, no single research or stakeholder network
can encompass the full spectrum of scientific, technological, economic, and
societal insights to develop such a system, yet each network is crucial to the
integrated solutions. The adoption of food-energy-water (FEW) nexus technologies
and infrastructure presents a resource-efficient solution to these problems by
making small farms climate-resilient and less dependent on exogenous supply of
energy, water, and fertilizers.The overarching goal of the project is to develop
a scalable platform for integrating siloed research and providing tangible FEW
nexus solutions that ensure prosperity of climate-vulnerable small farms. This
goal will be achieved by converging the leading and most adaptable FEW
technologies, experiences, and knowledge that are currently siloed in different
networks and various countries in North America, Latin America, Africa, and
Southeast Asia. The partners are selected according to diverse experiences in
agricultural production and bioeconomy development, geopolitical feasibility,
and the connections our team has established through NSF and USAID projects. The
project aims to create a scalable platform—based on the principles of circular
bioeconomy—for integrating siloed research into a systematic technical roadmap
that can guide the development of regenerative, robust, and resilient solutions
for transforming small farms into climate-smart, carbon-negative, and profitable
units with high public acceptance. This goal will be achieved by converging the
leading and most adaptable FEW technologies, experiences, and knowledge that are
currently distributed in different networks and various countries in North
America, Latin America, Africa, Europe, and Southeast Asia. Specific objectives
include (1) designing sensor-driven angle-adjustable solar arrays above crop
canopy to generate electricity, increase crop production by protecting crops
from excessive radiation, wind, and rain, and collect/divert rainwater to on-
site storage, such as wetland pond, for subsequent precision irrigation, (2)
producing and upgrading biogas from livestock manure, (3) valorizing biogas
digestates and crop residues into biofertilizers, (4) promoting approaches that
favor soil regeneration and health, (5) developing socioeconomic models to
ensure affordability, viability, and equitability, and (6) training future
workforce in circular bioeconomy. The project engages students from historically
black colleges and universities through new curricula, study abroad programs,
senior design courses, and student workshops. Project results will be
disseminated via outreach activities, publications, presentations, and social
media. This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program
that supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to
climate change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based
researchers to bring together international teams to develop research questions
and partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build
multi-stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger
scale in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.