* 2330751
* I-Corps: diagnostic &amp; patient management tool for physicians treating movement disorders
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Timothy Dunn, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to accelerate
the drug development process for neuropsychiatric compounds and improve the
clinical management of brain disorders. This project will evaluate whether
advances in deep learning-based pose tracking algorithms can lead to new
business opportunities within both biotech/pharma and healthcare. Behavior is a
result of the complex coordination of brain processes and is affected by disease
or impairment. The behavioral repertoire of a patient or animal is a rich
noninvasive source of data about its neuropsychiatric health, but limited tools
exist to mine this type of data. Solving the problem of behavioral
quantification has the potential to make neuropsychiatric drug development more
efficient by providing biotech/pharma with a better understanding of how their
drugs are working from the time they are first tested in animals all the way
through pivotal human studies. Behavioral quantification tools can also assist
clinicians with the treatment of neuropsychiatric diseases, which due to their
complexity typically require extensive training to properly diagnose and manage.
This I-Corps project is based on the development of a deep learning based
behavioral quantification tool for use in drug development and clinical
medicine. Current approaches to measure the efficacy of neuropsychiatric
interventions are limited by their sensitivity, efficiency, and reproducibility.
Breakthroughs in neuroscience have elucidated new mechanisms for drug developers
to target, but limited techniques exist to evaluate the efficacy of new
treatments. In addition, animal models for neuropsychiatric testing have limited
translatability to clinical results, making asset prioritization difficult for
drug developers. Deep learning based behavioral measurement tools serve as a
noninvasive solution to this problem by automating behavioral analysis with high
sensitivity and specificity. These tools can extract insights that are currently
inaccessible to drug developers, which will not only lead to advances in the
understanding of the biology of disease, but also the collection of pivotal data
for drug approval. The ability of biotech/pharma to robustly characterize
therapeutic efficacy across all stages of development reduces the regulatory and
commercial risks currently associated with neuropsychiatric drug development.
Similarly, physicians would be able to use advanced behavioral quantification
techniques to compare a patient’s symptoms against a library of “digital
fingerprints” to accurately diagnose conditions and manage symptoms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.