* 2330333
* EAGER: An Integrated Fiber Sensing and Communication Living Lab in the Research Triangle
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Tracy Futhey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Fiber optical networks have been widely deployed at different scales to form the
core infrastructure of today's Internet backbone, telecommunication networks,
and smart connected communities. In addition to delivering high bandwidth data
services at deterministic low latency, each fiber-optic cable can also serve as
a high-resolution sensor since it is sensitive to different environmental
effects such as vibration, strain, and temperature, due to linear and nonlinear
light scattering. As a result, fiber optical networks can be naturally
transformed into a large-scale distributed sensor network with the fiber
footprint being a continuous sensing medium. The goal of the proposed project is
to leverage an existing extensive testbed in Duke-Durham Research Triangle Park
in Raleigh, NC, augmented with sensing and measurement capabilities, to
investigate fiber sensing-based heterogeneous traffic monitoring as well as its
co-existence with data communication networks at scale. At the societal level,
this project will enable more efficient optical spectrum utilization and network
operation, as well as more sustainable cities and communities.

Using the deployed testbed equipped with advanced fiber sensing and
communication equipment, this project targets two pilot experiments leveraging
the unique large-scale fiber footprint (i) Fiber sensing-based heterogeneous
traffic detection and monitoring in extremely noisy measurements for smart city
applications, and (ii) Integrated fiber sensing and communication for improved
optical spectrum utilization and efficiency in practical enterprise-level
networks. Overall, the testbed can be used to conduct unprecedented fine-grained
and long-term fiber sensing and communication experiments and measurements, and
to serve as a platform for research in the area of integrated fiber sensing and
communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.