* 2330460
* Conference: Towards a mass shooting early alert network by modeling 9-1-1 data streams
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ilya Zaslavsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 64,999.00

Mass shootings are a growing problem in the United States, especially on school
campuses. Emergency response to these events is often delayed due to inefficient
or overburdened alert and decision-making chains. As public safety events such
as mass shootings result in bursts of 9-1-1 call activity in the vicinity of the
events, analysis, and modeling of patterns of such calls enabled by recent
advances in artificial intelligence and spatiotemporal data mining holds
significant promise for a novel intelligent notification network, capable of
triggering meaningful alerts even before the information propagates through the
legacy response channels. The proposed workshop will bring together experts from
the public safety industry, 9-1-1 operators, regulatory bodies, computer science
and AI researchers, educators, and policymakers, to jointly explore the
opportunities and critical research, technical and organizational challenges,
and strategies of using 9-1-1 data streams for early detection of mass casualty
events. The workshop will help clarify data needs, concerns, and constraints
related to the implementation of predictive analytics tools and services based
on 9-1-1 call patterns and lay the groundwork for a prototype early alert
system, which could be deployed in multiple jurisdictions across the United
States to ensure a more efficient and timely emergency response.

Building on the Next Generation 911 (NG911) standards and protocols for multi-
channel and multimedia notifications, the predictive analytics models would let
public safety professionals transform the nationâ€™s 911 emergency response
system, making it possible to trigger and tailor an early response to different
emergencies. The workshop discussions will focus on (1) an improved data model
for 9-1-1 data that would enable its efficient use in real-time public safety
emergency event detection and notification; (2) initial results and challenges
of spatiotemporal pattern detection in 9-1-1 and similar massive datasets,
particularly from geo-fenced areas such as school perimeters; (3) preliminary
results and opportunities for developing predictive models of mass shooting
events using state-of-the-art AI and machine learning tools; and (4) user
requirements, and technical, organizational and ethical challenges of deploying
such models in operational emergency response networks in a robust,
interoperable, and trustworthy manner. Achieving these goals, and outlining a
comprehensive research agenda to study the critically-important multi-
disciplinary problem of efficient response to mass shootings, will require a
convergence of diverse cross-sectoral knowledge and expertise that has not been
assimilated previously

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.