* 2330891
* Research Infrastructure: FABRIC Operations - Accelerating Innovation and Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* James Griffioen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 4,057,868.00

The FABRIC project has deployed a state-of-the-art programmable world-wide
network infrastructure during the commissioning phase funded through the NSF
Midscale research infrastructure-1 program. This infrastructure connects
research facilities globally, enabling groundbreaking distributed applications
and services using while more than 30 interconnected FABRIC sites already
deployed. FABRIC enhances research capabilities in wide-area networking
protocols, Internet-of-Things (IoT), Big Data, machine learning, mobile
technologies and high-performance computing, fostering scientific discoveries
and cross-disciplinary collaborations.

The FABRIC project, now in its operations phase, aims to further grow user
communities, foster operational excellence, develop new features, and
demonstrate success to its stakeholder communities. Expanding the user base
amplifies the impact of FABRIC and other NSF testbeds on science. By providing
reliable services, FABRIC ensures reproducibility of complex experiments. The
development of new features attracts users from various communities, helping
address their specific needs. Demonstrating success through measured outcomes
informs the funders and reinforces FABRIC's impact on stakeholder communities.
Its intellectual merits lie in infrastructure programmability and
interconnectivity, enabling experimentation with distributed systems at
unprecedented scales. It supports scientific reproducibility and is a crucial
component of the scientific cyberinfrastructure ecosystem. Its impact spans
diverse domains, such as high-energy physics, astrophysics, cybersecurity, and
scientific instrument streaming services, empowering researchers to achieve
breakthrough discoveries. FABRIC's broader impacts extend to researchers in
computer science, engineering, and domain sciences such as genomics, astronomy
and climate research. It actively engages the research community through KNIT
workshops and the ambassador program designed to expand FABRIC’s reach to
researchers from all disciplines and institutions, regardless of background.
FABRIC provides educational resources to faculty, and develops collaborations
with minority-serving institutions, simplifying access to advanced research
tools and infrastructure for many communities. The project website,
[https://www.fabric-testbed.net], serves as a central repository for project
updates, data, code, and resources, fostering collaboration and accessibility
worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.