* 2330942
* Expediting Solutions to Hard Multi-Robot Path Finding Instances
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Nora Ayanian, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cang Ye
* 10/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

How can many independent robots completing tasks in a shared space move about
safely without collisions? There are many scenarios where using many robots
working together can improve efficiency, safety, and quality of life. For
example, self-driving cars can move people quickly, safely, and efficiently,
while reducing delays and vehicular accidents. Warehouse robots can pick and
pack items without humans walking around a giant warehouse, which can lead to
the human employeesâ€™ exhaustion and repetitive injuries. Autonomous drones
delivering residential packages can reduce vehicular traffic on the road and
provide reliable and extremely quick delivery. Coordinating many robots safely
and efficiently in cluttered environments is fundamentally important in these
and many other current and future real-world problems. As robots become an
increasingly common element of our society, multi-robot coordination will grow
exponentially in importance. In this project, we will try to deepen our
understanding of the problem of collision-free path finding for many robots in a
shared space. The problem of optimally coordinating many robots to maximize
efficiency or speed while avoiding collisions is extremely computationally
intensive. While there exist a large array of algorithms that can solve these
problems, each of these algorithms excel in some instances but flop in others.
Currently, experts in solving this problem have a general sense of which
algorithms will handle certain instances of a planning problem, but having an
expert in the loop is not feasible for large-scale deployment, for example, in
self-driving cars or drone package delivery. In this project, we will take a
data-driven approach to understanding under what conditions solvers excel, and
under what conditions they stumble. The goal of this project is to find novel
ways to break down large problems into smaller subproblems that can be more
easily solved and understand the gaps that exist in the current array of
solvers, so that future solvers can be developed to address those gaps.

The problem of finding collision-free paths for multiple agents from start
vertices to assigned goal vertices in a graph, known as the labeled multi-agent
path finding (MAPF) problem, is NP-Hard. Labeled MAPF is well studied, with many
optimal solvers available; however, they are not able to scale to the number of
robots present in some modern multi-robot systems, such as autonomous
warehouses. Rather than develop new MAPF solvers, this research will use
existing machine learning techniques to leverage the strengths of existing
labeled MAPF solvers, producing new techniques and algorithms that will allow
scaling up for application to large robot swarms and will solve instances that
existing solvers cannot yet solve. The approach is threefold. First, the team
will exploit the strengths of MAPF solvers by using machine learning to train an
algorithm selector to predict the fastest MAPF solver for a particular instance
from a portfolio of solvers. Second, they will develop methods for effective
decomposition of large MAPF instances into smaller sub-instances that can be
solved in parallel using solvers selected by our algorithm selector, increasing
speed and scale. Finally, they will develop methods for estimating the empirical
hardness of a MAPF instance, i.e., how long each solver will take to solve an
instance. Results will be evaluated using established metrics for MAPF solvers,
measuring the number of new instances our algorithms solve, and progressively
demonstrating them in simulations with hundreds of robots. This project will
significantly improve the tractability of many-robot path finding and provide
understanding of the hardness of the problem at scale. It will expand the
limited understanding of what makes some MAPF instances challenging; develop
novel algorithms and techniques to enhance existing and future MAPF algorithms;
and significantly increasing the number of robots for which optimal non-
colliding paths can be found. It will also produce the largest benchmarking of
optimal MAPF solvers to date and help other MAPF researchers understand the
strengths and weaknesses of existing MAPF solvers. The work is at the
intersection of robotics and combinatorial optimization and will be instantly
impactful to those communities. The results will significantly improve planning
performance for many-robot systems, and thus will have far-reaching impacts in
robotic warehousing, autonomous vehicles, autonomous delivery, just-in-time
manufacturing, and many other fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.