* 2330452
* Global Centers Track 2: A multi-disciplinary framework to combat climate-induced desert locust upsurges, outbreaks, and plagues in East Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Lawrence Kiage, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 248,352.00

The latest IPCC report (released in 2023) highlights that climate change
disproportionately affects nearly half a billion people in eastern Africa,
mainly resulting from the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather
events. Increases in temperature and rainfall over desert areas in eastern
Africa, and the strong winds associated with tropical cyclones, are postulated
to provide favorable conditions for desert locust outbreaks. However, the
specific impacts of changing climate conditions on locust dynamics and migration
pathways are not fully understood. Desert locust outbreaks are a problem for
many parts of eastern Africa where they seriously threaten the livelihoods of
communities residing in Burundi, Comoros, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya,
Rwanda, Seychelles, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. In these
areas crop losses to insects are projected to increase by up to 50% with an
additional 2°C of global warming. Locust outbreak mitigation measures require
comprehensive and coordinated response efforts inclusive of designing an early
warning system, incorporating a continuous surveillance scheme, developing
predictive models, innovative, accessible dissemination of information and
products that permit prevention and intervention efforts at the local level.
This project would develop effective strategies for mitigating future locust
outbreaks driven by climate change in eastern Africa. By engaging academic
researchers from relevant disciplines and local experts within affected
communities, we will establish lasting partnerships to investigate and apply
sustainable mitigation strategies. A central aspect of our approach is
developing a mobile application that allows farmers and concerned individuals to
access real-time information and report sightings of locust outbreaks. The
project will test existing locust surveillance schemes and utilize a 'locust
risk to communities' framework to create an interactive portal and application
with location-based information. This platform will facilitate data collection
and analysis, ultimately forming the basis for a future Global Climate Change
Center that supports climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts in the
world's least developed countries. The development of the global center will
also facilitate the sharing of data and analytical results through a centralized
cyberinfrastructure hosted at the Center for Disaster Informatics and
Computational Epidemiology at GSU. Our project seeks to contribute to developing
innovative locust outbreak mitigation strategies in eastern Africa and beyond,
leveraging technology and interdisciplinary collaborations to address the
pressing challenges climate change poses on vulnerable populations.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that
supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate
change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers
to bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.