* 2330878
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Material Culture in Determining Social Affiliation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Charles Cobb, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 26,376.00

This doctoral dissertation project utilizes the concept of globalization, or the
process of interaction and integration among diverse people, to investigate the
spread and adoption of customs over space and time. While it is tempting to draw
broad comparisons between many groups that share commonalities in practices,
belief systems, and material culture, globalization can potentially transform
groups into blended communities with complex identities. Globalization as a
social process is most often used to describe the modern world, but versions of
this phenomenon can be recognized throughout history. Like modern processes,
premodern examples represent the spread of cultural traits on impressive scales
that fostered transformative interaction and restructuring.

This study addresses globalization by analyzing how changes in ceramic
manufacturing can be indicative of how ‘global’ craft knowledge was transferred
within regions and the degree at which these practices were integrated with
local traditions. Beginning around AD 1000, one region experienced a period of
globalization (“Mississippianization”), which affected many aspects of religious
and daily life. While ongoing archaeological research of the mid-continental
United States often focuses on a pattern of discrete cultural attributes spread
from a central location, premodern globalization was more likely a variable
process that led to differing local versions of a shared culture based in part
upon each group’s political, environmental, and social settings. The project
focuses on this era of critical social change, as well as the centuries
preceding and following, (AD 600-1550). To understand the fusion of global and
local practices, this project studies how cultural transformations unfold
through daily technical potting choices at the macroscopic, microscopic, and
elemental levels. This project integrates chemical data collected via laser
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and
mineralogical data collected via ceramic petrography and X-ray diffraction
(XRD). Instead of concentrating on prestige items, this study shows that
everyday objects, including very small sherds, can be used to understand the
adoption and adaptation of past traditions. These compositional studies assess
the array of ceramic manufacturing practices, which will inform regarding
continuity, change, and amalgamation of natural resource utilization and
technological choices over space and time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.