* 2330336
* The Twelfth (12th) Workshop on Meteorological Sensitivity Analysis and Data Assimilation; Lake George, New York; May 19-24, 2024
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Isaac Moradi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2024
* USD 16,000.00

Data assimilation plays a crucial role in weather forecasting by combining
observations of the atmosphere with numerical model data to determine the
current state of the atmosphere. This is important because the current state of
the atmosphere is used as a starting point for the weather forecasts, and the
more accurate the starting point is, the better the weather forecast will be. A
significant improvement in the accuracy of weather forecasts over the past few
decades can be attributed to the enhanced precision of current weather estimates
obtained through data assimilation. The Workshop will enable collaboration and
discussion between experts in data assimilation, including topics such as using
machine learning to enhance the performance of data assimilation, how
observations can be optimally used to improve weather forecasts, and how data
assimilation methods can be used for the ocean as well as for the atmosphere.
The workshop's main goal is to advance fundamental understanding of data
assimilation and sensitivity analysis, and their applications to weather
forecasting and climate estimation for societal benefit. Travel support will be
provided for graduate students to attend the Workshop to learn directly from the
scientific community and to present their own research.

The Workshop participants will present, review, discuss, and evaluate works
pertaining to atmospheric sensitivity analysis and data assimilation, but will
include representation from oceanography, coupled atmosphere-ocean systems, and
other fields that employ similar techniques. Topics for presentation and
discussion will include development of computationally efficient techniques for
sensitivity analysis, including machine learning, diagnostic tools, and
consideration of statistical issues affecting sensitivity analysis or data
assimilation. Applications of data assimilation to synoptic and dynamic analysis
of weather events, to reanalyses, and to estimation of observation impacts will
be evaluated. Presentations will include overview talks on fundamentals and
recent paths of development, and posters or short seminars on new works.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.