* 2330702
* I-Corps:  Sustainable biocomposite materials for use in consumer and industrial applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Chiara Daraio, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sustainable biomaterials made from algae and agricultural waste.
The proposed process is designed to create a class of biomaterials from low-cost
waste byproducts of other industrial waste streams with properties that exceed
current bio-based materials, and are similar to those of commercial
particleboard and softwoods. The proposed technology may be used to produce
stiff biodegradable composite materials. Unlike traditional petroleum-based
polymeric materials, the proposed biomaterials are based on algae, which
sequester carbon from the atmosphere during growth. Current active research
using wastewater algae facilitates a circular economy by enabling the
combination of two biowaste streams, base substrate algae and bio-waste
reinforcements and fillers, resulting in materials that are both easily recycled
and biodegradable. The goal is to reach a completely circular process by using
algae that are a byproduct of municipal wastewater purification systems. End use
applications for this technology platform include building and construction
materials, furniture, insulation, and packaging.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of biocomposites made from
algae and agricultural waste. The proposed technology is a molding process that
uses porous aluminum oxide molds to produce stiff biodegradable composite
materials. Unlike traditional petroleum-based polymeric materials, the algae raw
material sequesters carbon from the atmosphere during growth, with 1.6 to 2
grams of CO2 captured for every gram of algal biomass produced. At end-of-use,
the material naturally decomposes without specialized recycling treatments, and
may be crushed, rehydrated, and remolded for reuse. In addition, other
environmental benefits of the biomaterial over traditional polymeric materials
include lower energy use in fabrication, ability to use the full algae cell in
production, and compatibility with multiple types of biowaste fillers and
reinforcements. These biobased and biodegradable materials support
sustainability and carbon reduction goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.