* 2330518
* Global Centers Track 2: Blue Climate Solutions
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* David Lagomasino, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 12/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Coastal ecosystems inhabited by mangroves and seagrass meadows play an essential
role in slowing climate change and supporting human livelihood in many parts of
the world, but they have been diminished by human impacts and global climate
change. Frontline communities and decision makers need better data and improved
predictive ability to reverse the losses of these habitats. This Global Centers
Design award supports planning for a future center for Blue Carbon Solutions.
The award supports activities led by the University of Rhode Island to create a
team to predict future deforestation trends; quantify changes in carbon storage
of these habitats; and experimentally test effectiveness of policies and
management options by empowering research by Indigenous Peoples and Local
Communities. The center is envisioned as an incubator for transdisciplinary
research, coupling earth observations with citizen science and local and
Indigenous knowledge. The team, which also includes East Carolina University and
other US institutions as well as partners in Indonesia, will develop new AI
techniques in modeling habitat loss, projecting changes in blue carbon stocks
and ecosystem co-benefits at policy-relevant spatial scales, and co-testing
causal impact of solutions with stakeholders. Participation by underrepresented
groups will be increased by involving Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
and youths in Indonesia as citizen scientists. Graduate students and scholars in
the U.S. and Indonesia will be trained in Team Science and transdisciplinary
research. The center will support decision makers in developing evidence-based
conservation and restoration policies to mitigate climate change while
sustaining climate-vulnerable coastal communities and ecosystems. The team will
shape and strengthen team readiness across three Research Themes: (1)
understanding multi-scale drivers of mangrove and seagrass losses and gains, and
generating predictions of “at-risk” areas and their drivers; (2) quantify multi-
scale and changes in ecosystem services and co-benefits of mangrove and seagrass
habitats for climate mitigation and adaptation; and (3) design and test the im-
pact of innovative policies and interventions to conserve and restore mangroves
and seagrasses. Across each theme the team will apply two Enabling Cores: (i)
harness big data, AI, and data science, and (ii) co-produce knowledge with
Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities through citizen science. The center
will use a Knowledge Convergence Workshop, a proof-of-concept project using
machine learning to predict areas of habitat loss, an online seminar series, and
a Team Science certificate pro-gram to advance these goals in the planning
stage. The center will support decision-makers’ use of evidence-based
conservation and restoration strategies to mitigate climate change while
sustaining climate-vulnerable coastal communities and ecosystems.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that
supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate
change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers
to bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.