* 2330565
* Global Centers Track 1: CLEETS - CLean Energy and Equitable Transportation Solutions
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* V. N. Venkatakrishnan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 09/30/2028
* USD 4,999,937.00

Road transportation is essential to the global market and the economy. However,
still largely powered by fossil fuel, it is also an important source of
pollutants and carbon emissions which impact public health and the climate. Road
transportation and the energy sector account for ~75 percent of all global
carbon dioxide emissions. The "CLean Energy and Equitable Transportation
Solutions (CLEETS)" Global Center focuses on accelerating clean energy solutions
to decarbonize road transportation. Led by the University of Illinois System, it
leverages expertise and resources in the U.S. (Arizona State University,
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research) and the U.K. (University of
Birmingham, Cardiff University). It engages community, governmental, and
industrial partners to develop sustainable transportation strategies. The
researchers assess the state of transport energy infrastructure and optimize it
to accelerate the transition to zero-emission clean energy and connected
vehicles (CECVs). The Center accomplishes this by developing converging
scientific and technical partnerships among international governments,
industries, and end users. It quantifies the anticipated impact of clean
transportation on public health and the economy. It examines data and
cybersecurity issues that affect CECVs. It unveils governance and policy change
scenarios that enable clean transportation options accounting for technological
innovations, economic prosperity, public health, and minimum carbon emissions.
This NSF award also provides support and training for undergraduate and graduate
students, and early-career scientists, at U.S. institutions, as well as
educational outreach toward K-12 students, teachers, and the public.

More specifically, the Global Center designs rigorous decision-support tools for
communities and policymakers. CLEETS uses a systems approach to inform and guide
the transition while maintaining prosperity and addressing climate impacts. The
test beds for this multidisciplinary approach are three regions sharing common
traits: the Great Lakes Megaregion in the U.S. and South Wales and the West
Midlands in the UK. All three regions are manufacturing hubs with dense networks
of roads and highways, national transport intersections vital for the economy
yet threatening air quality. These regions' prosperity also depends on imported
fuels and electricity. Yet, they also exhibit geographic and governmental/policy
differences which can be tested.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative partnership
with funding agencies in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, to jointly
support use-inspired research addressing global challenges in climate change and
clean energy. Partnerships with the Commonwealth Science and Innovation Research
Organisation (CSIRO), Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC), Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC), and
UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) leverage resources to tackle challenges at a
larger scale than would be possible for one funding agency alone. This Center is
jointly supported by NSF and UKRI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.