* 2330929
* Understanding Molecular And Photo-Assisted Doping of Organic Electronic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andre Taylor, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2026
* USD 398,065.00

Low-cost and reliable solar energy generation is crucial for mitigating the
ongoing effects of climate change and establishing a sustainable energy future.
Metal-halide perovskite solar cells have emerged as disruptive contenders in the
solar market due to their low-temperature processability, abundant material
composition, and solution processability. However, their short device lifespan
remains a major obstacle to their economic competitiveness. The charge transport
layers that interface with the perovskite active layer play a critical role in
both the efficiency and lifespan of these solar cells. Extensive research on
charge transport layers has led to significant improvements in efficiency and
lifespan, with spiro-OMeTAD being the most extensively studied due to its
excellent electrical properties. However, current doping methods for spiro-
OMeTAD result in detrimental byproduct formation, impeding the scalability and
lifespan of perovskite solar cells. This research aims to overcome these
challenges by developing a novel doping process that effectively inhibits or
eliminates the formation of these byproducts. The outcomes of this study have
the potential to impact various fields relying on organic semiconductors,
including field-effect transistors, photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and
organic photo-detectors. It is expected to contribute significantly to improving
the performance, scalability, and stability of organic semiconductor-based
devices by enhancing doping efficiency, suppressing byproduct formation,
achieving uniform doping, and enabling reliable and scalable processing.
Furthermore, the funding from this project will support a laboratory experience
for grade 10 and 11 high school students from underrepresented communities
through the Applied Research Innovations in Science and Engineering (ARISE)
program at New York University, providing valuable opportunities for research on
perovskite solar cells.

Our group has developed a new doping method utilizing a process gas and
ultraviolet light to oxidize Spiro-OMeTAD solutions containing LiTFSI. This
method improves film conductivity, durability, and reduces byproduct
concentration. It has demonstrated efficacy in increasing conductivity of
various organic polymer species, despite significant energy level barriers.
However, the design criteria for dopant composition and energetics in fully
solution-processed doping schemes are unclear. This project aims to understand
the underlying mechanism of molecular and photo-assisted doping of organic
electronics. Integrating engineering, chemistry, and physics, it offers a novel
approach to tuning the properties of organic-based electronic materials,
enhancing conductivity, uniformity, and stability. Our first aim explores the
effects of cationic substitution of metal-TFSI salts on reaction pathways,
byproduct concentration, and optoelectronic properties of cast films. The second
aim probes the impacts of light intensity, wavelength, gas species, and solvent
properties on doping efficiency in conjugated polymer systems with favorable and
unfavorable energy level alignments. By investigating these mechanisms and their
role in optoelectronic properties, we seek to improve doping efficiency,
retention, uniformity, and expand the range of available dopant species in
organic semiconducting films. These advancements will significantly contribute
to perovskite solar cell technology, facilitating the transition from fossil
fuels to clean energy and enabling cost-effective, scalable manufacturing
techniques to meet increasing demand.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.