* 2330643
* EAGER: Development of a Fluorescent Reporter for Protein-Membrane Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 07/31/2025
* USD 248,827.00

The interaction of proteins with membranes in brain cells is fundamental to how
the brain works. These interactions are also a contributing factor to various
neurologic diseases such as Parkinson’s disease. This project involves the
development of an imaging method to study protein-membrane interactions in brain
cells. This research will enable studies of the underlying cause of Parkinson’s
disease, which may result from the clumping of a protein called alpha-synuclein.
The clumped protein then spreads from brain cell to brain cell throughout the
brain. Although the alpha-synuclein clumping process is believed to play a role
in Parkinson’s disease, how this clumping occurs is not fully understood. One
possible mechanism involves interactions of alpha-synuclein with certain
membranes in brain cells. With the development of the proposed imaging method,
it will become possible to study the entire process in live brain cells and
hence develop further understanding of Parkinson’s disease. The project involves
two graduate students. In addition, an interactive learning module for seventh
grade math students will be presented at a local school.

This project is laying the groundwork for an imaging scheme using tethered
fluorescence resonance energy transfer reporters to allow interrogation of
membrane-induced alpha-synuclein aggregation in live, cultured neurons. The
ultimate goal is to study intracellular lipid vesicles involved in endolysosomal
transport, as well as synaptic vesicles, to address the key neuroscience
question of which types of membrane-bound entities serve as sites of alpha-
synuclein binding and aggregation in live neuron models of Parkinson’s disease.
To enable this line of research, this project has two objectives: (i) realizing
a method to monitor alpha-synuclein -lipid membrane association in live neurons,
and (ii) developing a technique to monitor membrane-mediated alpha-synuclein
aggregation in live neurons. Success in the development of this optical sensing
method to monitor alpha-synuclein aggregation and prion-like spread will enable
understanding of Parkinson’s disease that could be extended to animal model
investigations. At a more general level, this project could have a broad impact
on the understanding of a variety of human diseases, protein-membrane
interactions, and the molecular underpinnings of brain function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.