* 2330525
* Global Centers Track 1: Global Hydrogen Production Technologies (HyPT) Center
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2028
* Mike Ranjram, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2028
* USD 5,000,000.00

Hydrogen produced with net-zero emissions of carbon dioxide is called "green"
hydrogen. Large-scale green hydrogen production is essential to meet the Paris
Agreement’s climate goals while maintaining the economic productivity vital to
societal wellbeing. Green hydrogen enables the decarbonization of energy-
intensive industries such as ammonia and steel production, and transportation.
However, green hydrogen is currently several times more expensive than hydrogen
produced from fossil fuels. This hinders its global adoption. The Global
Hydrogen Production Technologies (HyPT) Center engages a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary team to formulate a pathway to low-cost large-scale green
hydrogen production from a platform of complementary technologies. The
researchers—34 experts from 19 institutions in the U.S., Australia, Canada, UK,
Egypt and Germany—develop new technologies and explore novel policies and
economical models to build a strong hydrogen economy. This award also provides
support and training to graduate students at Arizona State University, as well
as to early career scientists at Stanford University and the University of
Michigan. The center fosters outreach to indigenous peoples in the U.S.,
Australia, and Canada. The aim is to engage these communities in adopting
renewable energy technologies and give them access to educational and career
opportunities in this field. The Global HyPT Center focuses on three major green
hydrogen production technologies with strong potential to deliver breakthroughs:
(i) water electrolysis including renewable energy integration and emerging
electrolyzers; (ii) methane pyrolysis with solid carbon as value-added co-
products; and (iii) photocatalytic solar water splitting. The Center also
tackles two major cross-cutting challenges for green hydrogen: (i) policies,
economics, and markets for building a hydrogen economy; and (ii) water resource
and treatment for electrolysis and photocatalysis. The common underlying
scientific challenge for all three green hydrogen production technologies is
reaction kinetics. At the materials level, it requires innovations in catalysts,
where material cost, performance, and criticality are the primary concerns. At
the device level, reaction kinetics can be accelerated with improved mass and
heat transport. At the system and application levels, each technology faces a
unique set of challenges in engineering and socio-economic dimensions. The
Center interweaves researchers with diverse expertise from different countries
under these thrust areas to work synergistically with the goal of low-cost
(US$1/kg) and large-scale (gigatons a year) green hydrogen production.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative partnership
with funding agencies in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom, to jointly
support use-inspired research addressing global challenges in climate change and
clean energy. Partnerships with the Commonwealth Science and Innovation Research
Organisation (CSIRO), Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada
(NSERC), Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC), and
UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) leverage resources to tackle challenges at a
larger scale than would be possible for one funding agency alone. This Center is
jointly supported by NSF, CSIRO, NSERC, and UKRI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.