* 2330437
* Global Centers Track 2: US-Africa Research Center for Clean Energy
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Daniel Molzahn, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

New energy technologies, including solar and wind energy, electric vehicles,
hydrogen fuels are technologically viable and increasingly cost effective. Many
governments and large multi-national companies are planning rapid deployment of
these technologies to support economic development, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, and reduce pollution. Yet promising technologies do not always
succeed as planned. Successful approaches must be both technically and
societally effective, and solutions will differ across societies and regions.
This Global Centers Track 2 Design award supports the planning phase of a US-
Africa Research Center for Clean Energy (UARCCE) to foster collaboration between
academia, communities, and the private sector, to develop energy solutions
grounded in real-world experiences and needs. Exploratory research and
coordination efforts for planning the UARCCE will leverage an existing
partnership between the Georgia Institute of Technology and the African Center
of Excellence in Energy for Sustainable Development (ACE-ESD) in the College of
Science and Technology at the University of Rwanda, and with Rwanda Polytechnic
(IPRC Kigali). The partnership will develop use-inspired research questions
through collaboration with experts across Georgia Tech, particularly from the
College of Engineering, the College of Design, the School of Public Policy, and
the Strategic Energy Institute. The Ray C. Anderson Center for Sustainable
Business (ACSB) in the Scheller College of Business will facilitate
collaboration with over 55 companies committed to a net-zero business compact
launched by the Drawdown Georgia research initiative. The two-year planning
grant will support coordination efforts to (1) establish an energy solutions
network that will co-develop approaches to interdisciplinary, convergent
research and (2) leverage the network to identify use-inspired energy knowledge
gaps. Specific clean energy research hypotheses will be developed based on
barriers and opportunities for clean energy adoption in east and southern
Africa. Opportunities for undergraduate and graduate internships are also
envisioned. The research will focus on key knowledge gaps related to
electrification, alternative fuels for transportation, and technologies for
cooking without biomass. Electricity system reliability and resilience is
already a major challenge in both Rwanda and the United States. The search for
robust solutions faces technical and computational challenges, which have become
even more pressing with the expected expansion of electricity systems and
adoption of electric vehicles. Business models and community guided planning
processes for improved electricity provision need to be identified and tested
for both technical and societal viability. Research projects will be developed
that address overarching convergent research themes related to the differences
due to resource, economic, societal, and policy systems for clean energy
adoption, the transition of knowledge into use, and effective knowledge co-
production. The collaborative team will establish research-industry
partnerships, engage communities and other stakeholders, and plan optimization
and scenario modeling to frame options that can be applied in multiple contexts.
The partnerships, engagement, and modeling approaches will be developed to test
their effectiveness and potential for generalization. Student learning,
workforce training, and mentoring activities of the Center will be designed to
recruit underrepresented minorities and women, and to develop methods for
culturally and contextually informed STEM learning opportunities. An
international advisory board will be recruited, and a robust evaluation plan
will be developed. This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an
innovative program that supports use-inspired research addressing global
challenges related to climate change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards
support U.S.-based researchers to bring together international teams to develop
research questions and partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize
data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired
research at larger scale in the future.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.