* 2330274
* Travel Support for Dynamic Traffic Assignment Conference (DTA 2023); Evanston, Illinois; 10-12 July 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides travel support to enable selected graduate students and
junior researchers, especially those from under-represented groups, to attend
the Dynamic Traffic Assignment Conference (DTA 2023), Evanston, Illinois, 10-12
July 2023. The Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA) series of symposia aims to
foster excellence in dynamic traffic assignment research and practice and
provide a forum for exchanging innovative ideas and challenges on DTA and
related transportation science problems. It helps bring together those working
at the cutting edge of the field, exchange their results, discuss research
issues, and identify future directions, with a goal of encouraging participation
of both junior and senior researchers. To achieve this, a goal of the DTA 2023
is to keep the cost of attending as low as possible to encourage participation
of underrepresented and minority students, and junior researchers. This award
will help accomplish that goal.

The grant will encourage broader attendance at DTA 2023. The funding will
provide travel support to approximately 20 graduate students and junior
researchers, especially those from under-represented groups to present papers or
extended abstracts and participate in discussions. These travel grants will be
awarded through a competitive process and thus receipt of these travel support
will be considered an honor by the recipients. The presentation sessions have
been well attended in the past and provide students with an opportunity to
network with senior researchers in the field from both industry and academia as
well as to highlight their own ongoing work, further enhancing career
opportunities and building the Engineering workforce. The conference has
historically been a fertile ground for students and junior researchers'
professional development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.