* 2330416
* Underwater Robot Navigation and Localization During Recovery by Optical Homing and Penning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Jaejeong Shin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cang Ye
* 12/31/2026
* USD 599,503.00

For autonomous underwater robots the ability to operate for long periods of time
and then return back safely is a critical feature in a range of important
applications, such as subsea inspection, remote surveillance, and seasonal
monitoring. A major challenge for a robot in such long-term missions is to
estimate its location accurately since GPS signals cannot penetrate the ocean’s
surface, and Wi-Fi or radio communication infrastructures are not available
underwater. Using a dedicated surface vessel for acoustic referencing or coming
up to the water surface for GPS signals are power hungry, computationally
expensive, and often impossible (in stealth applications). This project will
make scientific and engineering advances by using a novel optics-based framework
and on-board AI technologies to solve this problem. The algorithms and systems
will allow underwater robots to estimate their location with GPS-quality
accuracy without ever resurfacing. More importantly, these features will enable
long-term autonomous navigation and safe recovery of underwater robots without
the need for dedicated surface vessels for acoustic guidance. Overall, the
outcomes of this project will contribute to the long-term marine ecosystem
monitoring and ocean climate observatory research as well as in remote stealth
mission execution for defense applications.

This project will advocate a novel solution to the foundational problem of
underwater robot localization and navigation by introducing the notion of
'optical homing and penning'. This new optics-based framework will incorporate
the scientific and engineering concepts for active robot localization and non-
invasive navigation without compromising the stealth. The integrated research
will develop three sets of novel technologies for (i) distant UUV (Unmanned
Underwater Vehicle) positioning with blue-green laser speckles, (ii) accurate 3D
orientation measurements from coded bokeh spectrums, and (iii) GPS-quality pose
estimates by a directionally-controlled adaptive LIDAR. The combined optical
sensory system will be deployable from specialized buoys acting as floating
lighthouses. An intelligent visual SLAM system will also be developed for robust
state estimation in deep waters when no lighthouse beacons are visible.
Additionally, a ROS (Robot Operating System)-based simulator will be developed
for evaluating UUV navigation and mission execution performance. For feasibility
analysis and assessment, this project will formalize real-world deployment
strategies on two UUV platforms through comprehensive ocean trials in the
northern Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean. These research activities will
be complemented by (i) curricula development for three STEM courses, (ii)
undergraduate robotics team mentoring programs, and (iii) women in robotics
workshop initiatives at UF.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.