* 2330630
* I-Corps:  Catalytic membrane to eliminate organic pollutants in industrial wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Jaehong Kim, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a catalytic membrane used to destroy organic pollutants in
industrial wastewater. Industrial sectors spanning pharmaceuticals, chemicals,
oil and gas, among others, produce contaminant-laden waste streams that require
costly, energy intensive treatment processes. Due to increasing regional water
scarcity, new regulatory restrictions, and shareholder pressure to adopt
sustainable practices, there are several driving forces for industrial
operations to implement effective, in-house treatment. Several options currently
exist for industrial wastewater treatment, including membrane filtration and
activated carbon/charcoal adsorption. Many industrial facilities currently use
one or more of these technologies to reduce contaminant levels prior to
discharge into the municipal wastewater treatment system. However, in-house
treatment typically results in contaminant-laden waste streams or solids and/or
does not completely remove organic contaminants. The proposed technology is
designed to degrade toxic organics within minutes. Passing wastewater streams
through the proposed catalytic membrane efficiently mineralizes organic
contaminants to CO2 and H2O, creating benign waste streams that may be recycled
or directly released into local municipalities. This I-Corps project has the
potential to revolutionize wastewater treatment, improving treatment efficacy
while simultaneously reducing cost and energy consumption.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a catalytic material that
may be used to break down contaminants not removed by conventional water
treatment processes. Using the proposed technology, organic pollutants, such as
hydrocarbons, pharmaceutical products, and plasticizers are destroyed within
minutes without the need for secondary treatments. This technology falls under a
category of treatment technologies called advanced oxidation processes (AOPs),
which are water treatment methods designed to destroy toxic pollutants via the
production of reactive radicals. The proposed catalyst rapidly generates these
radicals in-situ, relying on the addition of an inexpensive precursor salt to
the influent. Although employed in select industries, current AOPs cannot
achieve complete destruction of contaminants, resulting in the production of
toxic byproducts. Furthermore, most AOPs in the market incur high energy costs,
rendering them unattractive for wider industry investment. The proposed catalyst
and treatment scheme mitigate these problems by offering near-complete
elimination of organic pollutants at record-breaking efficiencies while
maintaining lower operating costs than industry benchmarks. Many industries may
benefit from implementing this technology in their treatment process by reducing
treatment costs, increasing their capacity for water reuse, and better meeting
regulatory requirements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.