* 2330934
* I-Corps:  Artificial Intelligence and Haptic-Enabled Robotic Assistant for Surgeons
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Ann Majewicz Fey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wearable system capable of sensing and analyzing motion data of
surgeons and surgical trainees to provide online, haptic guidance feedback on
how to improve surgical performance. Robotic surgery remains a complex and
demanding psychomotor task that requires extensive training to master. In
addition, a growing shortage within the surgical workforce adds to the challenge
of providing comprehensive training. The proposed technology is designed to help
surgeons improve their surgical skills. This technology may be particularly
useful in rural areas or those impacted by surgeon workforce shortages as access
to well-trained surgeon experts is limited. The goal is to make it easier and
safer for surgeons to learn and use surgical robots by lowering the barrier for
surgeons to learn and use surgical robots through developing online analytics
and haptic feedback strategies, ultimately improving patient outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of artificial intelligence (AI)
and haptic enabled wearable technology to assist with analyzing surgical motions
and providing surgical skill guidance in near real-time. The proposed technology
uses human-centered, data driven models for surgical movement analysis and
context awareness. These models are designed to detect a range of behaviors,
including stylistic behaviors, expertise levels, bimanual coordination, and
stress levels of surgeons during robotic surgery and training. The models
leverage machine learning, deep learning, and mathematical methods to analyze
kinematic data from surgical robots and their operators in real time, making
them unique in their ability to provide immediate feedback and guidance using
visual and haptic technologies to surgeons, augmenting their surgical
performance. This technology has the potential to greatly reduce the training
required to operate surgical robots effectively, making it easier for surgeons
to integrate this technique into their practice. In addition, the proposed
technology has the potential to improve patient outcomes by minimizing the risk
of surgical errors and complications. The real-time feedback and guidance
provided by the system enable surgeons to make more accurate and informed
decisions during surgeries, reducing the likelihood of errors and complications.
This has the potential to improve patient safety and reduce the need for
postoperative interventions, ultimately leading to better clinical outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.