* 2330079
* I-Corps: Automated Nanoparticle Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Samuel Mabbott, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a metallic nanoparticle synthesizer designed for academic, small-
scale, and government laboratories. Currently, academic and small-scale
laboratories either purchase or manually synthesize nanoparticles for
utilization. However, users report high expense and variations in quality from
purchased nanoparticles, and manually synthesizing nanoparticles was found to be
laborious and necessitated extensive training to yield viable nanoparticles with
consistent performance. The proposed technology automates the process and
eliminates the need for manual intervention. In addition, the process may enable
researchers to generate more accurate and consistent results by providing batch-
to-batch reproducibility and control over the physical dimensions of the
nanoparticles produced. This may have an impact on the development of advanced
biosensors, nanomedicine, and targeted drug delivery systems and improve
healthcare outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an automated metallic
nanoparticle synthesizer. The proposed technology is designed to enhance
efficiency of nanoparticle production, supplying laboratories with particles on
demand and reducing the time and expense associated with outsourcing
nanoparticle synthesis. In addition, the proposed process may enhance control
over the synthesis process, including the dimensions, morphology, and
composition of the nanoparticles, enabling customization for specific research
requirements. The proposed synthesizer has been shown to generate 100 mL of 20
nm diameter gold nanoparticles. Additionally, it is equipped with an automated
heat bed featuring feedback control and precise peristaltic pumps for accurate
regulation of synthesis temperature and optimal reagent delivery, which may
ensure superior quality and minimize batch-to-batch variability. The proposed
technology may transform nanoparticle production in laboratories, facilitating
nanotechnology-based research and innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.