* 2330946
* Planning:  Cyberinfrastructure Strategic Planning at Lac Courte Oreilles Ojibwe University
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Tristan Stevens, Lac Courte Oreilles Ojibwa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution's faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction.

Lac Court Oreilles Ojibway University (LCOOU) serves the Lac Courte Oreilles
Band of Lake Superior Ojibway in Wisconsin. The project leaders are conducting a
cohesive set of activities that inform the design of a cyberinfrastructure
upgrade, with the ultimate goal of completely upgrading the college’s
cybersecurity profile. The project will entail the key activities of: assessing
the current cybersecurity profile; identifying potential vulnerabilities;
consultation with experts who are conversant with the profiles at similarly
situated TCUs; and determining specific actions and equipment necessary to
rebuff hackers and avoid data failures. At the end of the planning period, LCOOU
should have a concrete plan upon which to develop a stronger cybersecurity
network that will serve the college’s advancing STEM instructional and research
capacity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.