* 2330057
* I-Corps:  Accessory device to improve safety of urinary catheters
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Posner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a medical device that improves the safety of urinary catheters
while reducing burden on hospital staff. Up to one in four hospitalized patients
require a urinary catheter, which equates to about thirty million catheter
placements in the U.S. each year. Today’s standard urinary catheter is inserted
into the bladder through the urethra and is anchored inside the bladder using an
inflatable balloon at the end of the tube. If the catheter is pulled or snagged,
the inflated balloon is forced out of the bladder, tearing the urethra and
damaging the surrounding anatomy. The proposed medical device is designed to
prevent this trauma from occurring, which drastically improves the safety of
urinary catheters for the millions of patients that use them. It is estimated
that up to 400,000 patients in the US experience a traumatic catheter removal,
and the average cost of treating the associated complications is $10,000. The
proposed technology also may provide significant cost-savings to the hospital by
preventing traumatic catheter removals and the associated complications.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a medical device that may be
installed into a urinary catheter that allows the catheter to disconnect if
pulled or snagged. The proposed device may be installed anywhere along the
length of the catheter, which minimizes the length of tubing outside of the
patient’s body that can be pulled or snagged. The device is designed to securely
attach to the catheter tube and is able to withstand traction forces of over
50N. The device maximizes urine flow rate and does not constrict the flow as
compared to a catheter that does not have the device installed. Further, the
device disconnects at a desired force to prevent trauma and may be seamlessly
reconnected for continued use. The prototype also allows urine to drain while
preventing water from escaping the balloon. Research is underway to minimize
infection risk, identify the optimal force for disconnection, and ensure optimal
drainage of urine with possible debris.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.