* 2330156
* Conference: 14th International Precipitation Conference (IPC14) - Emerging directions in precipitation science and applications: going beyond
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Pierre Kirstetter, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 05/31/2024
* USD 29,943.00

Precipitation drives the movement and storage of water in the atmosphere. It is
both a source of freshwater and a driver of natural hazards that impact society.
Precipitation is difficult to estimate and predict for weather, climate, and for
decision making. The International Precipitation Conference was established to
bring together researchers from various disciplines to identify challenges and
advances in precipitation research. It is also an opportunity for scientists and
engineers to develop collaborations and for early career scientists to get
support and training.

The international community acknowledged the challenges in precipitation
research and established the International Precipitation Conference (IPC) in
1986 to bring together the atmospheric, climate, hydrologic and applied water
resources communities to discuss local, regional, and global precipitation
challenges and develop collaborations that advance modeling, decision making,
and prediction of resources and extreme events such as floods and droughts and
their hydro-geomorphic hazards. Building on previous IPCs, this conference will
bring together an international group of scientists and engineers to integrate
research efforts, mentor early career scientists and students, and craft future
directions in the field. The conference will engage and support early career
scientists and students in a collaborative environment with pre-conference and
training workshops, and fosters opportunities for future research
collaborations.

The award will be co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences, Climate and Large-Scale
Dynamics, and Physical and Dynamical Meteorology programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.