* 2330404
* I-Corps: Medical Application Game-Generator for Prescription Intelligence Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Stephen Farrow, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform that teaches patients about their medication,
reports patient knowledge and health status back to the health team and provides
updated prescriptions from the health team to the patient. The goal is to help
manage patients with complex chronic diseases. Chronic progressive diseases,
such as diabetes, are difficult to manage for the patient and the
physician/health team. They require frequent adjustment of behavior and
medications and are challenging for physicians to assess, confusing for patients
to understand, and often inconvenient and expensive to manage. In addition, high
demand limits patients’ access to clinic time, and patient education in the
clinic is time-consuming. The proposed technology is designed to provide real-
time, objective assessment of patient understanding and likely adherence to
treatment prescriptions, and of the impact of those treatments as reported by
physiology data from wearable patient monitors, and facilitate real-time,
efficient clinician-patient communication to adjust ineffective treatments. The
proposed technology may be a step toward improved access, health outcomes, cost-
containment, staff stability, and patient and clinician satisfaction. This
technology also may have application in other settings where real-time human
education for performance assessment and optimization is desirable, such as
elite athlete training, military readiness, and operations in remote
terrestrial, aquatic, and off-world environment extremes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a software application that
applies Artificial Intelligence and a smart device to facilitate health
improvement. The proposed technology uses wearable health monitoring technology
and intelligent assistance theory to accomplish rapid, thorough clinical
assessment and patient comprehension and implementation of updated prescription
information. The proposed technology transmits objective patient knowledge
performance and physiological data from a wearable health monitor to the
clinical team. The clinical team may then respond with updated prescription
instructions to the patient in real-time for optimal health improvement with
minimal delay. Studies show that the proposed technology may facilitate
education and performance assessment in an enjoyable, efficient, quantifiable
manner for adults and youth. The current application leverages multiple engine
and platform strategies to present customized learning, gaming, and practice
strategies to the patient, then transmits performance data along with
physiological information via the electronic medical record to the clinical
team. The proposed approach may mitigate the impact of complex progressive
diseases by early intervention and rapid adjustment of treatment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.