* 2330827
* EAGER: Investigating reasonable costs to achieve public access to federally funded research and scientific data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Katherine Skinner, Code for Science and Society Inc
* Standard Grant
* Plato Smith
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,454.00

This project will investigate costs involved in publishing research outputs in a
range of publicly accessible venues. Using a mixed research model, the project
will produce insights, tools, and intervention strategies to highlight and
mitigate current disparities between institutions and researchers in different
research tiers and institution types.

National adoption of open science practices aims to ensure all that all citizens
benefit from immediate and free access to federally funded research. However,
even when those digital research outputs are free for users, their publication
and management are not “free.” This raises significant questions regarding who
should pay for these processes and how much. As researchers, research offices,
scholarly societies, publishers, libraries, and various data management and
scholarly communication infrastructure providers actively grapple with emerging
policy changes, this research will address key questions: 1) What are the costs
of publishing publicly available research, and how do these differ across
publication types, institution types, and disciplines; 2) What do US researchers
and research institutions pay directly or indirectly (e.g., through
transformative agreements) to make federally funded outputs publicly available;
3) What workflows and decision chains do researchers and their research
institutions use to secure appropriate public access channels for research
outputs; and 4) How do researchers and research institutions currently establish
a threshold for reasonable cost for publicly available venues, and do they
budget this as allowable expense? As this research is conducted, the project
will especially look for differences in both thought and action across
institutional types and tiers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.