* 2330041
* Global Centers Track 2: SuReMin: Sustainable, resilient, responsible global minerals supply chain
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jennifer Dunn, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

To decarbonize at the scale and pace required to address climate change, there
is an increasing demand for useful and usable research that can inform and
strengthen a sustainable international minerals supply chain. Accordingly,
SuReMin will conduct research and develop educational opportunities to guide the
development of this supply chain. The Track 2 Design Phase will entail
developing a research agenda for the management, reuse and disposal of mining
waste, community-engaged social and environmental life cycle assessment of
minerals mining, and low-cost, scalable methods for environmental and social
data collection. SuReMin’s founding collaborators include Northwestern
University, Montana Technical University, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile (UC), the Sustainable Minerals Institute (SMI) – an entity of the
University of Queensland (Australia) located in Santiago, Chile, the Universidad
de los Andes, and the Universidad Iberoamericana (Mexico). These partners
convene expertise and perspective that can catalyze cutting edge, impactful
research while also training future engineers to be global, collaborative, and
transdisciplinary innovators. Inclusion of SuReMin’s international partners is
notable because voices from the Global South – including Chile and Mexico - are
notably underrepresented in sustainable mining research, despite this region
contributing over 35 million metric tons of critical minerals for lithium-ion
batteries alone annually. SuReMin’s Track 2 Design Phase goal is to establish an
integrated research team and identify a clear pathway towards a future Global
Center by exploring and refining research, education, and broadening
participation activities. To develop the Center’s research agenda, SuReMin will
host three workshops to gather feedback from universities, government agencies,
industry, non-profit organizations, and communities to aid in its crafting. The
workshop topics are 1) low-cost, scalable acquisition techniques for
environmental and social data, 2) sustainable mining waste management, reuse,
and disposal, and 3) community-engaged life cycle assessment of minerals mining.
SuReMin will also develop a compendium of data sources to quantify social and
environmental effects of mining in Chile and the U.S. Furthermore, pilot
projects will contribute a new, community-engaged LCA for a copper or lithium
mining community in Chile, a low computational-cost platform to screen
potentially problematic tailing dam infrastructure, and new methods to recover
metals from mining leachates with minimal chemical and energy requirements. To
explore and refine education programming, SuReMin will support an undergraduate
trek to Chile, offer a graduate research seminar, and explore the expansion of
Northwestern’s experiential international education program to additional
partners in Chile. This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an
innovative program that supports use-inspired research addressing global
challenges related to climate change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards
support U.S.-based researchers to bring together international teams to develop
research questions and partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize
data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired
research at larger scale in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.