* 2330343
* Global Centers Track 2: Enabling interdisciplinary wildfire research for community resilience
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jenna Tilt, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

One of the most consequential climate change-related outcomes in the western US
is the rapid increase in wildfire frequency and size. Over the last two decades,
wildfires increasingly have moved from wildlands into human communities. The
impacts of these wildfires on communities includes losses of and damages to
civil infrastructure. These losses and damages have become increasingly complex
due to the increasing interconnectedness of the global economy and dependencies
among infrastructure systems. This Global Centers Track 2 Design award aims to
develop an international, interdisciplinary center that will contribute to
solving societal challenges to mitigate, adapt to, and recover from the effects
of wildfires on physical, social, and economic infrastructure. Addressing the
cumulative effects of wildfires, including those on social and economic systems,
crosses disciplines and jurisdictional boundaries and requires collaboration
among social, economic, and technical sectors. Award activities are designed to
build scientific and community capacity and include scenario building, community
engagement, and training and workforce development. The award is a partnership
among Oregon State University, University of Oregon, and University of
Washington in the U.S. with multiple universities in Australia and the United
Kingdom. This project would fill gaps in knowledge of methods for reducing the
risk of infrastructure losses and the multiple barriers to mitigation actions by
land management agencies, local government, and residents. It will foster a co-
production of knowledge by using scenario-based exercise and considering
engineering aspects (e.g., material properties), data-driven decision-making
framework, post-fire Lidar data, and multi-hazard impacts on community
infrastructure. The results of this research will advance or identify research
questions to further knowledge of wildfire impacts on connected infrastructure
systems, communities, and natural, cultural, social, political, financial, and
built environments. The identification of these connections will lead to the
development of a transformational convergent research vision, which will be
outlined in a Track 1 proposal. This research vision will (i) identify sector-
specific impacts of wildfires, as well as their connections and
interdependencies; (ii) develop models that illustrate such impacts and evaluate
mitigation, response, and recovery strategies, and (iii) identify opportunities
to engage sensing technology to quantify fire demands within communities and use
sensing data to validate modeling methodologies. The identification of these
connections will also enable further research development on the wildland urban
interface by groups of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers.

This award is funded by the Global Centers program, an innovative program that
supports use-inspired research addressing global challenges related to climate
change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design awards support U.S.-based researchers
to bring together international teams to develop research questions and
partnerships, conduct landscape analyses, synthesize data, and/or build multi-
stakeholder networks to advance their use-inspired research at larger scale in
the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.