* 2330504
* Global Centers Track 2: Equitable and User-Centric Energy Market for Resilient Grid-interactive Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Yi Fang, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 12/31/2025
* USD 249,987.00

Distributed energy resources (DERs) have tremendous potential to transform
operators and users toward more clean and resilient energy supplies by
harvesting and distributing various renewable energies tailored to the profiles
of distinctive local communities. An equitable and user-centric market is
essential in this transformation. New designs, mechanisms, and technologies are
needed to establish a DER-based, self-sustaining clean energy ecosystem at the
edge of power grids for a diverse spectrum of communities and stakeholders. This
Global Centers Design award to Santa Clara University (SCU) supports U.S.
participation in the planning phase of a center to tackle these challenges. The
planned Center, co-led by SCU in the US and Concordia University (CU) in Canada,
aims to create a global research and training platform with a critical mass for
collaborative investigation, innovation, and education toward a user-centric
energy economy for grid-interactive communities. The goal is to advance
scientific knowledge and engineering solutions for more equitable, affordable,
flexible, and reliable access to clean energy supplies for a broader range of
local communities. It will investigate enabling mechanisms and technologies to
increase community acceptance, stakeholder benefits, and provider/consumer
interaction of clean energy in a global context. The Center will follow its use-
inspired nature to design research and education activities that address the
practical challenges of key stakeholders in grid-interactive communities. The
education and outreach components will prepare the next-generation workforce for
academia, industry, and communities. During the Design Phase, the Center will
focus on two critical components: grid-interactive communities and user-centric
markets. It will foster conversations and collaborations among diversified
research experts and community users. Its projects will investigate: i) Critical
applications and use cases from key stakeholders that call for use-inspired,
multi-disciplinary, and international collaborations; ii) New theories,
frameworks, and models for grid-interactive communities, user profiling, device-
driven energy management, machina economicus, and energy fairness; iii) New
architectures for clean energy markets, community-based energy interactions, and
scalable co-simulation, and iv) Innovative grid edge technologies for efficient,
flexible, trustworthy, and resilient distributed energy management against
disturbances, adversaries, and disasters for grid-interactive communities. The
Center will release its co-simulation tools, testing cases, and datasets to grow
the research community and the ecosystem. The international collaborations
between the two leading institutions will leverage the distinctive geographical,
technological, regulatory, and cultural context in their local communities to
provide enriched and diversified opportunities for research and education
activities benefiting the general public in the global context. Special programs
will be offered to minority researchers, professionals, students, and other
users for diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility among multi-sector
stakeholders in the ecosystem. This award is funded by the Global Centers
program, an innovative program that supports use-inspired research addressing
global challenges related to climate change and/or clean energy. Track 2 design
awards support U.S.-based researchers to bring together international teams to
develop research questions and partnerships, conduct landscape analyses,
synthesize data, and/or build multi-stakeholder networks to advance their use-
inspired research at larger scale in the future.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.