* 2330513
* Nanophotonic Tomography – Peering below plasmonic waves
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Pieter Kik, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2026
* USD 352,540.00

Surface plasmon polariton waves have become a key ingredient in applications
that manipulate light at the nanoscale, i.e. in nanophotonic applications. When
light hits a metal surface it causes electrons to oscillate, in some cases
generating ripples or waves in the charge density at the metal surface. Such
waves, known as surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), allow for extreme light
concentration and highly sensitive optical detection. While the existence of SPP
waves is well known, it is extremely challenging to investigate their behavior
below the metal surface. To address this challenge, this project will study sub-
surface nanophotonic effects by measuring light emission from thin metallic
layers placed at different depths below the surface. This layer-by-layer
analysis of the optical response at the nanoscale is referred to as nanophotonic
tomography. The systematic analysis of such thin-film light emission will be
used for depth-resolved studies of SPP waves in nanophotonic systems that have
practical applications, including photocatalysis and hot electron enhanced
photovoltaics. In addition to bringing fundamental understanding of key
nanophotonic phenomena, the research will be integrated in Nanophotonics course
materials.

Depth profiling of surface plasmon polaritons is a highly challenging
proposition. The proposed work leverages recent insights in the generation and
detection of gold photoluminescence (PL). Based on the observation of detectable
Au PL from few-nm thick gold layers, it has become feasible to use embedded thin
gold films as 2D probes of local field enhancement. Based on this realization,
layer-by-layer gold PL analysis will be applied to geometries that are of great
current importance to the fields of plasmonics and nanophotonics: (a) the
“particle on mirror” geometry, where nanophotonic tomography will be used to map
the depth over which hot electrons and holes contribute to Au photoluminescence,
(b) the zero-mode waveguide (ZMW) with an embedded nanoparticle, in which
layering of the surrounding ZMW enables depth-selective quantitative analysis of
gap plasmon field amplitudes, (c) Metasurface-enhanced Raman scattering, where
layered metallic metasurfaces will allow for a quantitative correlation of Raman
scattering enhancement from 2D materials and Au PL, and (d) sub-surface few-nm
Au films in Ag for the investigation of hot carrier redistribution by monitoring
the excitation-energy dependence of modifications to the Au PL spectrum. The
knowledge gained from the research is of great importance to applications in
biosensing, photocatalysis, and hot-electron assisted photovoltaics. In
addition, the proposed work will provide a clear and comprehensive body of work
on using gold PL as a general probe of internal optical fields. The results are
anticipated to be of great value to the general field of nanophotonics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.