* 2330228
* Heralded Entangled Sources for All-optical Quantum Networks with a Quantum Advantage
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Mazurek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Today, entangled correlations are at the heart of the Quantum 2.0 revolution
with the potential to significantly impact the fields of communications,
sensing, and computing. In particular, entangled states power fundamentally
secure—or “unhackable”—quantum communication. Quantum systems are extremely
sensitive to loss and errors, and it is a major unsolved challenge to build a
quantum network that can efficiently distribute entanglement that is useful for
Quantum 2.0 applications. Existing approaches to quantum networking all face
major technological barriers that make them unsuitable for quantum
communication. This project will demonstrate a new type of quantum network based
on entangled single photons. The networking scheme is based on existing
technology, and the tools required to build it are available today. The network
will be used to distribute entangled photons to separate users at two different
network nodes. Even though the photons will experience high amounts of loss over
the network, the distributed entanglement will be subject to negligible error,
measured with high efficiency, and distributed at high bit rates—all necessary
criteria for secure quantum communications. The network is scalable, meaning
more network nodes can be added to allow secure communication between multiple
users simultaneously. The proposed system has important implications for privacy
and national security. This program will support the training of two graduate
students in experimental single photon source design and measurement, and in
quantum information and communications theory. The network can be used as an
advanced quantum networking testbed that can be used as both an education and
training tool, and it will be expanded and maintained in part by high school and
undergraduate interns recruited via a new summer program targeted towards
traditionally underrepresented groups.

Distributing high-quality entanglement over lossy channels in a scalable manner
is an unsolved problem. The goals of this project are to develop identical
sources of path-entangled single photons operating at MHz rates, and to
demonstrate entanglement swapping between two sources separated by a 2 km public
fiber network. The resulting distributed entanglement can be used to carry out
advanced quantum communications protocols that have a provable quantum
advantage. A research fiber network connects the NIST and CU Boulder campuses,
and this will be used to distribute 99% fidelity entangled states between the
two campuses at kHz rates. This approach is scalable, Quantum 2.0 ready, and
will for the first time demonstrate a provable quantum communications advantage
across lossy, kilometer-scale network links at rates five orders of magnitude
higher than current state-of-the-art networking demonstrations. This will lay
the groundwork for small-to-medium sized multi-node quantum networks that can be
built within the next five years that are capable of distributing larger classes
of entangled states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.