* 2330829
* Conference on Science and Law of Sea Level Rise: Reducing Legal Obstacles to Managing Rising Seas; Fort Lauderdale, Florida; Spring 2024
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Rebecca Kihslinger, Environmental Law Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 96,700.00

This project brings together professionals in science, public policy, law, and
journalism in an interdisciplinary symposium on sea level rise (SLR) aimed at
addressing opportunities and challenges to effective U.S. coastal resilience
policy and practices.

The Environmental Law Institute will engage scholars and student researchers
from law schools and academic departments to: 1) develop white papers on key
legal topics related to sea level rise; and 2) deliver their findings at an
interdisciplinary symposium in Florida. The research will underscore themes
raised at previous workshops such as the inevitability of significant sea level
rise, the increasing urgency of developing comprehensive responses to it, and
the necessity of adapting the legal system to address immediate and accelerating
societal impacts.

The potential Broader Impacts include promoting the ability of scientists,
policymakers, and the general public to understand and make decisions based on
the emerging science of sea level rise and coastal adaptation and resilience.
The conference and its attendant activities will contribute to increasing cross-
disciplinary understanding of the issues by the participants and the communities
with whom they interact and enable them to communicate more effectively as
necessary.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.