* 2330597
* I-Corps: Youth Advocacy for Resilience to Disasters
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2023
* Allen Hyde, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to empower
and amplify the voices of Black Indigenous People of Color (BIPOC) youth in
building disaster resilience within their communities. By developing a
curriculum, this project aims to provide middle school youth with the knowledge,
skills, and tools to address environmental justice issues related to disasters.
This innovative approach fosters civic engagement, data literacy, and critical
thinking among youth, equipping them to become active agents of change. The
project's broader significance lies in its potential to assist youth in becoming
resilient and socially conscious individuals who can tackle complex challenges
in their communities. Through the curriculum, youth participants gain a deeper
understanding of the interplay between disasters, climate change, and social
equity. They learn about green and grey infrastructure solutions, data
visualization techniques, and youth advocacy strategies. By engaging in hands-on
activities and developing action plans, youth not only enhance their scientific
and technological understanding but also cultivate leadership skills and build
networks within their communities.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a curriculum and an open-
source mapping tool, which addresses a crucial problem: the lack of
representation and empowerment of youth in disaster resilience efforts.
Traditionally, these youth have been marginalized and their perspectives
overlooked in community planning and decision-making processes related to
disasters. The opportunity lies in harnessing the potential of youth to
contribute meaningfully to resilience and foster social equity. The innovation
of the curriculum lies in its interdisciplinary approach, integrating elements
of environmental justice, data visualization, and youth advocacy. By combining
these components, this project aims to equip youth with the knowledge and skills
to understand the relationship between disasters, climate change, and social
equity, and empower them to advocate for change within their communities. The
curriculum encourages critical thinking, civic engagement, and the development
of action plans, enabling youth to become catalysts for resilience and
community-driven solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.