* 2330685
* I-Corps:  Modular electrolyzers to transform methane to liquids
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of modular electrolyzers that transform distributed methane
emissions from an environmental liability to a feedstock for chemical products.
With almost 80 times the warming potential of CO2, methane is a short-lived
climate force that disproportionally impacts climate change in the near term.
Methane emissions from large, centralized sources (e.g., refineries) can be
processed with established methane-to-liquids (MTL) plants. However, scaling
down conventional MTL plants for distributed methane sources is not viable
economically. The development of modular systems that may be deployed to
mitigate emissions from more distributed sources (e.g., landfills or abandoned
gas wells) addresses an important unmet need in the effort to curtail greenhouse
gas emissions. The proposed technology is aimed at converting waste methane to
value-added chemicals at ambient conditions and may provide economic advantage
for customers and environmental/societal benefit by reducing emissions that
would otherwise contribute to climate change. The commercialization potential of
electrochemical methane conversion may provide important guidance toward
effective technology development to address the grand challenge of methane
emissions reduction.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of modular methane-to-liquid
electrolyzers. Drawing on inspiration from methane-eating bacteria, the proposed
technology development will leverage recent advances in additive manufacturing
and nanostructured materials to create programmable reaction environments
optimized for forming and separating methanol. The proposed technology focuses
on converting methane to value-added products like methanol at ambient
temperature and pressure using pulsed potential electrocatalysis (PPC). In this
system, a pulsed voltage or a pulsed light source is applied to a catalyst that
activates and converts methane to value-added products. Preliminary results show
that pulsing a catalyst with voltage or light stimulus enables control over
surface reaction processes. Controlling surface reaction processes enables
enhancement of methane conversion activity and selectivity of the final,
valorized product. In addition, it may be possible to tailor the pulse profile
to match a specific inflow gas composition and control the composition of the
final value-added product. The proposed electrochemical conversion affords the
usage of modular reactors that may operate at different methane in-flow
conditions. Current methane conversion technologies such as steam methane
reforming require heavy infrastructure, high capital costs, and usage at large
scales, however, the proposed modular, pulsed electrochemical reactors have the
potential to work at more moderate methane in-flow scales. This presents a
competitive advantage for modular, electrochemical reactors because typical
methane flare sites operate at small, distributed scales that are often
unsuitable for large-scale steam methane reforming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.