* 2330220
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM MobiCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Francesco Restuccia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This project provides support for students based at U.S. institutions to attend
the 29th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM
MobiCom 2023), held from October 2, 2023 to October 6, 2023 in Madrid, Spain. In
addition to the regular conference program, MobiCom 2023 includes a set of
workshops, panels, research demonstrations, and a poster session. MobiCom
attracts world-leading researchers and practitioners to attend and present their
work and participate in panels and keynote sessions. For these reasons,
attending MobiCom provides students with an invaluable learning opportunity and
learn from the very best researchers in mobile computing and networking
technologies.

MobiCom is dedicated to addressing the challenges of mobile computing and
networking and has emerged as one of the leading conferences covering networks,
systems, algorithms, and applications that support the convergence of mobile
computers and wireless networks. The travel grant program has a proven record of
providing students the means to benefit from this educational experience.
Participation in MobiCom is an extremely important part of the graduate school
experience, provides students with an opportunity to interact with more senior
researchers, and exposes them to leading-edge research in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.