* 2331325
* ART: Mining the Rich Vein of Research in Montana
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Lee Spangler, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,500,000.00

Montana State University’s (MSU) research translation activity in terms of
invention disclosures, patents filed, and US patents issued has lagged behind
the nation when compared to 0its strong and growing fundamental research
portfolio. MSU’s unmet research translation potential is an especially pressing
concern given that it serves the low-population, historically under-resourced,
and geographically isolated state of Montana. This Accelerating Research
Translation project will work to overcome these hurdles and capitalize on the
promise of translational activities and university-industry partnerships to
advance STEM research capacities, infrastructure, pipelines, and workforce; spur
economic development; and address diverse community needs in an under-served
region of the United States. The project’s main goals are to 1) build on the
university’s land-grant mission and culture of societal problem-solving with
entrepreneurship and research translation as added core values; 2) increase
research translation capacities through sustainable programs and support; and 3)
elevate MSU’s levels of research translation in line with its very high research
activity. By improving the rate of research translating to practice, and by
broadening participation of underrepresented minorities in research translation,
this project will contribute to improvements in economic competitiveness and
societal well-being while sustaining research excellence at MSU.

Expected outcomes, including a more diverse and energized community of students,
staff, and researchers who value and pursue translational activities of direct
benefit to society, will be accomplished via an integrated mix of innovative and
inclusive training, support, and partnerships. A design thinking program will
combine with an entrepreneurship curriculum to teach use-inspired approaches and
co-produce culturally and geographically relevant translational research and
solutions. A comprehensive suite of support will advance high-potential, high-
impact research translation in the form of Seed Translational Research Projects
(STRP) and encourage university spinout companies at greater rates. Local and
regional partnerships with ART ambassadors and the University of Washington will
promote research facilitation champions on campus, facilitate multi-
institutional exchanges of ideas and best practices, provide mentorship, and
allow access to well-established entrepreneurship and spinout services. These
synergistic activities will be tailored to regional contexts and needs, and will
prioritize inclusivity and diversity, with particular attention to Montana’s
rural and Tribal communities.

The project is partially supported by NSF’s Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.