* 2331008
* Planning: Enhancing Cybersecurity and Computer Science Education in Underserved Areas
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* LaVonne Fox, Turtle Mountain Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution's faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction.  Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC) serves the
Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians. In response to a state mandate for
teacher credentialing in cybersecurity and computer science in K-12 grades, TMCC
is undertaking a self-study, planning, and development project addressing these
crucial fields. The community served by TMCC is underrepresented in
cybersecurity and computer science, so developing a program of study to offer to
the K-12 professional community to maintain their credentialing, expanding
access to the instruction to the students of the college, with community input,
and developing a strategic plan to add computer science as a field of study is
seen as a means to prepare students for service and employment for and in the
community. TMCC has assembled a highly experienced team of instructional
professionals and advisors to conduct the self-study and produce a compelling
design for implementation into the college’s STEM degree offerings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.