* 2331991
* Conference: 12th North American Paleontological Convention, Ann Arbor, MI - June 17 to June 21, 2024
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Matthew Friedman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2024
* USD 47,794.00

The 12th North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC) will occur between
17-21 June 2024, hosted at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (U-M). This
large international conference occurs every 4–6 years. NAPC offers a unique
opportunity for a broad interaction of individuals from all sub-disciplines of
paleontology that collectively address a range of questions about how Earth’s
life and environments have changed over time. During NAPC, attendees share the
latest research, formulate new areas of investigation, participate in
instructional workshops and field courses, meet new collaborators, and provide
or receive mentoring in research and career development. This award broadens
participation through registration support for students, avocational
paleontologists, and paleontological artists. Additional participant support
provides accommodation and registration for early-career individuals
participating in a mentoring program. Other events supported by this award will
offer opportunities for community-building, networking, and education, including
Early Career and Diverse Paleoscientists and Allies events, plus a plenary
session open to the public. NAPC brings together hundreds individuals in a
variety of roles (faculty, students, museum professionals, technicians, artists,
and members of the public) to meet, exchange ideas, learn, and mentor in topics
related to paleontology and adjacent disciplines. In addition to contributed
talks and thematic symposia, NAPC supports technical workshops with a training
component, events for groups within our discipline to foster networking and
community building, and field trips highlighting regional geology, paleontology,
and collections-based resources. The meeting at U-M is designed to increase
participation, including by key contributors to the discipline like artists and
avocational paleontologists, by offering financial support and dedicated
sessions or events for these parts of the community. The meeting also includes a
plenary session, live-streamed and open to the public, that highlights the
diversity of contributions to paleontology, historical biases in the discipline
and paleontological data, and the utility of deep-time data for addressing
societal issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.