* 2331208
* ART: Translational Research Ambassadors Network for Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Fostering a Responsive and Open Mindset (TRANSFORM)
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Brian Wampler, Boise State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,499,567.00

Boise State University’s vision for this Accelerating Research Translation (ART)
project is to create and maintain a thriving, sustainable, and innovative
translational research ecosystem that is responsive to the economic and societal
needs of the region and nation. To do so, the project team will capitalize on
emerging momentum in two tracks that are poised for growth and investment:
market-oriented (Track 1) and community-engaged (Track 2) translational
research. The market-oriented track will address commercialization and
traditional technology transfer work that identifies innovations in the
laboratory and moves them efficiently to the marketplace (e.g., problem
identification, innovation, intellectual property protection, industry
collaboration, and translation through licensing or startups). The community-
engaged track addresses innovations in human systems, healthy ecosystems, public
policymaking, and democratic governance. This track is designed to better equip
federal, state, local, tribal governments as well as NGOs, nonprofits and
community organizations with the tools and networks to manage and respond to
socio-economic changes resulting from stressors, such as, a rapidly increasing
population, greater pressures on natural resources, and changing climate
conditions. During the first year of the project, seven ART Ambassadors will
champion program development, policy reform, and the reallocation of resources
to support translational research. Program mentor, Arizona State University’s
Global Center for Tech Transfer team, will work with Boise State to advise on
strategic areas of investment, identify hindrances and roadblocks to a
successful translational research process, and serve as a resource for training
and institutional capacity building. In building, testing, and advancing
translational research systems, the ART Ambassadors will invest in Seed
Translational Research Projects based on translational potential, responsiveness
to priority societal problems, strong partnerships, and training opportunities
for postdocs and graduate students.

Boise State’s ART project represents a deliberate effort to improve the
university’s connections and role within the regional entrepreneurial ecosystem.
The project team will consolidate a set of institutional initiatives to foster
the growth of this entrepreneurial ecosystem, integrating university and
industry leadership, mobilizing faculty expertise to support dialogue and
evidence-based decision making, and creating a robust network of partners. By
strengthening its institutional capacity in translational research, Boise State
will be an active partner of new industries that are rapidly expanding in the
region and will support government officials and NGOs to design collaborative
solutions to pressing social, environmental, and policy problems. The ART
project will provide training for early career faculty, postdoctoral fellows,
and graduate students to help prepare the next generation of translational
research professionals. Project leadership and ART Ambassadors will ensure
inclusiveness and accessibility in all aspects of the proposed work, including
lowering barriers to participation, implementing inclusive mentoring networks,
and assessing diversity and inclusiveness in the translational research
community on campus and with external partners. By the end of the ART program,
Boise State will demonstrate an upward trajectory in the “Big 5” translational
research metrics: invention disclosures, new patent applications, total
licenses, license revenue, and startups formed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.