* 2331680
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE-EMBS International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Yu-Chiao Chiu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Gage
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

The 2023 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Engineering in
Medicine & Biology Society (EMBS) International Conference on Biomedical and
Health Informatics (BHI’23) is a premier flagship conference on informatics and
computing in healthcare and life sciences. BHI’23 will take place from October
15 to 18, 2023 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The theme of BHI’23 is “Transforming
healthcare and medicine with artificial intelligence (AI).” It will provide a
unique platform for cross-disciplinary researchers to showcase their research on
big data analytics and machine learning that addresses challenges in
biomedicine. An important mission of BHI’23 is to promote participation and
engagement of undergraduate and graduate students, especially women and students
from under-represented groups. The National Science Foundation (NSF) Student
Travel Award will support this goal by providing travel awards to qualified
students from under-represented groups and students who lack funds to attend the
conference.

With the NSF support, the investigators expect to provide travel awards to
approximately 30 students to encourage their participation in BHI’23. BHI’23
will provide the student awardees with opportunities to present their research,
expand knowledge, network with world-class researchers, and broaden
collaborations. Furthermore, participants will have access to keynote speeches,
career and technology panels, special sessions, workshops, and tutorials. The
investigators will promote diversity and equity by reserving at least 25% of the
awards to students from under-represented groups and support first-time
attendees to the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.