* 2331660
* PRIMES: Practical Inference Algorithms to Detect Hybridization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Ulrica Wilson, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 274,320.00

Phylogenetics is the branch of evolutionary biology whose main objective is
understanding the evolutionary relationships between species. Inferring such
relations is crucial for important areas of current concern, such as
conservation efforts, understanding infectious disease dynamics, and improving
agricultural practices. Hybrid speciation, or hybridization, occurs when two
distinct species merge genetically to create a new one, and it is known to have
played an important role in the evolution of many species, including
butterflies, salamanders, sunflowers, and primroses, among many others. In this
project, the Principal Investigator will develop much-needed algorithms to be
used by the biological community as a tool to detect hybridization between
species. Additionally, the PI will design and conduct multiple activities to
encourage aspiring scholars, especially those belonging to minority groups, to
pursue a career in STEM. The theoretical foundation of the algorithms that will
be developed in this proposal will be the Network Multispecies Coalescent model
(NMSC), a standard stochastic model describing the distinct evolutionary
relationships between species’ genes in the presence of incomplete lineage
sorting and hybridization. Current statistically consistent methods to infer
species networks under the NMSC are restricted to a rather simple family of
networks known as level-1. The PI will develop and implement fast and consistent
algorithms to infer more general species networks under the NMSC from genomic
data. This will be achieved with three aims: (1) Expand current identifiability
results to a more general family of networks; (2) Develop algorithms to infer
statistically consistent estimators of species networks; and (3) Implement
algorithms that are useful, reliable, and easy to use. Software implementations
will handle large datasets under attainable running times, be made publicly
available, and include extensive novel functionalities that will be widely
useful to the biological community. This work will advance both theoretical and
practical methods for phylogenetic inference. To increase underrepresented
groups’ participation in biomathematics, the PI will organize and host a seminar
series entitled “Biomathematics for All: Celebrating Diversity.” In these
lectures, invited speakers will discuss their research together with the
challenges and opportunities they have faced. Furthermore, the PI will design
and conduct the summer week-long program “Introduction to the Mathematical
Modeling of Evolution: A Week-long Course for Beginners” for the diverse student
community of California State University San Bernardino, a minority-serving
institution. The PI will attend the Fall 2024 semester program: “Theory,
Methods, and Applications of Quantitative Phylogenomics” at ICERM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.