* 2331634
* PRIMES PAIR: Partnering with AIM for Inclusive Research
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Leslie Hogben, University of Saint Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 277,570.00

This project will promote research at undergraduate institutions (especially
those that serve large numbers of students underrepresented in the mathematical
sciences workforce) nationally through a partnership between Dr. Mary Flagg at
the University of St. Thomas in Houston, TX and the American Institute of
Mathematics (AIM). Dr. Flagg will work with AIM to support faculty research and
research with undergraduate students at undergraduate institutions by enhancing
the relatively new (virtual) AIM Research Communities program (in an AIM
Research Community she co-organizes, faculty join collaborative research groups,
solve problems, and publish papers documenting these solutions). She will also
work with AIM and the Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in
Mathematics (ICERM) to enhance the Research Experiences for Undergraduate
Faculty (REUF) program; she herself got her start in graph theory and linear
algebra through the REUF program. Faculty participating in these programs bring
research problems connected to their faculty research into their classrooms.
Because more than half of undergraduate mathematics degrees are awarded by
colleges and universities that do not have doctoral programs, it is vitally
important that students at these institutions have this opportunity to benefit
from participating in undergraduate research. The importance of undergraduate
research in stimulating interest in and preparing students for graduate school
in the mathematical sciences and the STEM workforce is now widely recognized.
This project will also directly expand research opportunities for undergraduate
mathematics students at University of St. Thomas and will produce substantial
research at the intersection of graph theory and linear algebra.

The linear algebra direction is centered around the inverse eigenvalue problem
for a graph (IEPG). This problem has broad applications in many areas of
mathematics including dynamics and physics and has received a great deal of
attention in the last few years. As part of this project, Dr. Flagg will
organize a small group of expert researchers from around the world to meet
several times at AIM over the next two years to make significant progress on the
IEPG by applying tools from analysis. Zero forcing was introduced in the context
of the IEPG, but also has applications in control of quantum systems and graph
searching. Questions in the graph theory side of this research have many
applications, from linear algebra to monitoring the power grid, and research
questions in graph theory are a substantial part of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.