* 2331776
* Collaborative Research: SLES: Safety under Distributional Shift in Learning-Enabled Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Javad Lavaei, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF project aims to revolutionize the design of learning-enabled, safety-
critical systems, with a special focus on power systems. These systems face
increasing challenges due to accelerated environmental and technological
changes. The project will bring transformative change to the operation of such
systems by introducing the concept of antifragility, which promotes change as an
opportunity for system enhancement. This innovative viewpoint is crucial for
effectively managing distributional shifts in our rapidly changing environment.
This transformation will be achieved by pioneering proactive, memory-based
antifragile systems, exploring multi-agent systems for cooperative decision-
making, and applying advanced techniques for validation and rigorous stress
testing. The intellectual merits of the project include a groundbreaking
approach towards embracing change and uncertainty. Rather than perceiving these
factors as detriments, the project uses them as catalysts for self-improvement,
setting the stage for a resilient and adaptive way to operate safety-critical
systems. The broader impacts of the project include enhancing the resilience and
reliability of crucial infrastructures such as power systems to ensure
uninterrupted access to vital services. The project also seeks to serve as a hub
for cross-disciplinary dialogue on safe decision-making and public outreach
activities to foster scientific literacy and diversity within the STEM
community.

In power system operation, safety is crucial and requires adherence to rigorous
mathematical models that describe the dynamics of various parameters such as
voltage, frequency, or the health of an equipment. The task of preserving end-
to-end safety is becoming prohibitively complex amidst distributional shifts,
driven by the growing complexity and unpredictability of the environment. Our
project addresses these challenges through three interconnected research
thrusts. The first thrust targets the creation of proactive, antifragile systems
that anticipate and adapt to changes, using advanced techniques such as meta-
safe learning and offline reinforcement learning. The second thrust bolsters
system antifragility through multi-agent systems, encouraging exploration,
cooperation, and distributed control to ensure resilience and safety, even under
significant disturbances. The third thrust is devoted to validation and stress
testing, employing multi-objective adversarial learning and real-world case
studies to better handle rare or unexpected events. These research thrusts
provide a comprehensive understanding of system fragility, distributed decision-
making, and cooperative behavior. Supported by empirical analysis and
mathematical guarantees, the proposed methodologies offer a robust approach to
ensuring the safety of learning-enabled systems amidst evolving challenges,
marking a significant advancement in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.