* 2331256
* Conference: Convergence with Control: Bridging the Arts, Ecology, Neuroscience, and Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Clarence Rowley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,900.00

Systematic modeling, analysis and design of social, economic and technological
systems requires addressing myriad tradeoffs that natural systems and human
groups handle so effectively. A confluence of ideas from diverse disciplines,
including arts, ecology, neuroscience, and control theory will further enhance
our understanding of the underpinnings of such remarkable systems and enable us
to facilitate such robustness and resilience in engineered systems. Examples of
such systems range from electric networks to connected and autonomous vehicles
to smart manufacturing to mixed human-automata systems. Broader issues that
require such confluence include climate change, energy efficiency, and human-
wildlife conflicts. To begin a dialogue aimed at improving synergistic
approaches to these challenges, the proposed workshop on Convergence with
Control: Bridging the Arts, Ecology, Neuroscience, and Engineering aims to bring
a diverse scientific community together and foster fruitful cross-disciplinary
collaborations. It will feature diverse and distinguished domestic and
international speakers, including early career researchers. The participants
will be from cross-cutting disciplines, including the arts, ecology,
neuroscience, and engineering. In addition to the talks, the workshop will
feature several activities with cross-disciplinary themes that will facilitate
team-forming and facilitate deep scientific discussions. The workshop will
consist of presentations by invited speakers interleaved with cross-disciplinary
activities.

The purpose of the workshop is to facilitate and enhance research discussions
and collaborations among experts in a broad range of disciplines, including
biology, arts, and engineering. The invited speakers are leading experts in the
areas of ecology, neuroscience, music and dance, dynamical systems, and control
theory. The sub-themes, (i) collective behavior and control, (ii) robotics,
learning and control, and (iii) neuroscience and control, will ensure that the
broad agenda of the workshop is focused both on theory and application. The
invited speakers have been selected to ensure a broad representation of research
disciplines and such exposure will also benefit young researchers immensely.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.