* 2331136
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 Computational Modeling in Biology Network (COMBINE) Forum
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Michael Blinov, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Gage
* 06/30/2024
* USD 6,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical in supporting the reliable exchange of
information, interoperability of various tools, and reproducibility of
scientific results. The COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork (COMBINE) was
created to coordinate standardization efforts for modeling in biology by
providing a central point for discussions about standards relevant to biological
studies and organizing regular face-to-face meetings among standards users and
developers. COMBINE workshops have been instrumental in making progress in the
development of these standards and in interacting closely with biologists that
develop state-of-the-art models, such as whole-cell models. This award will
support the COMBINE 2023 meeting to be held at the Center for Cell Analysis and
Modeling, University of Connecticut Health in Farmington, Connecticut, from
October 5th to 8th, 2023. Travel and accommodation expenses for US-based
students to attend the meeting will be partially supported. Priority will be
given to participants from underrepresented groups who otherwise may find it
very difficult to find the funds to attend. This workshop will provide a
valuable educational and research experience for these participants, enabling
students to share their work and interact with the larger community.

COMBINE 2023 will be a workshop-style event with software tutorials, oral
presentations, posters, and afternoon breakout sessions discussing various
Systems Biology standards such as Systems Biology Markup Language, Systems
Biology Graphical Notations, Synthetic Biology Open Language, etc. It will be
held at the Center for Cell Analysis and Modeling, University of Connecticut
Health, Farmington, Connecticut, from October 5th to 8th, 2023. The four meeting
days will include talks about the standards and related standardization efforts,
working groups discussing the standards, and presentations of tools using these
standards. Some oral presentations will be selected from abstracts submitted by
the attendees. In addition, poster sessions will allow people to inform each
other about their software and other projects in a setting that fosters
interaction and in-depth discussion. The funding will provide partial support
for travel, and accommodation expenses to 5-7 US-based students. The students
will be selected by the COMBINE coordinators. The student applicants will
provide a short narrative on why they are interested in participating, including
a description of their current interest/involvement with standard development.
Members of underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to apply. At
least one-third of the funds will be reserved for these individuals. The
remainder of the funds will be utilized to support the attendance of students
working on standards or developing critical software infrastructure that
supports these standardization efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.