* 2331364
* ART: STRIDE - Stimulating Translation of Research via Intentional Development and Ecosystem
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Shelia Cotten, Clemson University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,500,000.00

Discoveries and innovations from universities’ foundational research in science
and engineering have been the cornerstone for advancements in the nation’s
health, prosperity, and welfare. To translate such innovations into economic and
societal benefits, university faculty, scholar, and students will need skillsets
different from their academic training and supports often scarce in most
universities. Clemson University has seen strong, steady growth in sponsored
research in the past decade; its pace of research translation, however, has
remained at a lower level. This project, titled Stimulating Translation of
Research via Intentional Development and Ecosystem (STRIDE), will broadly engage
Clemson University stakeholders to identify the limiting factors and a path
toward significant transformation in the university’s research translation
capacity, in line with the university’s land grant commitment.

STRIDE’s goals include: bootstrapping a roadmap to grow the university’s
research translation support infrastructure in the technology transfer office,
colleges, and innovation center; empower faculty and students to pursue research
translation and create research translation support entities across the
institution; provide financial and other support to seed translational research
projects with high potential for impactful translation. STRIDE will develop
training programs and engagement activities across all colleges to support its
education, research, economic, and societal missions. STRIDE will also bring the
region’s innovation ecosystem closer than ever through joint program
developments and streamlined support through stages of innovation. Diversity,
equity, inclusion, and accessibility considerations will guide STRIDE from
intake of participants and innovation projects to translation outcomes. STRIDE
will be closely aligned with the Clemson Elevate university strategic
initiatives to multiply its impacts. STRIDE will significantly enhance the scale
and pace of translation of ideas and knowledge into tangible products, services,
tools, and methods that will ultimately create lasting economic and/or societal
impacts through creation of the next generation workforce and university support
framework for research translation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.