* 2331965
* Transforming Introductory Computer Science Instruction with an AI-Driven Classroom Assistant
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Narges Norouzi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2027
* USD 191,929.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by using artificial
intelligence (AI) technology to transform introductory programming classrooms
into active, engaging, and supportive learning environments for a diverse range
of students. Advances in AI are rapidly transforming every aspect of human life,
including education. The collaborative project team plans to develop INSIGHT, an
AI-driven classroom assistant for introductory computer science that provides
real-time support to both students and instructors. The INSIGHT classroom
assistant has the potential to improve introductory computer science education
by supporting students with adaptive feedback and supporting instructors with
aggregate student coding analytics. The proposed project has the potential to
help instructors to dynamically adapt their instruction to students' conceptual
understanding of computer science concepts.

This project has three main objectives. First is to design, develop, and
iteratively refine the INSIGHT AI-driven classroom assistant. Second is to
develop a deep understanding of how students learn computer science with AI-
driven classroom assistants. Third is to design a set of effective instructional
support principles for coding-enriched classroom interactions. The project team
will collaborate with instructors in a wide range of introductory computer
science courses at large and small public universities, and Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. The team plans to evaluate the impacts of INSIGHT on
improving studentsâ€™ learning and engagement. Results from the project will be
shared with practitioners and researchers through workshops and presentations at
conferences on computer science and engineering education. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.