* 2331127
* RAPID: Geotechnical Engineering and Geo-Sciences Response to the 6 February 2023 Turkiye Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 88,185.00

The 6 February 2023 Türkiye Earthquake Sequence involved large-magnitude,
strike-slip earthquakes along plate boundary faults. Similar strike-slip plate
boundary faults exist in many other areas globally, including California. While
the presence of the faults is known, much remains unknown about the effects of
earthquakes on those faults, both in terms of the associated seismic hazards
(levels of ground motion) and the impacts on people and infrastructure. As such,
it is essential that the earthquake engineering and seismology communities learn
from this devastating and seminal event. That learning began with a coordinated,
multi-nation and multi-institution reconnaissance program jointly organized
between the US and Turkey (Cetin et al. 2023, GEER Association Report 082). This
Grant for Rapid Reponse Research (RAPID) project builds upon the reconnaissance
work to investigate sites that are of special interest, developing the available
data to the point that it can be used to advance seismological and engineering
modeling, and thereby influence seismic risk reduction.

This RAPID award supports researchers conducting targeted investigations at
specific locations in the regions affected by two large earthquakes on 6
February 2023. The investigations include: (1) Documenting surface fault rupture
by developing Structure from Motion (SfM) models of the full length of the
rupture to supplement in-field evaluations at specific locations. (2) Fault
trenching/dating near the southern end of the East Anatolian Fault (ruptured in
2023 event) as it transitions to the Dead Sea Fault (did not rupture) to
understand how offsets between fault segments can arrest rupture and the
“loading” of non-ruptured faults. (3) Characterizing ground motion station sites
close to the ruptured fault using surface wave and seismic cone penetration
testing, where such data is currently lacking. (4) Performing limited additional
reconnaissance at targeted sites such as port facilities. The broader impact of
this work is to inform recovery, inform our understanding of multi-fault rupture
sequences with application in parts of the US, and populate databases used to
build predictive models for surface fault rupture, ground motions, seismic dam
performance, seismic lifelines performance, liquefaction triggering and
deformations, and seismic foundation performance among others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.