* 2331917
* Desktop Printing of Soft Robots with Integrated Fluidic Control Circuits
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Tolley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,419.00

Soft bodied robots have promising applications including dexterous manipulation,
locomotion in complex environments, and safe interaction with humans. However,
the control of soft robots has typically required complicated components such as
pumps, valves, and electronics making them difficult and expensive to
manufacture and recycle. This award supports research to understand how to print
soft robots (including their body, actuators, and control circuitry) in one
piece out of a single material, using commercially available desktop 3D
printers. A key innovation is to control the robots with embedded circuits that
run on compressed gas rather than electricity, with soft 3D printed components
acting as transistors, sensors, etc. The knowledge gained through this work will
advance the science of robotics by providing a new approach to the manufacture
of robots that can be printed all at once on consumer grade hardware and can go
into operation immediately. The research will advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare by enabling the rapid development of inexpensive soft
robotic devices tailored to real-world applications, including for education,
environmental monitoring, medical devices, and space exploration. The outcomes
could further lead to future robots that are fully recyclable or biodegradable.
This award will also provide opportunities to educate and train graduate and
undergraduate students in multidisciplinary research incorporating robotics,
fluid mechanics, and materials science, as well as opportunities for STEM
outreach to K-12 students, with a focus on including students who are members of
the underrepresented groups.

The fabrication of soft robots has previously required complex fabrication
processes, exotic materials, or both. This research aims to achieve
monolithically printed functional soft robots with embedded fluidic control
circuits using popular desktop extrusion (fused filament) 3D printing from
commercially available soft materials (thermoplastic polyurethanes). Using a
pressurized gas as an energy source for both actuation and computation, this
work will eliminate the need for assembly or multi-material 3D printing.
Component stiffness will be tuned by varying geometry. An open-source design
tool will encode design rules for achieving functional pneumatic components with
extrusion printing. This will be followed by an investigation of the underlying
physics connecting design parameters to the performance of a fundamental set of
3D printed pneumatic components. This experience will be subsequently used to
print integrated pneumatic components required for the control of soft robots.
Finally, the cumulative knowledge will enable the monolithic 3D printing of
functional, agile soft robots with embedded sensors and feedback control
circuits.

This project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in
Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering
(ENG) and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.