* 2331513
* I-Corps:  Micro-scale computed axial lithography for 3D fabrication in challenging materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Hayden Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a microscale computed axial lithography additive manufacturing
process. Inorganic materials including glasses and ceramics have high
temperature and chemical resistance, high stiffness and strength, and biological
inertness. Due to the brittleness of the raw material, manufacturing of complex
geometries is challenging and, historically, has been dominated by subtractive
machining operations including milling, grinding, and chemical etching. However,
as technological advances motivate the manufacture of customized application-
specific devices with unique 3D morphologies, the conventional fabrication
methods are inherently limited by material removal unit processes. The proposed
technology is designed for rapid production of 3D microstructures with
relatively smooth surfaces. This may be used in the manufacture of microfluidic
devices (including micromixers) with high optical clarity, inertness, and
suitability for challenging chemical environments. In addition, the proposed
technology may achieve customized geometries with multiple fluidic channel
depths in low-volume production. This level of customization is not easily
achievable with conventional short-run fabrication methods such as wet chemical
etching, or injection molding. For example, the technology may be used to enable
the rapid and precise printing of customized dental crowns, where each crown
must be unique and tailored to fit the shape of the patient’s teeth. The
proposed technology also may be applied to producing mold inserts for injection
molding processes. In the future, this technology may reduce manufacturing costs
and enable the customization of high-precision parts for a wide range of
industries including dental, medical, and semiconductor.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an additive manufacturing
technology called computed axial lithography (CAL). The proposed technology is a
volumetric, light-based, micro-scale photopolymerization method conceptually
analogous to the inverse of computed tomography. Parts are printed by exposing a
container of photoresponsive material to computed light patterns from many
angles and the integrated light dose photopolymerizes a prescribed 3D geometry.
The process is currently capable of defining geometries with 50 µm positive
feature size and 150 µm internal channel diameters in silica glass nanocomposite
materials within a few seconds. After thermal post-processing, complex solid
silica glass geometries with high optical transparency and nanometer-level
surface roughness may be achieved. In addition, the process by be used for
printing directly into organic photopolymer resins, and processes for other
ceramic nanocomposites with specialized applications are under development. The
merits of this technique over industrially established layer-by-layer methods
include its higher throughput, lower surface roughness, and elimination of
wasteful solid print-supporting structures. The lower surface roughness makes
the process potentially attractive for applications where aesthetic clarity is
important, and for producing custom micro-optical components. Fracture testing
results indicate that the lower roughness results in a tighter distribution of
mechanical strength in micro-CAL-printed components than in layer-by-layer-
printed parts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.