* 2331874
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN:Convergent Pyroscapes: Catalyzing Innovative and Inclusive Wildland Fire Science and Education in Western North Carolina
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Laura German, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 12/31/2025
* USD 196,799.00

Native people are significantly underrepresented in science, engineering, and
math (STEM) fields. This poses a problem for equity, and it diminishes the
contribution of Native worldviews and technologies used for problem-solving. One
of the contributing factors to increasingly severe wildland fires and loss of
forest ecosystem services has been the loss of Native American fire management
practices. Indigenous-led fire stewardship can assist with this challenge while
addressing the following three factors: existing conceptions within fire
science, management and education that narrow the decision space within forest
management; shifts in forest conditions under federal management that make it
more difficult to restore Native forest values; and barriers to STEM education
among Native youth. This project will support a newly emerging partnership
between the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, the University of Georgia, the
U.S. Forest Service, and TERC, a STEM education research organization, to
integrate Native and Western scientific knowledge into both Native STEM
education and wildland fire science, training and practice in western North
Carolina. As services to the nation's health, welfare, and prosperity, this
project's scientific advances will increase forest health and reduce wildfire
risk, and its curricular innovations will promote social equity and the
representation and career potential of future Native scientists.

Managed fires can be a critical tool to mitigate rapidly shifting landscape of
forests . Approaching the solution from a deep convergence of Native and Western
fire science, technology and management is therefore critical. This project will
develop an innovative approach to that knowledge convergence, with an aim of
incorporating Native fire management, knowledge, aspirations and technologies
into STEM education and prescribed fire science and management. To achieve that,
the project will use Indigenous-led, culturally responsive facilitated workshops
and collaborative co-design methodologies to: broaden and build equitable
partnerships; share and synthesize foundational knowledge and perspectives; and
co-develop robust plans for a Phase 2 proposal. The resulting work plan will
have three ultimate goals: (1) to reveal and dismantle the conceptual blinders
that currently constrain Western fire science and hinder Native students' STEM
engagement; (2) to generate innovative, inclusive fire science advances that
expand the scope and predictive capacity of fire modeling, e.g. by simulating
scenarios that both extend beyond conditions observed empirically under current
fire regimes, and are based on Native science and technology; and (3) to enhance
the participation of and career pathways for Native youth in forestry and
natural resource management by integrating Native and Western scientific
knowledge in convergent STEM curricula.

This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.
This planning project is also funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and
practice that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in
STEM; (b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.