* 2331880
* Collaborative Research: SLES: Bridging offline design and online adaptation in safe learning-enabled systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nikolai Matni, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2026
* USD 533,411.00

Maintaining the safety of a learning-enabled system that navigates in an unknown
environment is a major challenge owing to uncertainty in the environment, the
system's goals, and the system's learning-enabled components. This project
proposes a novel approach to mitigating these uncertainties. The project’s
novelties are the development of a two-phase design and deployment process
integrated into a tight feedback loop: (1) an offline design process aimed at
synthesizing systems that are provably robust and resilient to known unknowns,
and (2) an automated online safety monitoring phase, during which a deployed
learning-enabled system seeks to detect, learn about, and adapt to unknown
unknowns. By closing the loop between online safety monitoring and offline
design, using data collection as the enabling modality connecting these two
phases, meaningful notions of both offline and online safety can be defined. The
project’s impacts include: (i) a mathematical guarantee on the end-to-end safety
of the design and deployment process described above for learning-enabled
systems; (ii) methods that ensure safety with respect to known unknowns during
the offline design stage, and safety with respect to unknown unknowns during
deployment, when possible; and (iii) techniques that identify and learn about
unknown unknowns, that is, novel sources of uncertainty, so that they can be
integrated into the design of future systems.

Realizing the project’s technical objectives requires major advances in
representing, characterizing, and accounting for uncertainty in learning-enabled
components using streaming data generated from dynamic distributions. The
project addresses these challenges by first developing novel safety-rich data
augmentation and domain randomization techniques for the training of safe
learning-enabled systems. The project also seeks to identify the correct types
of safety-rich data to be collected to ensure end-to-end safety of a system with
learning-enabled components trained using this data. These data generation and
augmentation techniques are integrated into novel safety-aware robust learning,
control, and verification methods with strong safety guarantees. Finally, the
project aims to develop online safety monitoring, uncertainty quantification,
and adaptation techniques for contending with unknown unknowns during
deployment. Meeting these objectives requires novel techniques rooted in
conformal prediction and active learning that allow for principled tradeoffs
between risks to system safety and active data collection and learning, thus
closing the design and deployment loop. The project outcomes are incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate classes at both Penn and UC Berkeley, and the
research team plans to organize workshops at major controls, machine learning,
and cyber-physical systems conferences to help foster a novel interdisciplinary
community of safe learning-enabled systems researchers. All members of the
research team are committed to promoting diversity and inclusion within their
research groups.

This research is supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and Open Philanthropy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.