* 2331357
* ART: Inspiring the Generation of New Ideas and Translational Excellence at Florida State University
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Mark Riley, Florida State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,492,385.00

The Inspiring the Generation of New Ideas and Translational Excellence at
Florida State University (“IGNITE-FSU”) project is a transformational initiative
that will serve as a connector and catalyst for the translation of products and
services out of the research community in Tallahassee, FL, and ensure maximal
impact on the Florida economy and beyond. IGNITE-FSU will build capacity for
translational research through additional staff, supportive programs, and
mutually beneficial partnerships — all geared to identify, mature, harvest, and
translate ideas into impact. This will provide the spark needed to ignite a
thriving innovation ecosystem that benefits the entire North Florida regional
economy by developing and translating tangible solutions to societal challenges.
IGNITE-FSU is led by the institution’s VP for Research, VP for Faculty
Development and Advancement, and Dean of the Graduate School, and includes the
university President as an ART Ambassador to drive institutional culture change.

IGNITE-FSU consists of capacity-building and training activities specifically
designed to achieve four overarching objectives: (1) Enhance FSU’s translational
research infrastructure through the addition and/or re-alignment of staff,
partnerships, and resources. (2) Foster translational and entrepreneurial talent
by providing educational opportunities for faculty, students (graduate and
undergraduate), postdocs, and entrepreneurs in the community. (3) Establish
pathways to impact through Idea Ignition and Seed Translational Research Project
(“STRP”) programs, and meaningful innovation ecosystem partnerships. (4) Develop
an institutional culture that inspires innovation, celebrates inclusive
excellence, and serves our community and region. The IGNITE-FSU team will be
supported by mentorship opportunities through a partnership with the University
of Florida and will ensure that the entire local community benefits from NSF-
funded activities through partnerships with Florida A&M University, and a
variety of local innovation ecosystem partners collectively represented by the
Alliance of Entrepreneur Resource Organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.