* 2331168
* Rapid Analytical Device for the Performance of Construction Materials
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2024
* Nishant Garg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to predict the performance of key construction materials
in a matter of few minutes. Construction materials and chemicals are required to
undergo a quality control process via standardized specifications and
performance tests. Globally, there is a strong push for decarbonizing energy-
intensive industries, such as cement production, which accounts for 6-8% of
global carbon emissions. In the short term, the cement industry is looking to
reduce its carbon footprint by partially replacing cement with sustainable
supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs). The replacement of cement with low-
carbon SCMs is estimated to be able to result in CO2 savings of up to 30
percent. One of the barriers faced by the industry is the highly variable
quality of these low-carbon SCMs and the lack of real-time methods for quality
control. Quality control managers and cement kiln supervisors at cement plants
across the world are looking for reliable, online quality control tools. The
proposed technology may enable better quality control for newer SCMs, which may
facilitate their application in the cement industry. In addition, this may open
pathways for rapid, online quality control of low carbon building materials.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a rapid analytics device for
real-time quality control of sustainable supplementary cementitious materials
(SCMs). Newer materials proposed to replace cement in order to speed up the
decarbonization of the concrete sector are reliant on traditional, time- and
labor-intensive quality control tests that may take up to 7 days. This proposed
technology is based on previous research on the chemistry of SCMs, and combines
fundamental principles of low-cost material characterization and analysis. The
analysis obtained from various natural and commercial SCMs using the proposed
technology are consistent with the performance measured using current standard
methods. In addition, the proposed technology reduced the performance prediction
time from days to minutes, which may enable real-time characterization in the
production line. Further, this device may have an economic advantage over
current practices as it utilizes low-cost detection equipment to allow automatic
operation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.