* 2331218
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Enabling Meaningful External Research Growth in Emergent Technologies (EMERGE)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Mark Nijland, University of The Incarnate Word
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,846.00

The EMERGE (Enabling Meaningful External Research Growth in Emergent
Technologies) Cohort consists of Kettering University, University of the
Incarnate Word, University of Northern Colorado, and Western Carolina
University. Members of the Emerging Partnerships to Increase Innovation Capacity
(EPIIC) Project share a common vision to EMERGE as recognized partners in
research and development (R&D), translation of research into practice, and
talent development in emerging technology fields. Cohort strengths include
strong community and industry partnerships, diverse student populations, and
regional engagement. The cohort shares a commitment to social and economic
mobility, empowerment, and community development, which serves as a guiding
principle for this project’s activities. To build on this foundation, cohort
institutions will develop individual and joint capacities to integrate into
regional innovation ecosystems more effectively and establish collaborative
relationships with emerging technology programs and leaders. This project will
generate broadly applicable, data-driven models that can be adopted by other
teaching-focused Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs) to create cohorts that
accelerate regional innovation in emerging technologies. The EMERGE Project will
contribute to several societal outcomes that greatly benefit underrepresented
communities, including Hispanic/Latinx, Black/African American, rurally-
marginalized, first generation, and low income. The partnerships and networks
developed will provide opportunities for these groups to engage with regional
innovation ecosystems. The resulting research experiences and workforce
development training will lead to thriving and sustainable communities of
innovation, upward mobility among underrepresented and marginalized regions, and
workforce resilience in both urban and rural populations. Bringing the full
spectrum of talent and resources to bear on grand challenges will increase
knowledge production and innovation by capturing the insights of a broad talent
pool with experiences in emerging technology fields.

Primary cohort objectives include 1) building resources to support research
development and outreach capacity, 2) defining effective partnership models, 3)
marketing the value and uniqueness of cohort universities through an EMERGE-
branded web portal, and 4) exchanging and documenting best practices within the
cohort. These activities address current challenges facing cohort institutions,
including lack of awareness/underestimation of member institutions and limited
institutional outreach and relationship-building capacity. As a group, the
cohort will develop the EMERGE brand to serve as a unifying message highlighting
unique institutional strengths and promoting the value of collaborating with
diverse institution types with talented yet underutilized students, faculty, and
staff. While outreach will be aided by cohort-level activities, cohort
institutions will also focus on expanding their internal capacity to build
regional partnerships. At the institution-level, cohort members will build
resources to support research development and outreach capacity and develop
partnership models for engaging regional emerging technology stakeholders. To
amplify individual efforts, the cohort will 1) deploy the EMERGE platform to
provide a single access point to cohort institutions, 2) organize annual in-
person summits to build relationships, share knowledge, and align cohort
strategy, 3) participate in regular virtual meetings to facilitate communication
and ongoing collaboration, and 4) provide training workshops to exchange best
practices. Innovative partnership models, including faculty internships and
fellows programs, will be developed to encourage faculty professional
development and engagement with external partners. Beyond EPIIC funding, there
is a vision to expand the EMERGE model to include other non-R1/R2 institutions,
which would significantly broaden the project’s impact and create a consortium
of schools with the size and scope to rival large research universities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.