* 2331111
* NeTS: Small: ML-Driven Online Traffic Analysis at Multi-Terabit Line Rates
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Sanjay Rao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Internet network operations, whether run by humans or via automated systems,
need real-time operational data and data analysis for timely decision making in
support of a more secure and reliable Internet. This project supports
drastically reducing response times in detecting and responding to network
traffic anomalies, and aid with performance diagnosis and repair. Realizing
network capabilities often requires machine learning (ML) inferencing algorithms
(e.g., to detect anomalous traffic). Unfortunately, as network bandwidth grows
to hundreds of gigabits to even terabits per second, it is challenging to
analyze network traffic at line rates today. Consequently, network operators
resort to out-of-band traffic analysis resulting in slow reaction times (e.g.,
to detect network intrusions). This project seeks to enable an Internet that can
run ML-driven inference algorithms for applications such as network security at
line rate of hundreds of Gbps or even Tbps by advancing and leveraging
programmable switch technology. Doing so is challenging since programmable
switches are constrained in their compute and memory capabilities, have limited
expressivity, and limited support for runtime programmability (i.e., ability to
make changes without a switch reboot).

The project is developing (i) novel methods that can efficiently map an entire
class of popular ML models such as decision trees and neural networks to a
programmable switch pipeline in a manner that efficiently uses limited switch
computation and memory resources, while allowing any model in the class to be
supported at runtime; (ii) new switch primitives for computing ordered
statistics (e.g., medians, percentiles) of flow features; and (iii) techniques
to distribute large ML models on programmable switches across multiple
pipelines, and multiple switches in a runtime programmable fashion while
handling switch failures achieving resource efficiencies through a combination
of new switch primitives, and new network-wide optimization models. The project
team is collaborating with campus network operators for larger scale
validations. The project will train Ph.D, Masters and undergraduate students,
and lead to material on programmable switches in the networking curriculum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.