* 2331578
* Expanding the NORDP Consultants Program to Sixteen Minority Serving Institutions
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Kimberly Eck, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2028
* USD 9,278,960.00

The NSF Growing Research Access for Nationally Transformative Equity and
Diversity (GRANTED) Initiative seeks to support the development of the research
support and service infrastructure to address the complexity of securing and
managing external funding, particularly at emerging research and minority
serving institutions (ERIs and MSIs). This project from the National
Organization of Research Development Professional (NORDP) expands on prior
successful efforts working with Historically Black Colleges and Universities and
focuses on providing fundamental research development resources. Research
development refers to strategic, catalytic, and capacity-building activities
that advance research.

This project tests how the diversity of the U.S. national research ecosystem can
be enhanced by providing research development services to MSIs. In this project,
the NORDP Consultants Program will extend support to 16 minority serving
institutions across four new cohorts of four MSIs each. Each school will receive
600 hours of consulting time from experienced NORDP Consultants over two years
and gain access to an array of other research development supports for the
duration of the project period. The program will also promote network creation
among the institutions selected, through cohort community building events and
participation in an annual national conference. Formative and summative
evaluation activities are included to assess the effectiveness of the approach.
The project represents an innovative, novel, and potentially transformative
model of how professional societies can work with ERIs and MSIs, to provide more
equitable access to resources that will increase research capacity and
competitiveness, ultimately strengthening the nationâ€™s research enterprise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.