* 2331430
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Developing Emerging Technology Ecosystem Partnerships for Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Anton Riedl, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 799,996.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Champlain
College, Christopher Newport University, and Western Oregon University. The
Enabling Partnerships to Increase Innovation Capacity Award is focused on
building the capacity of three Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) to
sustainably increase the number of partnerships to drive workforce development
and research projects between faculty and students, industry, and Institutions
of Higher Education (IHEs). The project cohort is collaborating to learn, share,
and apply the expertise needed to move toward a model for developing and
maintaining external partnerships. The geographical distribution of the cohort
allows for broadened participation in emerging-technology innovation ecosystems
in three regions of the continental U.S.: Mid-Atlantic, New England, and Pacific
Northwest. Their capacity-building efforts will increase the number of
undergraduate students who engage in hands-on learning and career preparation
opportunities as part of the college experience (e.g., internships, industry
research) in the emerging technology industries being targeted, which include
Data Science, Artificial Intelligence, and Biotechnology.

The cohort institutions will collectively identify best practices from other
successful model institutions, share learned expertise, and create and expand
upon a centralized organizational structure at each institution. Additionally,
they will organize and pilot industry partnerships to find sustainable
partnership models and work to improve the infrastructure necessary to apply for
further funding to sustain these efforts beyond the timeframe of the project.
Each of the institutions will provide workforce development and foster future
regional economic prosperity by creating intentional educational opportunities
for their community members and generate a system of shared opportunities
between academic institutions and industry. By leveraging existing support
programs, this project will also create new opportunities for students from
diverse backgrounds, including students with historically underrepresented
identities in STEM fields (e.g., first generation, minority populations, women,
and nontraditional age students). The cohort will disseminate and share best
practices and models for establishing and maintaining partnerships with other
PUIs and IHEs, with the intent of helping them strengthen their capacity for
sustainable industry and research partnerships, improve workforce pipelines in
emerging technology fields, and increase involvement in local technology
ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.