* 2331116
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Wildland Fire + Cultural Burning (WFCB)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Andrew Haight, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,055.00

This Planning Project to Catalyze Innovative and Inclusive Wildland Fire Science
through Diverse Collaborations will result in a plan for future, immersive
experiences that will advance science center and museum visitors' understanding
of the interrelationship between human activity, wildland fire, and climate
change, focusing on Indigenous Ways of Knowing, cultural burning, and wildland
resilience to climate change. Over the course of one year, an Organizing
Committee, including a geographic diversity of Indigenous voices and practices,
will co-develop an action plan in support of a future submission to NSF's
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program for an interactive, bilingual
(Spanish/English) traveling exhibition and associated programs honoring
Indigenous Ways of Knowing and sharing how cultural burning practices support
wildland resilience to climate change. The Organizing Committee will implement
inclusion and accessibility strategies throughout the project, specifically
convening in a variety of formats; they will be led by a Native facilitator and
guided by a Native evaluator to allow for deep engagement that is culturally
responsive, builds trust among partners, and brings diverse perspectives to the
table. Learnings and reflections from the Wildland Fire + Cultural Burning
(WFCB) collaboration process will further inform future collaborations seeking
to use wise practices to elevate Indigenous stories within informal science
learning contexts and bring Indigenous Ways of Knowing to the forefront of
critical STEM subject matter such as wildland fire science. This future,
immersive experience will build public understanding of wildland fire science,
promote climate justice, and inspire the land stewards of tomorrow.

Past collaboration with Indigenous communities, as well as current conversations
with the WFCB organizing committee, have illuminated the need for thoughtful,
authentic community partner engagement and relationship building among regional
indigenous communities, nature organizations, museums, and cultural centers in
project planning. Important components of meaningful collaboration with
Indigenous communities will include developing relationships, fostering and
enhancing trust, practicing transparency, centering community needs and
priorities, listening to learn, maintaining functional feedback loops, and
expecting transformational, not transactional relationships (Cross-Hemmer,
2022). Multiple methods of communication and flexibility in timelines and
processes will also be important (Roots of Wisdom Project Team, 2016). Varied
modes of engagement will allow for authentic promotion of these components. Past
projects have utilized listening sessions, advisory committees, Indigenous
facilitation approaches, and other methods of engagement to provide flexible
space for diverse perspectives and needs. Opportunities for debrief and
discussion will be critical to allow for engagement of participants who may not
communicate directly. Recognizing differences between various communities will
also be critical, and it may be necessary to tell multiple stories. The
collaboration itself will be a learning process, and it will be critical that
teams be open to learning and reflecting on one's own cultural assumptions
(Stein & Valdez, 2016b). Collaborations respectful of diverse cultural
perspectives and supportive of Indigenous leadership can contribute greatly to
the revitalization and elevation of cultural burning (Adlam et al., 2021).
Details for the planning project will include proposed project goals, learning
goals, focus audiences, research question(s), collaboration process, draft
timeline, and budget that supports Indigenous co-leadership, creation, and
evaluation of a traveling exhibition and associated programs suitable for
diverse audiences across North America.

This planning project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which supports projects that: (a) contribute to research and practice
that considers informal STEM learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM;
(b) promote personal and educational success in STEM; (c) advance public
engagement in scientific discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e)
create and enhance the theoretical and empirical foundations for effective
informal STEM learning; (f) improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance
science communication and the public's engagement in and understanding of STEM
and STEM processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.