* 2331161
* Conference: ACM SIGSPATIAL Conference 2023: Student Activities and U.S.-Based Students Support
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2024
* Yao-Yi Chiang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This activity is for proposed travel awards for 20+ U.S.-based graduate and
under-graduate students to participate in the 31st ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS 2023
Conference, which will be held in Hamburg, Germany, November 13 – November 16,
2023. The Conference is annually organized by the ACM (Association for Computing
Machinery) Special Interest Group on Spatial Information (SIGSPATIAL), which is
an association for researchers, students, and professionals interested in
research, development, and deployment of solutions to spatial information
handling and spatial knowledge extraction problems. The Conference started in
1993, has established itself as the world’s premier research conference in
spatial data and GIS; it provides a forum for original research contributions
covering all conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of GIS ranging from
applications, user interfaces, and visualization to storage management and
indexing issues. Besides the technical program, the Conference features
workshops, a student research competition, a data competition, and demos. The
importance of spatial information handling continuously increases with new
application domains and the availability and ubiquity of large spatial data such
as maps, remote-sensing images, 3D medical atlases, and the decennial census.
Businesses, industry, academia, and governmental agencies utilize spatial
information to improve their daily operations, structure new strategies, and
increase overall productivity and US competitiveness.

Spatial data and applications pose novel research challenges in a wide variety
of sub-areas, includ-ing (but not limited to) spatial information acquisition,
modeling, data structures, and algorithms,analysis, querying and integration,
human-computer interaction and visualization, and systems and architectures.
From these sub-areas, deep research questions emerge that are motivated by a
broad range of applications (e.g., emergency and crisis management,
environmental monitoring, global positioning and location detection,
geosciences, location-based and mobile services, navigation, and route
planning). ACM SIGPATIAL GIS has provided a forum for this research, including
presentations of accepted technical papers, poster and demo exhibition
encouraging lively interaction among all participants, and presentations by
leading related industry members. The participation of U.S. graduate and
promising undergraduate students will result in the intellectual stimulation of
young minds to pursue advanced research and development activities inan area
that has a huge technical and societal impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.