* 2331765
* I-Corps: Flat-packed, reconfigurable panelized modular housing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2023
* William Vaughan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a panelized, modular housing technology. The United States is
experiencing a housing inventory shortfall of 4 million units coupled with a
substantial labor shortage in the construction industry. The proposed housing
solution may expedite the implementation of housing units and increase the
available housing inventory for entry-level buyers. In addition, the housing is
designed to decrease the time on site for assembly, which may increase the
efficiency of construction labor force and improve developer cost margins. The
proposed technology also focuses on fire resiliency as a primary design
objective. Given the increased risk from wildfires across various ecosystems,
this may improve insurability. More direct impacts include the reduction of
carbon emissions through the introduction of a fully reconfigurable and
recyclable housing solution and materials.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a flat-packed modular
building construction technology that may be move-in ready in a fraction of the
time of standard structural solutions. The proposed technology is a component-
based construction system made up of predefined modular components with embedded
utilities that may be configured based on the end-user's needs. The structural
components are designed to build flexible residential, commercial, and
industrial spaces and may be reconfigured, added to, scaled down, disassembled,
and moved as needs change. The core elements may be assembled into larger
components used to construct a final housing assembly. Each component is
designed according to a standardized 1 x 1 x 1 repeatable grid. This x-y-z axis
grid establishes the base measurement that will allow the design system to scale
on three axes. This repeatable grid system allows the structural components to
be assembled, disassembled, and reconfigured based on the occupantâ€™s structural
layout requirements, reducing assembly time to 1/8 of traditional building
technologies. The reusable components decrease construction and maintenance
costs and utilize standardized shipping infrastructure, decreasing the embedded
carbon for the transportation and assembly of the structure. The proposed
construction method provides responsive and adaptive short- and long-term
structural solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.