* 2331502
* PRIMES: A Biological and Socio-Environmental Approach to Machine Learning for Equitable and Proactive Cancer and Health Screening
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Dibyen Majumdar, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 278,537.00

This project is in collaboration with the Institute for Mathematical and
Statistical Innovation (IMSI). The project starts with the participation of the
PI in the IMSI fall 2023 long program, entitled Algebraic Statistics and Our
Changing World, then continues with a series of three scientific projects along
with educational/outreach activities aimed to empower individuals to effectively
assess their cancer and health risks, and thus enable us to be proactive in
detecting cancer and diseases at earlier stages. Using electronic medical
records of patients in Chicago, related to colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and
postpartum health outcomes, along with socio-environmental information, a novel
and equitable machine learning methodology will be tested and compared to
current and broadly used algorithms, to not only predict cancer and health
outcomes, but to also study the effect of exposure to violence on our health.
The full mathematical and statistical investigation in each of the three
research projects (colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and postpartum health
outcomes) will not only advance healthcare predictive modeling, but also inform
and advance the use of machine learning for an effective, accurate, and unbiased
use of predictive modeling in healthcare and beyond. The participation in the
IMSI long program will expose the PI to the state of the art of research in
related fields and ideas for the future, and will provide adequate time for
discussion with workshop participants with the potential to develop new
scientific collaborations, and enhance the research of his students and
collaborators. The scientific and educational activities will improve the well-
being of individuals in society, reduce inequities in society, reduce health
distrust among underserved communities, and increase the number of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM in general, and in mathematics and
statistics in particular. Scientific evidence is emerging suggesting that
societal and neighborhood level factors can elicit a toxic and sustained stress
response that promotes biological changes associated with the development of
cancers. Using electronic medical records of patients in Chicago related to
colorectal, lung, and postpartum cancer/health outcomes, along with socio-
environmental information, PI will perform a full investigation of a
classification machine learning methodology, i.e., the triple discriminant
scoring methodology, and compare its performance to existing and broadly used
techniques, such as Extreme Gradient Boosting and Neural Networks. Our
preliminary predictive modeling of colorectal adenomas using our triple
discriminant scoring methodology, which relies on a high number of simulations
and optimization tests across all possible subsets of data variables, showed
robustness against change in training data distribution, unlike for the Extreme
Gradient Boosting. The three research projects, i.e., predicting colorectal,
lung and postpartum cancer/health outcomes, will provide three large electronic
medical records data sets on which we will conduct a comprehensive mathematical,
statistical and empirical investigation of various machine learning
classification methods to extract an effective, accurate, and unbiased use of
machine learning in healthcare and beyond. In addition, the PI will participate
in the Institute for Mathematical and Statistical Innovation (IMSI) fall 2023
long program, entitled Algebraic Statistics and Our Changing World, to harness
and expand his interdisciplinary research, develop new research collaborations,
and enhance his students and collaborators research. Finally, scientific and
educational activities will improve the well-being of individuals in society,
reduce inequities in society, reduce health distrust among underserved
communities, and increase the number of women and underrepresented minorities in
STEM in general, and in mathematics and statistics in particular.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.