* 2331455
* Collaborative Research: Resource Collaborative for Immersive Technologies (RECITE)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* David Presley, Motlow State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 104,607.00

Extended reality (XR) technologies are being rapidly integrated into industry
and society, yet their integration into technician education lags. These
technologies, which include 360° photography and videography (360), augmented
reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and virtual reality (VR), have tremendous
potential to enhance student learning and are poised to revolutionize the
educational experience. This project will create an innovative ecosystem
supporting XR technology utilization in technician education, foster new
collaborations, develop community standards, and enhance technician workforce
pathways to ensure national industry competitiveness.

The project will improve STEM technician education through the accelerated
integration of XR technologies into technician education programs. The goals of
the project are: 1) Assess XR technology adoption and attitudes in NSF ATE
program domains and create implementation and dissemination resources for two-
year colleges; 2) Develop and implement XR technology faculty professional
development for direct instruction; 3) Develop an XR technology website and
products repository for ATE projects and Open Educational Resources using XR
technology; and 4) Grow and broaden XR implementation by connecting high
schools, academia, and industry. It is expected that the project’s findings will
contribute to the development of best practices and inform the design of
effective XR experiences for technician students, provide evidence-based
recommendations on the use of XR technologies in technician education programs,
establish design principles for XR simulations, aiming to create inclusive and
accessible experiences for all users, including those with disabilities, varied
learning styles, and diverse cultural backgrounds, and offer designers best
practices to ensure these technologies benefit and impact all learners
effectively. The project will fill critical gaps in the current understanding of
how to effectively integrate XR technologies into technical education. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.