* 2331068
* Conference: Scholarship Support for the Richard Tapia Diversity in Computing Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Valerie Taylor, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2026
* USD 493,200.00

The Association for Computing Machinery's Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity
in Computing is one of the premier venues to acknowledge, promote and celebrate
diversity in all parts of the computing field. This award will provide
scholarships for the next three years of the conference. Scholarships will
facilitate attendance of undergraduate and graduate students, support faculty
from minority-serving institutions to attend and participate in conference
activities, and provide PhD students with opportunities to engage with diverse
leaders in the computing field via a Doctoral Consortium.

The technical presentations at Tapia Conferences cover topics such as AI,
quantum computing, cybersecurity, high performance computing. Through these
technical talks, invited speakers and the Ken Kennedy Distinguished Lecturer
provide insights and expertise into emerging and cutting edge computing issues
to deepen and broaden the technical knowledge of all attendees. In addition,
students are motivated and encouraged to complete their degrees through a range
of engagement activities. The conference is organized such that students have
opportunities to interact with faculty and professionals, receive advice, and
form communities. Finally, Tapia Conference series provides a venue for sharing
of good practices and building a robust research community via panels, birds-of-
a-feather sessions, and networking opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.