* 2331474
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Raising Rural Economic Development &amp; Innovation (RREDI)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Malinda McGowan, Independence Community College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Angelo State
University (TX), Richard Bland College of William & Mary (VA), Independence
Community College (KS), and Longwood University (VA). The Raising Rural Economic
Development & Innovation (RREDI) pilot seeks to explore how higher-ed based
innovation hubs can effectively address socio-economic underdevelopment in rural
areas by harnessing local resources and leveraging a multi-state cohort model.
This project is important because rural communities in the United States have
experienced significantly higher levels of poverty, unemployment, and food
insecurity since 2008 compared to other areas in the United States and these
communities must find innovative solutions for solving these challenges given
the current social and economic climate.

The RREDI cohort aims to collaborate with one another to leverage and position
their rural regions for socio-economic development through strategic academic
and industry partnerships. The framework of Project RREDI's approach is:
‘Collaboration Inside’ + ‘Collaboration Outside’ = ‘Economic Development’. The
higher education institutional partners will build collaborations within their
rurally located institutions and with industry partners to foster economic
development in their regions. The goal is to create innovation clusters (via the
hubs) for the purpose of harnessing local, regional, and cohort resources that
will generate socio-economic growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.