* 2331969
* CREST HBCU-RISE: Preparation and Characterization of Ceramics Embedded with Nanostructures for Specialized Applications
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ashok Batra, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

CREST HBCU-RISE: Preparation and Characterization of Ceramics Embedded with
Nanostructures for Specialized Applications

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
HBCU Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (CREST HBCU-RISE), this
project aims to address energy crisis by investigating materials for energy
production and energy conservation. Piezoelectric materials that generate
electricity when subjected to stress, and lead-free ceramics will be
investigated for this project. The project aims to develop efficient phosphor
coatings for diode pumped white light generation. This will have applications to
build energy efficient and robust lighting devices. The design of energy
efficient materials is an ongoing global effort. The project outcomes may
enhance the knowledge to build small scale piezoelectric devices with better
efficiency and LED bulbs with light output similar to that produced by
incandescent lightbulbs.

The project deals with preparation and characterization of glass ceramics and
piezoelectric ceramics. Multi-element oxide glasses embedded with Ag and R3+ (R
for rare-earth) ions will be made by the melt-quenching technique in ambient air
or hydrogen atmosphere. Europium and/or Samarium doped glasses will be
investigated for white light generation and optical hole burning (optical data
storage) applications. R3+ -doped glasses will be investigated for optical
sensing of temperature. Moreover, glass emission intensity may increase if
resonance exists between Ag metallic particles and rare-earth ions which absorb
405 nm. Hence, heat treatment as well as hydrogen atmosphere will be used to
induce silver metallic particles in glasses. The piezoelectric ceramic films
will be fabricated from lead-free chemicals (alkali niobates and metallic
titanates) by screen printing/Doctor Blading and electrospinning techniques.
Ferroelectric, piezoelectric and pyroelectric coefficients of the samples will
be measured to characterize them. Sample characteristics and their figures of
merit will be improved by embedding them with nanostructures. These samples will
be investigated for energy production, biosensing and other applications. This
CREST HBCU RISE project will improve the capacity building of the university by
improving the research facilities of the Physics Department and training many
more minority PhD students in future, into STEM disciplines. The Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology HBCU Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (CREST HBCU-RISE) program supports the expansion of
institutional research capacity as well as the successful training of doctoral
students, especially those from groups underrepresented in STEM at HBCUs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.