* 2331381
* ART: Fostering an entrepreneurial innovation ecosystem through training and university-led private-public partnerships
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Jialai Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,496,999.00

This project aims to accelerate the capacity for translational research at The
University of Alabama (UA), while strengthening its role in innovation in a
flourishing regional ecosystem. A main objective is to foster innovation and
entrepreneurial culture on campus to increase technology commercialization that
is supported by training and university led private-public partnerships. The
activities of the project will result in increasing the number of inventions,
patents, licenses, startups, and other forms of technology commercialization,
generating high-quality jobs, fostering U.S. global competitiveness, and
strengthening the U.S. economy. Training programs will foster growth of a
globally competitive and diverse research workforce and advance the scientific
and innovation skills. Specific efforts will be made to encourage recruitment of
students and staff from underrepresented and minority groups.

Evidence-based training and education curriculum will be developed to
continually train postdoctoral researchers and graduate students to be experts
in translational research activities. It will inform how to create new and
accessible educational pathways into emerging technology careers for persons
interested in participating in the research and innovation enterprise. Selected
translation projects that have established high probability of commercialization
potential based on market needs will be supported to mature the technologies and
develop proof-of-concept prototypes while simultaneously being used as training
vehicles to train postdoctoral researchers and graduate students. The project
will amalgamate diverse academia, government, and industry stakeholders to drive
technological advancements and address systemic/societal challenges through use-
inspired research to unleash new ideas, talent, pathways, and resources to
create a vibrant innovation ecosystem. It will cultivate targeted early
partnerships between researchers and industry, broaden institutional capacity
for translational research, enhance entrepreneurial knowledge of the research
community through training programs that prepare participants for non-academic
careers, and eliminate typical institutional barriers that hinder effective and
inclusive research translation via policy advocacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.