* 2331379
* EAGER: Orchestrating Productive Collaboration Among Students in Mathematics with Multimodal Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Erik Weitnauer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,623.00

This project addresses the need for more effective teacher-oriented support
tools for collaborative learning through the development of a machine-learning
powered technical innovation called MathCollaborate. Almost every student in the
United States is required to take Algebra 1, yet 40% of students did not achieve
even the lowest proficiency level measured by the National Assessment of
Educational Progress in 2019; and there is every indication that the pandemic
made the situation even worse. Among students of underserved groups, the
achievement levels are even lower. Providing more exciting and collaborative
ways for students to engage in rich mathematics activities and discussions is a
priority, but a challenge for many math teachers. The project activities
supporting the development and research of MathCollaborate will help address
these challenges by providing participating teachers with insights about
students' math performance, engagement, and discourse, both online and in-
person, enabling more focused math instruction. This project will help identify
effective instruction and pedagogy around the use of collaborative activities in
classroom settings, more broadly.

This project seeks to support math teachers and students as they engage in
collaborative mathematics activities and discussions by leveraging artificial
intelligence and machine learning for online collaborative math learning. The
intellectual merit of this project aligns to three overarching goals. First,
this project will examine how teachers utilize and conduct collaborative work in
their classrooms and explore how technology could be designed and implemented to
better support teachers’ needs. Second, the project team will explore the types
of collaborative paradigms that emerge as groups of students interact and
discuss mathematics content. Within this, we will leverage multiple data sources
to study the interactions and discourse exhibited by students during
collaborative activities as well as how these correlate with learning outcomes.
Finally, the project team will utilize what they learn in this project in
conjunction with multimodal machine-learning methods to build detectors of
productive and unproductive collaboration strategies. The team will develop
these detectors into a functional prototype of MathCollaborate and examine its
ability to support teachers’ orchestration of collaborative activities in their
classrooms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.