* 2331586
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Generating Regional Innovative Partnerships (GRIP)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Robert McMichael, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,969.00

The collaborative project aims to broaden the participation of two-year
institutions of higher education in emerging technology programs by increasing
the capacity and infrastructure to grow and sustain strong regional partnerships
at the following institutions: William Rainey Harper College (IL), Ivy Tech
Community College (IN), Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College (MS), Washburn
University Institute of Technology (KS), and WSU Tech (KS). Over its three-year
duration, this project will fund the development, implementation, and evaluation
of each institution’s new capacity to meaningfully engage in cross-sector
partnerships to advance efforts in workforce development. The collaborating
institutions (the cohort) will engage employers in ways that have not been done
before at their institutions by implementing the Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) advisory council model. This model is substantially
different from the traditional advisory committees currently used at the
colleges that generally meet twice per year, lack employer involvement, and are
not considering future labor market needs. In the BILT, regional employers have
co-leadership roles and collaborate with faculty to develop and update course
content by sharing the knowledge and skills needed for the workforce 12 to 36
months into the future. This deeper level of engagement will significantly
impact the quality and relevancy of academic programs and will make students
better prepared for the workforce. Building relationships with regional business
leaders will ensure classroom content is current and create opportunities for
student internships, apprenticeships, mentorship, and guest speakers.
Institutions will implement the BILT process using publicly available BILT
resources and a BILT consultant for the regional-specific industry partnerships
being targeted. The colleges will share lessons learned, best practices,
progress on individual institutional plans, and solutions to barriers to
implementing college-wide change.

The overall objective of this project is to build institutional capacity to grow
external partnerships for workforce development programs to make them more
responsive to regional workforce needs. Goals include developing, implementing,
and evaluating an institution-specific, replicable, scalable plan to transform
the current traditional advisory committee process into the BILT model to create
meaningful engagement with industry partners and identifying recruitment and
outreach strategies that focus on ensuring representation of underrepresented
individuals and businesses on the BILT teams. Institutional activities vary by
institution; however, shared activities include implementing the BILT advisory
council model for at least one academic program, using publicly available BILT
resources and a BILT consultant for targeting specific regional industries and
employers, and developing and implementing institution-specific strategic plans
to build capacity for growing and sustaining regional partnerships within its
respective regional innovation ecosystem. Collaborative activities include
creating a framework for implementing BILT at community and technical colleges
that is replicable and scalable; educating faculty and employers on the value of
the BILT for students, programs, and the regional economy; establishing a
schedule of virtual monthly meetings; creating a community of practice to share
best practices, progress on individual institutional plans, challenges faced,
and solutions designed to address barriers to implementing institutional change;
creating a collaboration platform for discussions and document storage;
convening an Administrators Working Group comprised of PIs and co-PIs to
communicate the status of cohort progress and ensure all deliverables are on
target; and planning an annual in-person cohort workshop adjacent to the annual
Workforce Development Institute conference hosted by the American Association of
Community Colleges. A third-party evaluator will assess the outcomes and impacts
of the cohort’s project. The broader impacts of this project will be increasing
partnerships between academia, industry, and others through the BILT which will
lead to strengthening and deepening employer engagement and enabling community
and technical colleges to contribute to and become equitable partners in the
regional innovation ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.