* 2331424
* EAGER: Privacy Preserving Synthetic Graph Generation for System Provenance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Kangkook Jee, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2025
* USD 123,198.00

System provenance has emerged as an area of prominent research in recent years,
garnering attention from both academia and industry. The escalating
proliferation of Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) campaigns has been a key
driver behind it. Compounding this issue is the growing dependency on open-
source software for supply chain components. The origins and potential threats
associated with these components are often unclear and difficult to trace,
thereby highlighting the importance of a dynamic security defense built on
system provenance data collection. However, lack of robust and reliable datasets
significantly hinders the progress of system provenance research. While data
collection itself is costly due to the overhead of deployment and maintenance,
the public sharing of existing datasets is also obstructed due to potential
privacy risks. The granular, comprehensive nature of system provenance carries
significant sources of privacy leakage, captured during dynamic runtime. System
provenance graphs often carry privacy-sensitive information, not only in their
explicit textual and numerical attributes but also in their implicit structural
relationships, which can easily span high-order interactions. Distinct in their
privacy implications from traditional security datasets, system provenance
datasets offer a new perspective for privacy research.

Composed of four separate research thrusts, the project aims to address the
discrepancy between the privacy risks associated with system provenance and the
high demand for publicly available system provenance datasets. Firstly, to
accurately assess and understand the privacy implications of system provenance
graphs, a systematic study will be conducted to identify potential privacy risks
associated with these graphs. Secondly, various approaches will be explored to
construct models for synthetic graph generation, leveraging paths extracted from
system provenance graphs. To restructure the synthetically generated paths and
reconstruct realistic synthetic graphs, a series of post-processing techniques
will be applied. Thirdly, a set of metrics will be designed to measure both the
forensic plausibility and the privacy protections provided by the generated
synthetic data. Finally, the project will develop synthetic provenance graph
generation techniques to encompass a wider range of graph-structured datasets
for system and security applications. The project is founded on extensive system
provenance datasets from real-world deployments, collected with end-user consent
and under the university's IRB review.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.