* 2331354
* I-Corps: A magnetic resonance-compatible touchscreen with video display
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Sophia Vinci-Booher, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a drug-free strategy for alleviating anxiety during magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). One current solution is sedation, however, many
patients who are averse to MRI are also averse to sedation. Consequently, many
patients choose to avoid MRI procedures, even when recommended for effective
medical treatment. The proposed technology is an MRI-compatible digital tablet
that may provide patients with digital touchscreen access to their smartphones
during MRI to alleviated anxiety without sedation. The field of MRI peripherals
is an emerging field that provides MRI-compatible devices for patients to use
during an MRI scan. Currently, MRI peripherals are limited to basic devices that
are generally used for safety or physical comfort, such as button presses and
cushions. Additionally, this technology may be used by researchers to expand the
scope of research on human brain function. The proposed digital tablet offers
researchers a versatile, interactive MRI peripheral that may deliver a wide
variety of experimental manipulations involving complex actions. The proposed
technology may increase patient health outcomes by reducing patient aversion to
necessary medical procedures and expand the scope of basic research on human
brain function.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an interactive digital
tablet that may be used by patients and research participants while undergoing
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning. The proposed technology uses special
signal-driver circuitry and shielding to safely function in the strong
electromagnetic fields required for MRI without impacting the quality of the
images acquired. The spatial and temporal resolution of the display and touch-
sensing technology is on par with current state-of-the-art digital tablets and
smartphones, allowing for seamless interactions even in pediatric imaging.
Additionally, the proposed digital tablet provides an advantage over current
technology for studies of human brain function that can receive input (e.g., a
button press) but cannot generate output (i.e., images on a display screen).
Research has demonstrated that using the proposed technology in studies of human
brain function produced significantly different brain function in several brain
regions when compared to other current solutions. The digital tablet broadens
human brain research by providing researchers with a device that can receive
input and provide output within the cylinder of the MRI while a participant is
undergoing MRI scanning, supporting a much larger variety of actions, such as
handwriting/drawing and tablet use as well as personal smartphone use. The
proposed digital tablet may have application for reducing patient anxiety during
clinical MRI procedures and for studying brain function in MRI research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.