* 2331551
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC:Increasing our Innovation SCOREs: Symbiotic Collaboration of Regional Ecosystems
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rachel Wagner, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,727.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Seattle
University, Cal Poly Humboldt State University, St. Francis University, St.
Mary’s University, and Utah Tech University. The EPIIC award is to establish an
innovation ecosystem in a cohort-based model specifically designed for primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs). The cohort comprises a diverse range of
institutions with varying demographics, sizes, missions, and locations. The
primary goals of this project are twofold: (1) to develop innovation capacity
within the cohort institutions and (2) to collectively establish best practices
and foster a community of innovation for PUIs. This regional ecosystem
encompasses several rural institutions, many of which cater to low-income and
first-generation students, while others have a significant representation of
historically underrepresented students in STEM fields. The cohort is deeply
committed to implementing institutional changes that expand access to career
opportunities requiring advanced skills in their respective regions. The
overarching aim is to cultivate a mutually beneficial relationship among the
cohort members, empowering each institution to play an expanded role within the
regional economy.

The award's purpose is to establish a Symbiotic Collaboration for Regional
Ecosystem (SCORE) cohort, which introduces an innovative approach to enhancing
STEM innovation capacity. This approach stems from the cohort's undergraduate-
focused mission and its strong emphasis on students and the communities they
serve. The proposed project envisions a community-based approach, fostering the
development of best practices in various aspects of innovation and partnerships,
including workforce development, experiential learning, research and innovation,
industry partnerships, investors, entrepreneurship, and regulatory issues.
Operating as a community of practice, the cohort of primarily undergraduate
institutions will collaborate, learn, and grow together while upholding the
values of inclusive excellence as a central aspect of the project. The greatest
collective impact the cohort will have will come from the increased capacity to
serve the regions’ economic and community needs and to expand institutional
capacity to provide access for students into an advanced, quickly evolving STEM
workforce. A broader impact of this cohort-based learning community for
innovation will result in infrastructure for innovation capacity, continued
collaborations, enhancing innovation capacity for the STEM workforce, and
developing models and best practices for PUIs nationwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.