* 2331538
* I-Corps: Efficient Wireless Power Transfer Technology Enabling Transportation Electrification
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Hua Zhang, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of wireless power transfer (WPT) technology. Compared to the
existing power systems, the proposed technology may increase power transfer
efficiency while reducing cost and weight. This may benefit a wide variety of
applications including the charging of low-power consumer electronic devices and
high-power electric vehicles (EVs). The proposed technology is thin enough to be
integrated into an electronic device without increasing its size and thickness.
In addition, in EV charging applications, it may significantly improve the
mobility of EVs by removing the charging cables and providing convenience to
customers. Each wireless charging pad works as an independent power system with
a secured data-link service for customers to support intelligent charging demand
and management. The applications may be expanded to biomedical implants to
eliminate wire-connected chargers for patients and bring benefits in healthcare
area. The proposed technology also may be applied in high-voltage power systems
to support the penetration of renewable energy and distributed energy resources
with high-voltage isolation capabilities.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of wireless power transfer
(WPT) technology based on magnetic resonance. The proposed technology uses a
resonant circuit topology design and a special magnetic coupler structure
implementation. It has been demonstrated to achieve multi-kW power transfer with
over 97% efficiency across a distance up to 8 inches, which represents state-of-
the-art performance. In addition, the magnetic coupler structure is optimized to
confine the magnetic fields within a limited area and reduce magnetic field
emissions to the surrounding environment. The technology is designed to satisfy
the safety requirements proposed in both the IEEE C95.2 standard and the
international commission on non-ionizing radiation protection (ICNIRP)
guideline. The proposed WPT technology targets high power, high efficiency, long
distance, and compact (high power density) applications, spanning from low power
to high-power systems and may be used in the power, energy, and biomedical
areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.