* 2331932
* NERC-NSFGEO SMARTWATER: Diagnosing controls of pollution hot spots and hot moments and their impact on catchment water quality
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2028
* USD 499,997.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award recommendation, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget that supports scientists at
institutions in their respective countries. River water pollution has
consequences for human and environmental health, economic prosperity, and water
security. Recent advances in sensing and data science provide unprecedented
opportunities for a step change in the approaches used to identify and
understand sources, dynamics, and consequences of water pollution in complex
landscapes. The proposed “SmartWater” project will generate innovations in
experimental analytics, data science and mathematical modelling to yield new
mechanistic understanding of the dynamic drivers of multi-contaminant pollution
hotspots (locations) and hot moments (times) in a changing water world.
SmartWater will integrate environmental sensing, machine learning, and
mathematical modelling with stakeholders' catchment knowledge to transform the
way we diagnose, understand, predict, and manage water pollution hotspots and
hot moments. SmartWater will provide the basis for improved decision-support and
water quality management frameworks, which will be developed with and
implemented by partner stakeholders.

SmartWater’s multi-disciplinary, NERC-NSF collaborative team will unravel the
complex physical, chemical, and biological controls that determine water quality
by combining next-generation water pollution monitoring, big data analysis,
numerical models, and catchment knowledge. This new capability to diagnose and
predict the emergence of water pollution hotspots and hot moments, and outcomes
for catchment water quality dynamics and water quality management will be
demonstrated at experimental observatories in the United Kingdom and the United
States. SmartWater will work with stakeholder communities to co-create pathways
for successfully implementing practical and policy-relevant water quality
management practices. SmartWater will directly support design and implementation
of future management strategies in the face of regional climate and
environmental change by determining the impact of non-linear pollution hotspots
and hot moments on catchment water quality dynamics. This will improve
understanding of changing local exposures in river basins as well as large-scale
mass fluxes of pollutants and their downstream export.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.