* 2331351
* ART: Facilitating Impactful New Entrepreneurs to Accelerate Research Translation (FINE ART)
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Peter Reinhart, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,500,000.00

The focus of this project is to identify, foster relationships with, and
facilitate the development of emerging entrepreneurs to increase the capacity of
the University of Massachusetts Amherst to realize the translational impacts of
its well-developed basic research enterprise. The expected outcome is to create
a sustainable innovation engine to prepare students and faculty to contribute to
the innovation economy, shorten timelines between ideation and de-risked
enterprises ready for significant seed-round and venture capitalization, and
establish enterprises that embrace DEI and develop technologies that address
important societal needs. The project will equip diverse groups of scientists
and engineers from undergraduates to senior faculty with skills to extend
research excellence towards impactful translational outcomes.

To develop such translational skills faculty, postdoctoral, and student
researchers will be embedded in a network of ART (Accelerating Research
Translation) Ambassadors who will serve as role models, peer mentors and
advocates for societally impactful translational research, trained and supported
to develop both technical and non-technical or ‘soft’ translational research
skills, and provided with resources, including microgrants and seed grants, to
support and accelerate specific translational research milestones. The ART
project team will manage an umbrella organization to serve as 1) an enabler of
interdisciplinary teamwork across traditional ‘silos’, 2) facilitator of new
‘teachers’ in the form of industry leaders/serial entrepreneurs, 3) a home and
resource for translational intellectual development, 4) manage Seed
Translational Research Projects (STRPs) to accelerate specific technology
development projects and 5) establish a specific DEI sub-team that engages with
all other ART working groups. The project team will also collaborate with
external partners and other ART sites to develop best practices for an
innovation ecosystem across the often-neglected region of Western Massachusetts.
This project will unlock the translational impacts of the strong basic research
enterprise at UMass Amherst.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.