* 2331730
* Conference: IACM 2nd Mechanistic Machine Learning &amp; Digital Engineering for Computational Science, Engineering &amp; Technology (MMLDE-CSET); El Paso, Texas; 24-27 September 20
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Zhengtao Gan, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,885.00

This award is to provide travel and registration support to 20 high school, 15
undergraduate and 20 graduate students, 5 post-doctoral fellows, and 3 high
school teachers to participate in-person or virtually in the 2nd Mechanistic
Machine Learning & Digital Engineering for Computational Science, Engineering &
Technology (MMLDE-CSET) Conference to be held in El Paso, Texas from 24-27
September 2023. The objective of MMLDE-CSET is to provide a platform for
intradisciplinary collaboration between experts in engineering, basic sciences,
mathematics, and data and computer science from academia, industry, and federal
entities, who have interests in developing and applying machine learning and
digital twins solutions to complex technological problems based on mechanistic
methods and computational engineering and science paradigms. Additionally, the
conference strives to facilitate the development of the next generation of
engineers, scientists, and researchers, through education and dissemination,
with a strong focus on underrepresent groups. The objective of this conference
pertinent to this grant is to enable and expose the workforce of tomorrow to the
exponentially growing fields of machine learning and digitals twins in the
context of mechanistic based computational science and engineering methods.
There are several activities dedicated or geared towards students. Undergraduate
students will have an opportunity to present their research in an exclusive
education track composed of oral and poster sessions. Two short one-day courses
targeted towards graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be
offered on digital engineering, mechanistic data science, and basic application
of ML as applied to STEM fields. Three lunchtime education panels on curriculum,
teaching and learning approaches, and funding, respectively, will be held for
general audiences. Besides these carefully designed activities, students will be
able to attend plenary talks and general technical sessions and interact with
industry in specifically themed sessions.

This project is supported by the Advanced Manufacturing (AM) Program, the
Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (BMMB) Program, the Engineering for Civil
Infrastructure (ECI) Program, and the Mechanics of Materials and Structures
(MoMS) Program of the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI)
Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.