* 2331003
* Collaborative Research: An Effective and Efficient Low-Cost Alternate to Cell Aware Test Generation for Cell Internal Defects
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Society’s growing reliance on intelligent electronic systems risks significant
disruption and loss from integrated circuit failure. Mitigating this threat
requires building electronic systems that have been extensively tested to ensure
that they are fully functional and defect-free. Modern integrated circuits
contain billions of transistors that makes a complete exhaustive test of circuit
functionality impractical and infeasible. Such tests are generated in practice,
by considering the impact of likely manufacturing defects such as shorts and
opens at various circuit locations, and developing a set of input test patterns
whose correct binary output is altered by the existence of any targeted fault,
identifying a bad integrated circuit. However, it is not practical to model and
target all possible malfunctions in a large circuit, especially those that
employ deeply scaled technologies, low supply voltages and high clock speeds. As
a consequence, some faulty circuits inevitably escape post-manufacture testing
because of incomplete test coverage and cause integrated circuit failure when
deployed in operation. The goal of this research is to develop better and
significantly more cost-effective test methods for state-of-the-art integrated
circuits that can significantly impact the affordability and reliability of
future computing systems that are increasingly pervasive in day-to-day societal
applications and critical for national defense. The project will also help train
new students in this strategic area, consistent with recent priorities for US
leadership in semiconductor manufacturing.

Traditional test methods for integrated circuits generate test inputs that
explicitly detect faulty behavior only at the terminals of the standard cell
building blocks and the interconnections between these cells. It is now widely
known that detection of defective devices can be enhanced by considering defects
within the cell circuitry as well. To do this, currently, faults are injected
one at a time at likely defect locations in the cell layout, followed by
exhaustive circuit simulation of all possible input patterns to obtain cell
level tests. The generated tests are then delivered to cells embedded in logic
circuitry using circuit-level test generation algorithms. This has major
drawbacks. First, it is expensive to characterize the full range of resistive
defects at every possible location in large cells using exhaustive circuit
simulation. In practice, only ideal shorts and opens are simulated, leading to
test escapes. Second, this does not consider the significant impact of a timing
delay in one cell on the delays of other interconnected cells. Third, existing
test generation techniques such as cell aware test, can increase test size and
application time by greater than fivefold. To address these issues, this project
seeks to develop a new testing methodology that avoids exhaustive simulation,
but instead uses analytical reasoning to generate tests for cell internal
defects. Algorithms based on this analytic approach can generate compact tests
that cover defects spanning large resistance ranges without the need for
repeated simulations. Additionally, the delay impact of a single defect that
affects multiple cells can also be effectively captured, minimizing the escape
of timing faults.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.