* 2331318
* Travel: Improving the Utility of Haptic Feedback in Upper-Limb Prosthesis Control: Establishing user-centric guidelines for engineering innovation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Jeremy Brown, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 42,200.00

This award will provide partial travel support for U.S. participants to attend
the 2023 IEEE World Haptics Conference, which will take place July 10-13, 2023,
in Delft, The Netherlands. There is a divide between the reality of upper limb
prostheses and the needs of prosthesis users, in terms of usability, reliability
and cost. To help bridge this divide, the U.S. participants are organizing a
workshop on “Improving the Utility of Haptic Feedback in Upper-Limb Prosthesis
Control: Establishing User-Centric Guidelines for Engineering Innovation” at the
2023 IEEE World Haptics Conference, a premier international venue for exchanging
ideas and innovations related to haptic (touch-based) technology. This workshop
will bring together prosthesis users and prosthesis researchers to create
guidelines for future research. Attendees will hear from leading researchers in
the field, and actual prosthesis users, and will have an opportunity to engage
in conversations that help shape the future of prosthesis technology. The goal
of this travel support is to broaden participation in this workshop beyond
established researchers, to include both prosthesis users and student
researchers who may not have the research funds to support their own travel.

The U.S. attendees include five prosthesis users, three prosthesis researchers,
ten student researchers, and four workshop organizers. The outcome of this
workshop will be a set of guiding principles that can be used by researchers in
the community when designing future haptic feedback technologies for prosthesis
use. In addition, these guidelines will be used to create a core set of study
outcomes that can be used by researchers to standardize future research, and by
clinicians and prosthesis users to compare and interpret future research
advances. Priority consideration for student travel grants will be given to
women and minority students. Workshop outcomes will be disseminated through the
workshop website https://sites.google.com/gcloud.utah.edu/2023-whc-
workshop/home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.