* 2331394
* Conference Support: Participation of US Students and Junior Faculty to the 6th World Congress on Micro and Nano Manufacturing (WCMNM 2023); Evanston, Illinois; 18-21 September 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ping Guo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 30,000.00

The grant provides support for 30 students and junior faculty from US
institutions to participate in the 6th World Congress on Micro and Nano
Manufacturing (WCMNM 2023) in Evanston, Illinois, 18-21 September 2023. WCMNM is
a premier global conference on micro-nano manufacturing and draws attendance of
150-300 people each year from North America, Europe, and Asia. WCMNM serves as
an important platform for exchanging research ideas and fostering collaborations
for both academia and industry. Over 80 technical presentations and posters are
expected to be presented at the conference. A wide range of topics, including
mechanics and dynamics of process behaviors at the micro and nanoscale;
miniaturization of machines and equipment; micro-factory paradigms; microscale
metrology; materials handling; multi-scale modeling and simulation; design for
micro-scale manufacturing; micro and nano additive manufacturing technologies,
etc., will be covered.

Participating students receiving travel funds from this grant will learn from
the unique intellectual environment by attending technical presentations by
leading international experts in micro/nano manufacturing, and by interacting
with peer researchers from around the world. They will have opportunities to
network with researchers and engineers from around the world as well as graduate
students working in the manufacturing field. This experience will be valuable
for graduate students to gain new insights about future career paths and
emerging research frontiers. In addition, becoming involved with professional
societies will motivate their intellectual curiosity through developing a
network of professional contacts. By involving keynote and invited speakers from
the three co-organizing societies, this conference will provide graduate
students and junior faculty a platform to facilitate international collaboration
and research exchange. Specific outreach efforts will be devoted to advertising
the conference and the student travel award program to underrepresented
minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.