* 2331669
* SLES: Foundations of Safety-Aware Learning in the Wild
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Sharon Li, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2026
* USD 793,065.00

Machine learning (ML) models today must operate amid increasingly dynamic and
unpredictable environments. A crucial challenge for models deployed in the wild
is that they will encounter unknown out-of-distribution (OOD) data, in addition
to the known in-distribution (ID) data. Current approaches for training ML
models, particularly in a supervised setting, are known to be brittle and lack
necessary safety awareness, e.g., OOD data may be blindly classified as a known
class with high confidence. The project's novelties are developing safety-aware
learning methodologies and theoretical guarantees that can provably detect OOD
data as models are deployed in the wild. The project's impacts are to enhance
safety for a broad range of downstream applications that depend on artificial
intelligence (AI) classification, including transportation, healthcare,
commerce, and scientific discovery, so that they can properly handle unexpected
input.

This project will make AI understand better what it knows and doesn't know, so
that it abstains from unexpected input instead of wrongly classifying with
supreme confidence. Technically, the team of researchers will design new
algorithms that can leverage a large amount of real-world unlabeled data that
arises ubiquitously in the model's deployment environment.  Learning from such
data can be challenging due to its heterogeneity (mixed with ID and OOD data)
and non-stationarity (changes over time). To address the challenges, the project
designs new machine learning algorithms that provably use unlabeled wild data
for OOD safety-aware learning, online OOD detection to adapt to changing
environments, and OOD detection with foundation models. The learning framework
will be evaluated by a balance of empirical experimentation and theoretical
understanding.

This research is supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and Open Philanthropy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.