* 2331704
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Colleges Aligning Resources to Elevate Education and Regional STEM (CAREERS) Workforce
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Loretta Silverman, Ohlone Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project is a collaboration between Jefferson College (MO) and Ohlone
College (CA). By increasing institutional capacity, this project will allow
community colleges to expand their reach to the research and collaborative
opportunities of the emerging innovation ecosystem, which has been out of their
scope to date. To enable research development, Ohlone College and Jefferson
College are working together to create the capacity infrastructure that will
help their institutions and other similar institutions to support further
engagement and attainment of extramural research funding in research and
innovation. Because the partnerships between educational institutions, industry,
and other organizations in the innovation ecosystem will be unique for each
locale, the developed workforce model can potentially be adapted for customized
collaborations that strengthen regional innovation ecosystems.

This collaboration has the following infrastructure and capacity building goals:
a) building and strengthening a grants and sponsored research infrastructure
including training faculty in grant exploration and development, b) developing
and expanding relationships with industry and educational partners, and c)
establishing research pathways with 4-year college and university partners to
create inter-institutional undergraduate research opportunities. The capacity
building infrastructure for Jefferson College will include implementing a robust
grants management system, bolstering industry connections through business and
industry leadership team (BILT) mechanisms, and developing research training
pathways with 4-year research institutions. For Ohlone, this will consist of
branding the biotech program to better attract local partners, increasing
research capacity for partnerships with industry, community, and educational
partners, and developing a strategic plan for recruitment and retention of a
diverse student body and future biotechnology workforce. The best practice
sponsored research toolbox developed by this project could be shared with other
community colleges as a template across the state and nationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.