* 2331065
* EAGER: End-to-End Learning of Paradoxes and Interpretations for Data Storytelling
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jian Pei, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 125,000.00

Can we use AI and machine learning to automatically create compelling narratives
from extensive data sets, like business data, demographics, and economic
statistics? This project aims to answer this question in the affirmative and
make data storytelling accessible to everyone, even those without advanced big
data skills. Data storytelling is a powerful technique for understanding and
extracting valuable insights from large data sets. However, it can be daunting
for individuals who lack the technical expertise to navigate and interpret big
data effectively. In this project, we propose an innovative approach to
automatic data storytelling by learning from paradoxes found within a large data
set. Paradoxes are unexpected contradictions that exist within data, and they
hold the potential to uncover critical and surprising information. By harnessing
these paradoxes, we can craft engaging narratives that highlight the most
interesting and important aspects of the data, especially for decision-makers
and data consumers. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop open-source
software that facilitates creating compelling data stories. The outcomes and
findings will be made publicly available, ensuring that individuals and
organizations can benefit from this project. Additionally, the insights gained
from this research will be incorporated into data science courses, empowering
future data storytellers with the necessary skills to communicate complex
information effectively. By democratizing data storytelling through the use of
paradoxes and making it accessible to a wider audience, we can unlock the hidden
potential of extensive datasets and strengthen data-driven decision-making in
various domains.

This project will address the core challenges of paradox identification through
two main thrusts. First, we will focus on investigating concise and non-
redundant representations of statistical relationships among variables in data.
Our goal is to formulate representations that are both concise and minimal,
ensuring efficiency in conveying information. To demonstrate the feasibility and
potential of our approach, we will specifically examine Simpson's paradox in
this pilot project. Second, building on the established model, we will develop
efficient and scalable algorithms to find data paradoxes and their
interpretations. Our focus will be on exploring the efficiency, completeness,
and non-redundancy of the learning process, using real-world datasets for
evaluation. The knowledge and insights gained from this research will be
integrated into data science education and training programs, enhancing the
skills and capabilities of future data scientists. This project's transformative
nature lies in its recognition of data storytelling as a fundamental approach
within the realm of data science. The algorithms and tools we develop will
substantially enhance the abilities of data scientists, statisticians, and
business intelligence analysts to explore data, uncover new knowledge, and
deliver valuable insights. As a result, these advancements will have wide-
ranging applications and be of significant value to diverse communities. By
addressing the challenges of paradox learning and advancing the field of data
storytelling, this project will facilitate the exploration and interpretation of
complex data, ultimately enabling more informed decision-making to a wider set
of people and driving innovation across various sectors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.