* 2331925
* I-Corps:  Deep-Scale Evolution for Industrial Shape Nesting
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Horn, Northern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an approach to manufacturing that may reduce material waste by
fifty percent (50%). Manufacturers cutting shaped pieces from expensive
substrates (steel, titanium, leather, composites) use shape nesting software to
fit as many pieces as possible on substrate blanks and remnants to minimize
wasted material. However, current shape nesting software often falls short of
optimal material usage. Current products nest shapes sequentially, placing each
piece on the substrate one after another. The proposed technology is designed to
improve the placement of items on a 2D substrate more efficiently. The
technology is based on the simulated evolution of multiple, inter-dependent
species into a tightly knit, stable and productive ecosystem. The result is a
substantial reduction in wasted material. In the auto industry, for example, the
proposed technology may more tightly nest body parts to be cut from steel
sheets, reducing the amount of raw steel needed as well as the scrap steel,
which requires substantial energy to melt and reuse. The technology may be
applied to cloth and leather (textiles), aluminum and steel (shipbuilding), or
titanium and composites (aerospace). The reductions in scrap may make the US
economy more efficient and workers more productive. Reduced demand for mined
metals may have environmental benefits, as will the reduced need for landfill
space (since trim waste is often unusable). More efficient manufacturing of
parts from raw materials may provide for sustainable resource management, save
energy, lower greenhouse gas emissions, reduce pollution and the strain on
ecosystems, and make final products more affordable for consumers.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an algorithm for simulating
evolution of cooperation using an ecosystem strategy. The proposed algorithm for
deep-scale evolution uses massively-parallel simultaneous consideration of
global layout patterns, a new approach distinct from the sequential piece
placement and local layout decisions used in available nesting products.
Millions of species (each a possible placement of a shaped piece on a flat
substrate in 2D nesting) compete to cover the 2D material. The biggest set of
cooperating (i.e., non-competing) species emerges. The ecosystem perspective
favors large sets of cooperative species over individual, locally successful
species. Co-evolutionary selection pressure pushes the population toward
globally optimal total solutions. This emphasis on cooperative groups of
solution components often will find tighter, more efficient nestings of 2D
shapes (or packings of 3D pieces) than current sequential techniques that place
one shape at a time, or pack one item before the next. Recent studies comparing
commercial 2D shape nesting software products on one problem showed that the
proposed technology nested twelve pieces, while the commercial product offerings
nested only ten or eleven. The performance of the proposed technology for both
speed and output quality may be used to scale up to larger nesting problems from
industry. Based on the evolution of populations, the algorithm is inherently
massively parallel. As with deep learning neural networks, the proposed approach
depends on the exponential growth in computing power of graphics processing
units (GPUs).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.