* 2331817
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Mechanisms and fate of fire-induced carbonate formation in a cold desert ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* David Huber, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 18,216.00

Drylands have always been linked with wildfires, but climate change and shifts
in vegetation have altered the fire regime and carbon balance of these sensitive
ecosystems. Wildfires consume vegetation, releasing stored organic carbon as
carbon dioxide (CO2), a greenhouse gas. Recently, however, the accumulation of
salts in the form of soil carbonates (i.e., inorganic carbon) have been observed
after dryland wildfires. The mechanisms of fire-induced carbonate accumulation
(FICA) and its importance to long-term carbon storage remain unknown. This
research begins to address a gap in our knowledge about the origin, fate, and
impact of fire-induced soil carbonates as wildfire activity is at its historic
highest levels in drylands. Here, researchers characterize the environmental
controls on fire-induced carbonate accumulation using a prescribed rangeland
fire slated for September 2023 in an already intensively instrumented catchment
of the US Department of Agriculture’s Northwest Watershed Research Center (NWRC)
and Critical Zone Observatory (CZO). The research is part of an
interdisciplinary group of researchers and land managers collaborating to
enhance understanding of wildland fires to create greater regional impact. This
research will characterize the abiotic factors contributing to fire-induced
carbonate accumulation (FICA) using an experimental fire in September 2023,
located within the cold desert, sagebrush steppe ecosystem characteristic of
southern Idaho and the surrounding region. A combination of factors including
soil pH, calcium availability, soil carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration, and
extracellular enzymatic activity appear to lead to FICA, but the exact
mechanisms involved, and the source and fate of this carbon remain unresolved.
Uncommon in rangeland wildfire studies, the project will 1) collect soil samples
just before the fire, and contrast these with post-fire conditions to facilitate
future investigation of controls on FICA, and 2) measure soil CO2, moisture, and
temperature conditions before, during, and for 9 months after the fire – a
unique and perishable dataset, and something that has never been done to study
the mechanisms driving carbonate formation caused by fires. Sample collection
and sensor measurements will be stratified across north- and south-facing
aspects, and burn severity treatments (i.e., vegetation types) to understand
landscape controls on FICA. Soil samples are also considered perishable and will
be archived for future investigation beyond initial pH, EC, and carbonate
determination.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.