* 2331936
* EAGER: Toward a Decentralized Cross-administrator Zone Management System: Policy and Technology
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The problem of radio spectrum congestion limits the growth of wireless
communications and sensing, which is essential for all aspects of modern
society. This project investigates use of Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT),
of which the famous example is Blockchain, to support automated and secure
dynamic allocation mechanisms that enhance spectrum efficiency and availability.
The project explores use of DLT for interaction among mutually distrustful Zone
Management Systems (ZMS), a general category of automatic spectrum management
mechanisms that includes currently deployed Spectrum Access Systems and future
derivatives. Multiple ZMS must collaborate even though they do not trust each
other, as in current SAS where competing administrators manage a single shared
band, or in future radio dynamic zones like a radio telescope observatory where
the observatory ZMS trades spectrum back and forth with the ZMS for a
neighboring mobile wireless operator. Use of DLT enables a new collaboration
approach that reaches agreement faster, delivers more optimal outcomes, is
better protected against malicious ZMS, is more auditable by regulators, and
enhances data privacy for spectrum users compared to current SAS designs. This
project investigates DLT for ZMS collaboration from technical and policy
perspectives and seeks to impact future Federal Communications Commission
regulations.

Collaboration among multiple SAS today relies on each SAS running the same
decision algorithm on the same input data. The new architecture explored in this
project assumes each ZMS runs a proprietary decision algorithm on proprietary
data – which increases efficiency while enhancing innovation and flexibility –
and achieves coherent spectrum assignment decisions through a distributed
agreement process and an auditable record to prevent cheating. Within the new
architecture, this project focuses on policies and enabling technologies for
privacy-preserving information exchange and Byzantine-resilient collaboration
among participating ZMS. Project work includes: (1) Evaluate multiple DLT
technologies such as proof-of-stake systems that are more energy-efficient than
Blockchain. (2) Identify essential data that must be exchanged among ZMS. (3)
Develop a lightweight (i.e., time bounded), secure, reliable, and trustworthy
DLT-based protocol for assignments. (4) Explore an off-chain secure contract
execution approach to reduce protocol execution complexity. (5) Apply privacy-
enhancing technologies including multiparty computation and trusted execution
environments to safeguard the privacy of ZMS proprietary data and algorithms and
spectrum users. (6) Investigate methods to satisfy FCC policy goals such as ways
to assure contiguous channel and geographic assignments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.