* 2331228
* EAGER: Identifying the genetic determinants of plasmid-dependent phage host range
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Michael Baym, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Many functional genes, including genes involved in antibiotic resistance, are
found on plasmids in bacteria. These plasmids are able to move from one
bacterium to another, through horizontal gene transfer. Certain viruses,
bacteriophages, exploit these plasmids to infect bacteria. A recent discovery
suggests that these plasmid-dependent phages are common and readily discoverable
from the environment. This project aims to leverage a unique collection of novel
plasmid-dependent phages to answer outstanding questions related to the biology
and evolution of this unusual group of viruses. In particular, this project
concerns the identification of genetic factors that determine host range of
plasmid-dependent phages. Broader impacts of the project include toolsets for
high-throughput characterization of phages, as well as protocols and software
that will aid the community more broadly. Students will be trained in
bioinformatic analysis and will be involved in the phage discovery part of the
research project. The enhanced understanding of the molecular biology of these
phages and host range may eventually provide novel solutions to the problem of
antibiotic resistance.

Many functional genes, including determinants of antibiotic resistance, are
readily transferred on conjugative plasmids. Plasmid-dependent phages appear to
target these vectors of gene transfer, possibly exerting a negative frequency
dependent selective pressure on traits such as antibiotic resistance. The
investigators aim to leverage their unique collection of novel plasmid-dependent
phages to answer outstanding questions related to the biology and evolution of
this unusual group of viruses. Employing a receptor-guided discovery platform
using engineered target bacteria for high-throughput discovery, the
investigators have identified 51 new plasmid-dependent phages that are dependent
on IncP conjugative plasmids, share between 82.5% - 99% average nucleotide
identity, and contain no accessory genes. However, despite their close genetic
identity, the phages demonstrate large differences in host range that is
independent of plasmid presence. One aim of the research project is to
interrogate how small genetic differences can manifest as large changes in host
specificity using bioinformatics and engineering and testing mutations that
result in changes in host range. Another aim is to determine the genetic
mechanisms of the variation within host range and shed light on how the IncP
conjugative plasmid phages are able to adapt to the diverse biology and
physiology, and perhaps evade the defenses, of a wide range of bacterial hosts.
More broadly, these experiments will illuminate the genetic mechanisms by which
phages adapt to new hosts via allelic variation, and how the hosts, in turn,
evade and defend against phages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.