* 2331319
* ART: Research to Solutions, Building Translational Capacity in the Central Florida Innovation Ecosystem
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Svetlana Shtrom, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,873,888.00

This project will accelerate the University of Central Florida’s (UCF’s)
contributions to the regional and global innovation ecosystem centered in the
Central Florida area. UCF is part of a strong and supportive innovation
ecosystem primed for research translation. UCF has partnerships and
collaborations with the sectors of space, aerospace, health, defense (optics and
lasers, AI/ML/computer vision, digital twin, simulation, and modeling), energy,
and many others. Accelerating UCF research translation will create an enormous
economic development opportunity since UCF already produces high levels of
fundamental research. This project will create the infrastructure needed to
connect fundamental research produced by UCF and to train diverse talent to meet
the needs of the Central Florida ecosystem and the nation’s ecosystem. Because
of the industry sectors (space, aerospace, defense, and energy), and the global
nature of the companies involved, this project will have national and global
positive impact on economic growth, societal wellbeing, and national security.

This project will enhance the research translation capacity of UCF, a Hispanic
Serving Institution (HSI), by building missing and by leveraging existing
infrastructure with the assistance of mentoring institution, Georgia Tech, a
high research translational institution. The project will undertake activities
along the following key thrusts: (1) Enhance research translation capacity by
creating a Venture Lab to directly support translation, and by reorganizing
entrepreneurial support organizations to follow a more advanced model similar to
our mentor institution. (2) Expand the educational and training opportunities
for students across campus with reprograming and expansions of evidence-based
entrepreneurship education at the colleges of engineering and computer science
and business; and expand the pathways graduate students can pursue after
graduation to include startup development and industrial research and
development. (3) Recruit, mentor, and support six seed translational research
projects aimed to be developed into successful technology startups. (4) Create,
expand, and sustain a network of entrepreneurship and innovation ambassadors
from industry and community partners in support of the project objectives 1-3.

The project is partially supported by NSF’s Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation program. Partial funding for this project was provided by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program, which supports
improvements in STEM teaching and learning for all undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.