* 2331373
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Managing Culture Change on Two Fronts: Strengthening Our Capacity to Develop Partnerships
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Douglas Dunham, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: The College
of New Jersey (TCNJ) and the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire (UWEC). TCNJ and
UWEC are teaching-focused, research-active primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs) with strong traditions of faculty governance. As EPIIC partners, they
will leverage their common strengths to increase capacity for partnerships in
alignment with their institutional strategic plans. They will learn from their
institutional differences to enhance their institutions’ capacity to engage
effectively in their regional innovation ecosystems. This cohort represents the
segment of PUI/ERIs (emerging research institutions) that have a solid baseline
of research support for faculty in terms of grants offices and relevant policies
and procedures; research-active faculty who generally draw on undergraduates for
their primary lab support; strategic plans that encourage broad-based engagement
with the broader community and external partners; and a passion for creating
“real-life” opportunities through external partnerships that will strengthen
student preparation for futures in the workforce or success in graduate/doctoral
studies as well as strengthen our curricular offerings. The goal of the proposed
project is to mitigate institutional inward-facing and outward-facing cultural
issues that prevent each of these institutions from reaching their full
potential in forming and sustaining external partnerships. To accomplish this
goal, during the grant period, TCNJ will create an advisory council of leaders
with regular meetings and expected outcomes. TCNJ will inventory existing
partnerships and develop a seamless approach to partner with industry at various
levels of engagement. A key component of this work will be leveraging Handshake
as a means of connecting students with industry opportunities and tracking
corporate partnerships. This project will enable TCNJ and UWEC to leverage
underutilized potential and improve institutional capacity and positioning for
future partnership development; increase student engagement in use-inspired
projects and in answering research and technology questions, leading to enhanced
student success; encourage research-inactive faculty to engage again with
research and scholarship and prevent research-active faculty from becoming
inactive; increase activity in technology/economic development; and model how
research-active PUIs can meaningfully engage in regional innovation ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.