* 2331027
* EAGER: Controlling active site arrangement in zeolites through OSDA charge distribution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Daniel Shantz, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 91,358.00

Zeolites are an industrially important class of materials that enable the
conversion of low value molecules, for example, the undesirable components of
crude oil, into higher value molecules that can be used in transportation fuels
and plastics production. Their highly ordered atomic-level structures are what
enable these chemical conversions. The ability to control where specific
elements are incorporated in these materials would be transformative, leading to
improvements in existing technologies, and likely enable new ones such as
converting biomass to higher value products. However, this is not currently
possible. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) proposal
seeks to change the status quo by developing design criteria to control
placement of specific elements in the structure during synthesis. The proposed
work is designed such that it will be possible to rapidly assess the
transformative potential of the concept, i.e., a low-investment approach with
large potential impact. If successful, this will give the scientific community a
new approach to controlling the properties of zeolites and other industrially
important materials at the atomic level.

Zeolites are widely used in catalysis as a result of their discrete pore sizes,
controllable framework compositions and exchangeable extra-framework cations.
Controlling local structure, most notably the manipulation of the spatial
arrangement of framework aluminum, has been a long-sought goal in the research
community. The EAGER project seeks to solve this challenge by combining the
concepts of using 1) the charge distribution of the organic structure-directing
agent (OSDA) and 2) basic insights as to how the OSDA is incorporated in the as-
made zeolite to control the arrangement of aluminum i.e., control the active
site arrangement. The proposed work plan will enable rapid assessment of the
feasibility synthesizing compositionally similar ZSM-12 materials that possess
different spatial arrangements of aluminum by using different OSDAs. The ability
to modify the spatial arrangement of aluminum in the zeolite framework based on
the OSDA charge distribution and knowledge of how the OSDAs pack in the zeolite
pores would be transformative, and represent a significant step towards
‘catalysts by design’. Aside from the primary graduate student assigned to the
project, an undergraduate student will assist in the project, thus receiving
training in zeolite synthesis and characterization methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.