* 2331908
* PARTNER: An AI/ML Collaborative for Southeast Florida Coastal Environmental Data and Modeling Center
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Philippe Tissot, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,624,092.00

This project is an ExpandAI Partnership between the Florida International
University (FIU), North Carolina State University (NCSU), Texas A&M Corpus
Christi (TAMU-CC), and the AI Institute for Research on Trustworthy AI in
Weather, Climate, and Coastal Oceanography (AI2ES). In this project, a minority-
serving institution leads a new collaboration with two other MSIs and an AI
Institute focused on scaling up already-established research and education
programs at their institutions and to pursue shared, complementary goals around
developing AI with use for society in mind and for developing the next
generation of AI education and workforce talent. The collaborative research
focuses on the development of AI to manage threats of flood damage and other
environmental stresses faced by areas with high coastal population, with an
emphasis on environmental impacts in Southeast Florida. The project will also
build community around this new center of excellence in AI where such activities
were not previously well developed.

This project establishes the South Florida Coastal Environmental Data and
Modeling Center at Florida International University (FIU), promoting integrated
research and education efforts to develop artificial intelligence and machine
learning techniques for understanding and predicting the key processes affecting
ocean, urban, agricultural, and natural systems, and for studying coastal
environmental issues important to South Florida. This region encompasses
ecologically sensitive and economically important areas, such as Biscayne Bay,
urbanized corridors, tributary watersheds bordering the Bay, and the surface and
groundwater systems in regional watersheds. Due to high property values, dense
population, and vulnerable low-lying areas, the region is highly susceptible to
flood damage and other environmental stresses such as sea-level rise, urban
flooding, water quality monitoring, and harmful algae bloom detection. The
project focuses on four areas. Firstly, the Center manages and makes curated
datasets AI-ready and publicly available for testing AI/ML techniques and
developing solutions. Secondly, the researchers collaborate on trustworthy AI
for understanding and predicting coastal environmental phenomena, including
developing physics-informed AI models, reliable AI systems, and explainable AI
methods. Thirdly, the researchers apply AI/ML to study South Florida coastal
environmental problems, such as sea-level variability, compound coastal
flooding, and harmful algae blooms. Lastly, FIU and AI2ES provide education,
training, and workforce development opportunities for diverse undergraduate and
graduate students at FIU in AI/ML and Environmental Science, including
developing an undergraduate interdisciplinary program, strengthening pathway
programs for students from 2-year colleges, sharing education materials, and
facilitating research exchange and building alliances among institutions via
site visits, internship opportunities, and cross-institution workshops and
seminars. The project is partially funded by NSF’s Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program within the Division of Equity for
Excellence in STEM.”

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.