* 2331554
* I-Corps: Developing a Robust and Automated Insect Detection System for Connecting Farm Communities
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Vishesh Tanwar, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software technology to provide farmers with data-driven
recommendations based on real-time sensory data analysis from their farm fields.
The proposed technology also will introduce the concept of Smart Connected Farms
(SCF) to enable privacy-preserving data sharing among farmers and service
providers via wireless technology. The goal is to disseminate real-time
information across different farms and make precise decisions like analyzing
insect population growth. Implementing an SCF network in rural farms has
numerous networking and technological challenges, including the size and
heterogeneity of transmitted data, low/no bandwidth communications, and data
privacy. The proposed technology employs low-cost communication medium and edge
devices to provide better cost-benefit tradeoffs to the farmers. In addition,
data privacy is addressed with a privacy-preserving distributed approach that
offers secure and personalized data collection and sharing to eliminate
revealing information about the crop quality with a GPS location. The proposed
technology also involves the domain experts like agronomists and entomologists
to provide precise recommendations.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a platform for rural
connectivity and community decision-making integrated with privacy-preserving
distributed data analytics. The data collected is used to train machine learning
models. Compared to existing technologies, the proposed platform offers a
location-based fine-grained prescription for the precise application of
insecticides for a novice farmer, reducing farming cost. The prescription is
designed to provide insights about a precise infected area, the severity of the
infestation, and the number of insecticides to be sprayed. In addition, it may
be used to establish a farm network using Long Range (LoRa) communication
technology across the field, making it suitable for areas with no network to
transmit on-field data to edge devices. The proposed technology addresses the
user's issues of adaptability, trust, data security, privacy, and risk
preferences to justify the benefits to farmers in collecting and processing
real-time farm data. The proposed technology may be applied to developing a
broad range of cyber-physical systems and smart services. Such systems may
benefit crop consultants, agronomists, data scientists, and entomologists to
collect on-farm data and accomplish various applications such as insect
detection to recommend insecticide spraying decisions in real time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.