* 2331217
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Expanding Team Capacity for High Impact and New Growth (ETCHING) Cohort
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Tracey Clancy, SUNY Onondaga Community College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Columbus
State Community College (CSCC) and Onondaga Community College (OCC). The two
colleges share regional environments that have seen a revitalization of former
industrial regions through new emerging industries, with specific synergy
currently underway in high-volume advanced manufacturing and recent developments
in the semiconductor industry. The growth of emerging industries in both regions
will be a workforce catalyst, and CSCC and OCC aim to increase research and
training opportunities to address industry needs and better serve their
communities. CSCC and OCC share gaps in finding qualified and available faculty,
in collaborating with other four- and two-year institutions, in the need to
engage employer partners more deeply, and in a desire to increase capacity for
resource development aligned to emerging technologies.

The cohort goals will grow partnerships for the regional innovation ecosystem to
create a more diverse workforce to meet the talent demand. The cohort will
expand the research development capacity of each college and help other
institutions with similar goals to pursue new opportunities and better engage in
large-scale collaborations. Activities include creating an expanded partnership
model for engaging industry, developing a benchmark partnership model for
instructor sharing, creating in-residence models for industry instructor
sharing, and increasing capacity to engage in grant initiatives for larger scale
partnerships. The cohort will become a resource for grant development
partnerships that focus on increasing underserved participation in emerging
pathways. Equity-focused strategies will be incorporated throughout the design
and guide how diverse populations are engaged. Through this project, the cohort
will develop a blueprint for other institutions with similar challenges and
needs to effectively engage with their regional innovation ecosystem to in
emerging technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.