* 2331169
* 2D Semiconductor Memristors towards Neuromorphic Hardware Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Xiaogan Liang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2026
* USD 360,000.00

This grant supports research that advances key knowledge and techniques for
creating electronic devices for fabrication of future artificial intelligence
systems to enhance U.S. technological competitiveness and national prosperity.
The current artificial intelligence systems, such as artificial neural networks
are still based on conventional computing principles, which do not match
biological neuronal processes and result in a formidable computing complexity
and unacceptable power consumption for scale-up implementation. To address this
challenge, this proposal supports fundamental research to explore critical
device physics knowledge for the realization of new memristive switching devices
(or memristors) based on 2D nanomaterials which have a high biological
similarity, potentially enabling emulation of biological neuronal functions. The
hardware-based artificial neural network systems constructed from such devices
are anticipated to be capable of executing emerging brain-like neuromorphic
computing algorithms and enable superior inference capability as well as power
efficiency comparable to those of biological counterparts. Such neural network
systems, if successfully developed could be implemented to a broad range of
applications, such as controlling of unmanned vehicles, processing of
complicated computer vision data, and rapid diagnosis of illness based on
machine learning, thereby greatly improving the data processing capability of
the systems. In addition, the scientific and technical results from this work
will also promote capability in developing advanced computing and robotic
systems. This research also enhances participation of students and educators
from underrepresented groups in the education activities related to electronics,
integrated circuit chips, advanced controlling and computing techniques.

The newly proposed 2D semiconductor memristors are anticipated to exhibit
several advantageous properties in comparison with state-of-the-art memristors
based on bulk materials, including dangling-bond-free surfaces that potentially
enable cost-efficient production of device structures with the higher device
integration density, the lower threshold voltages and energies for switching
states, the higher level of interconnectivity among devices, and the larger
number of available device states. These desirable properties could be further
leveraged for addressing the aforementioned challenge related to hardware-based
neural networks. In spite of such anticipated advantages, the ultimate
realization of the neural network systems based on 2D semiconductor memristors
demands the research efforts to address several important device-oriented
challenges. Specifically, the synaptic weight update characteristics of 2D
semiconductor memristors need to be improved to be linear and symmetric in
response to pulse-like encoding signals, and new device doping/integration
techniques are needed to form different synaptic regions for emulating bio-
realistic functions. In addition, more experimental attempts for constructing
small-scale networks consisting of 2D semiconductor memristors need to be
performed, seeking to exploring the neuromorphic computing algorithms that can
fully harvest the aforementioned advantages of 2D semiconductor based memristive
devices in processing dynamic spatiotemporal signals. To address these
challenges, the PI will perform a series of research tasks to produce reliable
2D semiconductor memristors suitable for practical network implementation and
also preliminarily demonstrate small-scale networks for neuromorphic control
applications. The specific sub-aims include: (1) Obtain an in-depth
understanding of the memristive switching schemes of 2D semiconductor memristors
at the microscopic level and produce memristors with improved synaptic weight
update characteristics; (2) Realize scalable integration of 2D memristors with
deterministic and uniform synaptic properties; (3) Preliminarily demonstrate a
small-scale network consisting of 2D semiconductor memristors for temporal data
analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.