* 2331984
* Planning: Assessing Cyber Victimization Risk of Job Searching in the Hybrid World
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ling Wu, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Most studies on Cyber Victimization focus only on virtual spaces during job
searches and ignore the influence of hybrid space. The principal investigators
(PIs) want to better understand how hybrid space, which involves both physical
and virtual elements, affects cyber victimization during job searching. The PIs
also aim to find ways to reduce its negative effects on mental health, well-
being, and employment outcomes. To conduct their research, PIs will focus on
university students who are currently job hunting, particularly those attending
on-campus career fairs that happen annually or biannually. The project has two
main goals. One goal is to not only understand cyber victimization but also
create tools that help students avoid falling prey to job scams. Secondly, the
project aims to involve stakeholders from academia, industry, and policymaking
by organizing workshops and generating a report with assessments. This ensures
that the research findings are relevant and useful, and the strategies developed
to address cyber victimization risks in job searching are practical and
effective through collaboration and discussion. The project will also implement
educational programs and awareness initiatives to protect job seekers and equip
them with the skills needed to navigate the job search process safely. This will
build confidence in job seekers and enable them to make informed decisions while
seeking employment. In addition, the project aims to encourage the involvement
of underrepresented groups by involving students from Prairie View A&M
University, the largest historically Black university in Texas, and Texas A&M
University, the largest Hispanic-Serving Institution in Texas in the research
process. By doing so, these students will have the opportunity to gain knowledge
and skills in diverse fields, contributing to a more inclusive and equitable
research endeavor.

The project aims to bolster the investigation of job-search-related cyber
victimization risk in the hybrid realm by integrating multiple disciplines. By
conducting a sequence of multidisciplinary brainstorming sessions and workshops,
this project aims to enhance research frameworks, human behavior theories, and
spatial-social methodologies used to evaluate cyber victimization risk. By
adopting this interdisciplinary approach, the project will foster innovation and
facilitate a more profound comprehension of cyber victimization concerning job
searching scenarios. The workshops organized by the principal investigators will
promote collaborative efforts among scholars from a wide array of fields,
encompassing cybersecurity, psychology, human resources, criminal justice,
information technology, business, education, and geography/planning. This
collaborative endeavor will facilitate the identification and consolidation of
crucial concerns pertaining to the evaluation of cyber victimization risk during
job searching in the hybrid world. By integrating diverse perspectives and areas
of expertise, the project will enrich the comprehension of the frequency,
consequences, contributing factors, and strategies to mitigate cyber
victimization. The research questions formulated through interdisciplinary
workshops will delve into significant aspects of cyber victimization during job
searching, covering topics like deep fake job posts, demographics, education and
awareness initiatives, online privacy and security, and the impact of cyber
victimization on job seekers' well-being and decision-making. Moreover, the
project will play a vital role in advancing novel methodologies and approaches
for detecting, mitigating, and preventing cyber victimization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.