* 2331369
* Conference: 2023 Workshop on Nanotechnology Infrastructure of the Future
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Debbie Senesky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 05/31/2024
* USD 97,679.00

The National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) is an impactful
network of 16 geographically and technically diverse shared nanotechnology
facilities that enable scientists and engineers, who otherwise would not have
access to a broad suite of nanotechnology equipment, to perform groundbreaking
research. Along with providing open-access to state-of-the-art nanotechnology
facilities and expertise, the NNCI sites also collaborate to develop
nanotechnology education, outreach, and workforce development programs. In
response to the ending of this National Science Foundation (NSF) award in 2025,
the NNCI is organizing a “2023 Workshop on Nanotechnology Infrastructure of the
Future” to gather the necessary information to recommend a strategic path
forward for a shared national nanotechnology infrastructure resource for 2025
and beyond. The hybrid, two-day workshop will feature invited talks, panel
discussions with leaders from academia, industry, and government agencies, and
brainstorming sessions focused on the following topics: (1) Setting the Stage
for the Future of Nanotechnology Infrastructure, (2) Forecasting the Future:
Nanotechnology 2035, (3) Catalyzing Nanotechnology Education for K-14, (4)
Translating Nanotechnology from R&D to Market, (5) Reimagining Environmental and
Social Sustainability, and (6) Measuring Success: Impact Analysis and Metrics.
The workshop will take place in September 2023 in Washington D.C. and online to
enable easier access for a broad audience, since all U.S. stakeholders in
nanotechnology and related fields will be welcome. Through active participation,
the workshop attendees will identify technological trends, significant gaps in
our existing technical capabilities and education, and prudent solutions that
align the needs of the various stakeholders. The outcome of the workshop will be
a public-facing outcomes report recommending a path forward for the next
iteration of a national nanotechnology infrastructure resource.

Many academic institutions, small companies, and non-profit organizations cannot
afford to own and maintain the diverse portfolio of scientific equipment needed
to develop new technology. Since 1977, the NSF has supported some incarnation of
a network of well-equipped, open-access laboratories located at various
universities across the country. Researchers from outside of the host
universities can gain entry to the laboratories after being properly trained to
use the relevant equipment. Access to cutting-edge scientific equipment has
empowered low-resource scientists and engineers to perform transformative
research which has resulted in many impactful inventions and entrepreneurial
ventures. Equally important, these networks have fostered communities that are
passionate about science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) education and
outreach and thereby enable learners at all levels to grow and succeed. The
current open-access laboratory network, called the National Nanotechnology
Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), is funded until 2025. To help make
recommendations for the next open-access laboratory resource, workshop
participants will explore the anticipated needs of researchers and educators and
will brainstorm approaches to best meet these needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.