* 2331573
* Collaborative Research: Research Infrastructure: EPIIC: Collaborative Proposal: LIGHT UP: Leveraging Innovation to Grow High Tech and University Partnerships
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lethia Jackson, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

The Leveraging Innovation to Grow High Tech and University Partnerships (LIGHT
UP) Collaborative is multi-institution collaborative grant including the
following institutions: State University of New York College of Technology at
Canton, Rowan College of Burlington County, Marymount University, Alvernia
University, Kean University, and Bowie State University. This collaborative aims
to establish a community of practice to develop and enhance a research and
innovation ecosystem that capitalizes on external partnerships to shape the STEM
talent pipeline and workforce development. The LIGHT UP Collaborative, made up
of six mid-Atlantic and Northeast institutions, represents a strategic region
nationally in terms of STEM workforce development and industry clusters and is
one of the most diverse regions in the country. The collaborative will make a
significant impact on STEM industries by establishing a regional network to
build capacity and capitalize on the strengths of each institution to advance
research, entrepreneurship, and workforce development. Efforts will result in
the promotion of innovative teaching, learning, and training for both faculty
and students. Extending student experience beyond research and discovery into
real-world application contributes to advancing technological innovation and
STEM workforce development. Linking research with entrepreneurship drives the
innovation needed for our nation to remain globally competitive.

The LIGHT UP Collaborative project aims to advance a research-driven
entrepreneurial enterprise and expand external partnerships. The project is
designed to engage STEM students and faculty in a research-to-research
entrepreneur full life-cycle approach to harness STEM talent in a regional
innovation ecosystem that extends throughout the mid-Atlantic and Northeast
regions. The project will leverage each institution’s resources and expertise to
develop and enhance an innovation research ecosystem and broaden current efforts
in research commercialization and entrepreneurship. The LIGHT UP Collaborative
focuses on three goals that will: (1) expand and improve each institutions’
structural support systems for economic development initiatives; (2) build a
platform to drive more industry and government partnerships; and (3) increase
innovation enterprise development. The LIGHT UP Collaborative will serve as a
model for capacity building and partnership engagement through a community of
practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.