* 2331017
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Mechanics of Adsorption-Deformation Coupling in Soft Nanoporous Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,11/30/2024
* Wenjie Xia, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 11/30/2024
* USD 188,024.00

This grant supports research to pursue a fundamental understanding of
adsorption-deformation coupling in soft nanoporous materials. The research will
develop corresponding mechanical theories, aiming to better predict hygroscopic
movements in complex nanoporous media and control sorption-induced actuation by
design where sorption refers to the binding of ions to charged surfaces. Soft
nanoporous materials having characteristic pore sizes below 100 nm are
ubiquitous in nature (e.g., cellulose, protein) and in engineering applications
(e.g., cement, gel, nanocomposites). These materials often exhibit significant
swelling/shrinkage upon adsorption/desorption of fluids/gases due to
nanoconfinement effects resulting from their network topology and interfacial
interactions. Nature uses such stimuli-responsive features of cellulose
nanofibers to facilitate the dispersal of plant seeds upon humidity change. Bio-
inspired soft nanoporous materials have been recently developed for fast and
reliable actuators, sensors, and artificial muscles driven by sorption of
solvent molecules. This project will establish and validate a multiscale
mechanics framework informed by pore-scale thermodynamics and molecular
simulations for predicting the sorption-induced straining of nanoporous
materials. The project will also pursue an educational initiative involving new
course development on multiscale poromechanics and pre-college outreach by
harnessing the excitement surrounding nano-engineered materials and leveraging
it with the exceptional infrastructure for innovation and education at the
participating institutes.

This research is driven by the hypothesis that the complex coupling between
sorption and deformation in nanoporous media can be predicted by focusing on two
key pore-scale attributions, namely the disjoining pressure and surface tension
induced by solid-adsorbate interactions. To test this hypothesis, the study will
first establish a continuum theory guided by the thermodynamics of mixtures,
i.e., by viewing material as a superposition of the solid, fluid and surface
phases, through which the smeared pore-scale forces appear as macroscale
adsorption stresses acting on the porous skeleton. Expressions of pore-scale
forces will be then sought via molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and surrogate
pore models. Specifically, simplified pore models will be developed based on
Gibbsâ€™ excess treatment of nanoconfined fluid films to link pore-scale forces
induced by sorption with experimentally measurable quantities (i.e., adsorption
isotherm). The pore model will be validated by MD simulations of nanopores
subjected to fluid adsorption. These microscale forces will then be upscaled via
statistical homogenization to complete the poromechanics framework. Finally, the
theory will be applied to model the sorption-deformation behavior of amorphous
cellulose interacting with water vapor. The prediction will be validated against
experimental data and MD simulation results obtained from the same material
system. The research will challenge the current paradigm of poromechanics where
short-range interactions and surface forces within individual pores have been
routinely neglected. If successful, the research will greatly expand our
fundamental understanding on mechanics of active and soft porous materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.