* 2331108
* US ELT Program: TMT Design and Development
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Robert Kirshner, TMT INTERNATIONAL OBSERVATORY LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Luca Rizzi
* 05/31/2025
* USD 6,500,000.00

In the 2030s a new era in astronomy will begin with the commissioning of
Extremely Large Telescopes (ELTs) with apertures in the 25 to 40-meter range.
These facilities will be key to answering many of the fundamental questions
raised in the recent National Academies decadal survey in Astronomy and
Astrophysics, “Astro2020”, which identified U.S. involvement in future ELTs as
its top priority for ground-based astronomy. One of these facilities will be the
Thirty Meter Telescope, to be built by TMT International Observatory (TIO) and
with a preferred site in Hawai’i. TMT will have the spatial resolution (12 times
sharper than the Hubble Space Telescope and 4.6 times the JWST) and sensitivity
(with adaptive optics, ~200 times more sensitive than 8-m telescopes) to probe
and characterize the most distant and earliest galaxies, to study the formation
of stellar systems across cosmic time, and to characterize exoplanets — most
notably their atmospheres that may reveal possible signatures of life. TMT will
address some of humanity’s biggest questions about the universe itself and our
place within it.

Development and risk reduction activities will be concentrated in four key
areas: 1) TIO will complete M2 preliminary design, including optimized passive
mechanical support, M2 positioner stage design with electronics and control
system, finite-element analysis performance models and Preliminary Design review
documentation; 2) TIO will complete preliminary design for the alignment and
phasing system, including performance analysis, prototyping, systems
engineering, and software development; 3) TIO will complete preliminary design
and prototyping of components for the primary mirror control system, namely the
segment controller and cabling electronics, software, and actuators; and 4) TIO
will complete the preliminary design of the tertiary mirror system, one of the
key optical elements that defines the quality of the delivered images. Some of
the key technologies developed as part of this proposal will directly benefit
the U.S. astronomical community by advancing the state of the art of critical
components that will be required by the current and future generations of
astronomical facilities. Specifically, advances in the primary mirror control
system technology will directly benefit any future effort to use segmented
mirrors, while the work related to the secondary mirror system will further the
development of control systems for large convex secondary mirrors. Similarly,
the tertiary mirror system work will develop technologies that will benefit any
future large telescope project and ensure U.S. leadership in the field. The
project will document and publish the results of their work, promote diversity
in their workforce and partners, and expose early career colleagues to new
technology, a key effort in developing the next generation of telescope and
instrument builders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.