* 2331257
* HCC: Small: Assessing Radicalization and Deradicalization Online
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Jennifer Golbeck, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2026
* USD 583,644.00

This research will develop a foundation for measuring radicalization and,
importantly, deradicalization, in online communities by tracking individual
behavioral trends over time and at scale, and identifying patterns among members
who disengage from the subculture they had earlier joined in a process of
radicalization, but had begun to deradicalize. Online extremism and
radicalization has been a growing concern and active area of research. There is
a broad body of cross-disciplinary work studying online extremist groups but
limited computational and data science-based research on the deradicalization
process. The primary empirical research will analyze a recently-collected large
corpus of over 8 million online forum posts, including comprehensive archives of
five popular forums related to one extremist subculture. The practical
implications of this work have potential to benefit the well-being of society,
both online and offline, and to bolster national security.

This work includes five core projects: (1) Detecting Radicalization will build a
formal lexicon of subcultural language, a signal of belonging in the group, and
build a suite of tools to detect hate speech among members. (2) Detecting
Radicalization will analyze trends of language use per user to find patterns and
conduct content analysis to identify markers of radicalization. (3) Social
Incentives will study social interaction and its relationship with
radicalization to understand the applicability of theories that connect social
incentives and genuine beliefs. (4) Detecting Deradicalization will identify
markers of deradicalization among members who disengage from forums and those
who turn to support groups for members who are trying to leave the community.
(5) Classifying Deradicalization will build machine-learning models to
automatically identify members who may be considering deradicalization. The
models and lexicons developed in this research will provide methods for
understanding the social and normative dynamics of extremist groups and
subcultures more broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.