* 2331271
* ART: Translating Research to Practice to Create Climate-Ready Communities Across Virginia
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Thomas Peterson, George Mason University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,500,000.00

With this Accelerating Research Translation award, George Mason University – in
collaboration with the Center for Climate Strategies – will create university-
wide programming that enables the rapid, low-cost translation of the science
that local governments, community-based organizations, and local businesses need
to support the development of sustainable, equitable, and climate-resilient
communities. Climate-related disasters are increasing in frequency and intensity
– and are costing the United States billions of dollars in damages each year.
Communities in Virginia are already experiencing harmful effects of climate
change as extreme weather and precipitation, extreme heat, and sea level rise
damage infrastructure; disrupt work, commerce, and transportation; destroy
livelihoods; and cost lives – but the wide-spread implementation of science-
based solutions remains elusive. Drawing inspiration from the cooperative
extension service, this award will establish a transformative new model for
research translation; one that leverages the unique resources of higher
education, in collaboration with community stakeholders, to address this gap and
co-develop resilience to climate change.

This award will accelerate the translation of research into practice to create
climate-ready communities throughout Virginia (objective 1); establish and
foster a culture of translating research through community engagement, technical
assistance, and the co-production of research-informed products (objective 2);
and create a climate-ready workforce of scholars, practitioners, and leaders
with the skills and expertise needed to put research on climate change into
practice (objective 3). These programs will be organized into three distinct but
interrelated and integrated categories of activity: (a) facilitated and
coordinated outreach and ongoing engagement with municipal and other community-
based stakeholders; (b) community-focused research translation that is propelled
by a modified lean launchpad program that supports the development of seed
translational research projects (STRP); and (c) integrated training programs to
create a climate-ready workforce. The first two STRPs will focus on the co-
production of solutions that mitigate flood hazards (STRP 1) and reduce the
impacts of urban heat (STRP 2) on frontline communities. New instructional
programs established by this award will create climate science-literate
instructors, use-inspired scientists who are willing and able to translate their
research into practice, and social entrepreneurs. Municipal and other community-
based practitioners will also be trained in how and why to use science-based
methods, tools, and data to plan and implement climate change resilience
strategies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.