* 2331763
* SLES: Vision-Based Maximally-Symbolic Safety Supervisor with Graceful Degradation and Procedural Validation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jia Deng, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to develop new technology to ensure the safety of autonomous
robotic systems such as self-driving cars and home robots. Safety for such
systems is critical because robots interact with the physical world and people,
resulting in potential for adverse interaction outcomes in the absence of
safety. Most next generation robotic systems are expected to contain components
built using machine learning. Such learning-based components can result in new
capabilities but can also be prone to unpredictable behavior or failures, making
the full system unsafe to use. This project seeks to develop a general solution
to this problem. The main idea is to build a safety supervisor, a software
module that continuously monitors the actions of a robot and intervenes as
needed to ensure safety. The safety supervisor functions similarly to a driving
coach, who watches the practicing driver and takes over when necessary.
Techniques developed in this project will be broadly useful for building safe
and effective robotic systems. Research in this project is integrated with K12,
undergraduate, and graduate education through research training, course
development and outreach events.

This project develops techniques for constructing a vision-based safety
supervisor that endows the full system with the safety property called graceful
degradation, meaning that the full system will not fail catastrophically under
unfamiliar or unknown scenarios; instead, the full system will detect the
unfamiliar nature of the circumstance and switch to actions that are safe and
conservative. To this end, the project team develops symbolic scene
representations together with reasoning algorithms which produce interpretable
and verifiable safety assessments and decisions that are robust to unfamiliar
scenarios. To rigorously test and evaluate the safety supervisor, the project
team develops algorithms for procedural validation: validation through
procedurally generated synthetic visual data. Procedural generation is the
process of generating synthetic data from symbolic computer programs, which
provide full control at all levels of granularity and easily enable systematic
simulation of long-tail events and novel scenarios. In addition to procedural
validation, the project team also performs evaluation on real-world robots with
a focus on navigation and rearrangement tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.