* 2331409
* ART: Intensifying Translation of Research in Oklahoma (InTRO)
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* David Ebert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,499,975.00

Federally funded university research results in new discoveries and technologies
which need additional development and support in order to be translated for
broader application, use or commercialization. Many research findings never
progress beyond being written up in academic journals. The Intensifying
Translational Research in Oklahoma (InTRO) project will support the process of
research findings being translated into processes and products for use by the
public, industry, government, and others. InTRO will also provide training for
future engineers and scientists to pursue careers in translational research so
that there is a sustainable pipeline of discoveries reaching the public.

InTRO will grow a translational and use-inspired research university culture,
develop educational materials from an array of disciplines, and provide
infrastructure for translational research projects. InTRO will increase
partnerships and connections between researchers and outside collaborators that
include industry, government, community organizations, tribal nations, and other
outside entities. Researchers will have access to translational research skill
enhancement via a new Accelerating Research Translation (ART) Academy to provide
additional education and training on specific aspects of research translation.
The ART Academy program will cover research translation, partnerships and
collaborations, ethics, and workforce training and development. The ART Academy
will also provide funding to train graduate students and postdocs who are
interested in translational research careers. There will be an InTRO Seed
Translational Research Project program that supports advancement of early-stage
projects. Teams who are awarded SRTP grants will receive funding to enable the
translation of their proof-of-concept idea into a ready-for-use solution or
product in under two years. InTRO will result in an inclusive and sustainable
program that supports a community of diverse scholars, including students,
postdocs, and faculty, who are equipped to engage in translational research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.