* 2331482
* Collaborative Research: A Metamodeling Machine Learning Framework for Multiscale Behavior of Nano-Architectured Crystalline-Amorphous Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Lin Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 194,896.00

Nanostructured composites may achieve the preferred combination of strength,
ductility, toughness, and irradiation tolerance through microstructure tailoring
and chemistry; thus, they are highly desired structural materials in harsh
environments. In accelerating the design of nanostructured composites, the need
is for models that can capture microstructure-dominated deformation mechanisms
from the atomic scale to the structural scale. This award supports the
development of a meta-modeling framework that enables the incorporation of
atomic-level knowledge of microstructure-dominated deformation behaviors to
predict structural response. This framework will be applied to design amorphous
ceramic reinforced nickel alloys used in advanced nuclear reactors and high-
temperature environments. The interdisciplinary nature of the research will
provide graduate students a diverse training in computational and experimental
mechanics, collaborative teamwork experience, as well as research experience at
Los Alamos National Laboratory. Research opportunities and mentorship programs
will be created at the University of Nebraskaâ€“Lincoln and the University of
Alabama for undergraduate students, especially for women and underrepresented
minorities. Additionally, outreach activities at university museums will attract
local K-12 students towards STEM careers.

The accelerated design of nanostructured composites with desired properties
needs sophisticated models that can capture microstructure-dominated deformation
mechanics at multiple scales. In this project, a metamodeling machine learning
based framework that enables the incorporation of microstructure-dominated
deformation mechanics into a predictive macroscale model will be developed
though an integrated characterization, experimental, and computational approach.
Nanocrystalline nickel with high crystallization temperature amorphous ceramic
SiOC at the grain boundaries will be the model material. Microstructures,
deformation mechanisms, and mechanical properties of the Ni-SiOC nanocomposites
will be characterized using advanced microscopes and in situ micromechanical
testing. The atomic details of amorphous boundaries-mediated deformation in the
nanostructures will be revealed through the combination of density functional
theory calculations and large-scale molecular dynamics simulations. A dual-phase
micromechanics model will be developed by coarse-graining the key deformation
mechanisms identified at the atomic level. Surrogate models of the activation
functionals for various mechanisms in the micromechanics model will be derived
by training machine learning models from atomistic simulation data. At the
macroscopic scale, a physics-informed neural network model in which the
hybridized machine learning models will be used as surrogates to bridge scales
will complete the metamodeling framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.