* 2331040
* EAGER: Surveying impacts of community context on adaptive mutational landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Patrick Curtis, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2025
* USD 229,210.00

Species evolve in communities with other species. However, tracking evolution in
those complex communities is difficult. This project will examine how community
context alters species evolution. Using new techniques in whole-genome analyses,
this research will determine how different communities alter the fitness effects
across the entire genome. This research bridges the fields of ecology,
evolution, and microbiology to provide insight into how the evolutionary process
may occur in the complex communities. Analysis tools will be developed and made
publicly available through this research and the insights gained may be relevant
for conservation and management of ecosystems facing environmental change. In
addition, the research will enable training for graduate and undergraduate
students in laboratory and computation skills. Moreover, the researchers will
conduct educational outreach to local high schools on antibiotic resistance, a
topic at the intersection of microbiology and evolutionary biology.

The ability of a population to adapt is reliant on mutational input. Possible
mutations define the mutational neighborhood. This research will document how
the mutational neighborhood evolves with community context over time. Using
experimental evolution in microbial communities and transposon-insertion
sequencing, the project will directly measure how the mutational neighborhood in
bacteria can be predicted by species interactions. Three ecological scenarios
will be explored. They include predation, competition, and a combination of
predation and competition. Transposon insertion libraries in ancestral and the
evolved populations will be assayed for frequency changes across the scenarios.
Computational tools will be developed that calculate mutational neighborhood
measures using a Shannon entropy approach. These neighborhoods will be compared
across contexts. This project will provide new insights into the evolutionary
process in a community context and generate new analytic tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.