* 2331557
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: EmpowerEd -- Building the Future Workforce Together
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Lanna Lewis, Albany College of Pharmacy
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 399,934.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Hobart and
William Smith College, University of Maine at Farmington, Albany College of
Pharmacy & Health Sciences, Montgomery College, Benjamin Franklin Cummings
Institute of Technology, and Ohio Wesleyan University. According to the US
Bureau of Labor Statistics, over the next decade, STEM occupations are forecast
to grow faster than the total for all occupations, leave a talent shortage for
industries to fill nearly 3.5 million STEM jobs by 2029. In addition, there is a
growing disconnect between what STEM students learn in college and what
employers expect new graduates to be able to do. Some employers find recent
graduates lack soft skills like problem solving, critical thinking, and written
and oral communication; others find students to be unfamiliar with the practical
and technical skills needed for their day-to-day work. This collaborative EPIIC
project defines a process to address these issues at the academic institutions
participating in this project. Cohort institutions will work together grow
industry partnerships, improve alignment of program curricula with industry
needs, and enhance faculty skills and knowledge of emerging technologies.

Through this EPIIC project, the collaborating institutions will build
relationships with industry experts and government agencies to find out what
skills and knowledge are needed for STEM jobs in their fields. The cohort will
use this information to modify and enhance college courses and curricular
structure with industry needs in mind so students are prepared for jobs right
out of college. At the same time, skills training for faculty must be provided
so instructors are prepared to teach the enhanced course content and multiple
degree pathways must be created so students with diverse preparation and life
situations will graduate. Project participants will also communicate to students
clearly and effectively about how and why their education will prepare them for
the STEM careers they want, thus building the workforce this country needs. Each
academic institution in the diverse cohort, which includes two small liberal
arts colleges, two 2-year technical colleges, a primarily undergraduate state
university, and a 4-year college offering specialized undergraduate and graduate
degrees, has developed an individualized plan to implement this process. The
participating institutions will exchange information and work together as a
cohort to enhance each institution's capacity for building external
partnerships. This process will position the institutions to further deepen
engagement with industry and enhance their contributions to their regional
innovation ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.