* 2331879
* Collaborative Research: SLES: Guaranteed Tubes for Safe Learning across Autonomy Architectures
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2027
* Xiaofeng Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

The autonomous systems that operate by themselves (e.g., autonomous cars and
delivery drones) expose safety challenges dependent upon the complexity of the
missions and environments. Although such systems have demonstrated the ability
to learn and adapt on their own, ensuring the safety of these systems is not
trivial. Safety can be endangered due to various factors, including but not
limited to unexpected changes, inclement weather conditions, or unknown
obstacles. The onboard learning solutions of these systems have mostly been used
in non-critical situations like computer games, where safety concerns are
minimal. This proposal aims to address the urgent need for end-to-end safety in
learning-enabled systems across various application scenarios, e.g., self-
driving cars and flying vehicles in urban air mobility. We propose a novel
solution called "Data-enabled Simplex" or "DeSimplex.” DeSimplex is built on
solid mathematical principles and systematic methods for collecting data and
using the data for the system’s performance improvement. It provides a framework
that can be proven to be safe and allows learning-enabled systems to adjust and
perform well even when faced with extreme events, or environmental hazards. The
proposed work is crucial for wider applications that involve the safe and
efficient operation of autonomous systems in unpredictable, demanding physical
environments, including autonomous cars and flying vehicles of 3D urban air
mobility.

The proposed work lays the groundwork for advancing the comprehension of safety
in end-to-end learning-enabled systems, a foundational problem in cyber-physical
systems, robotics, and machine learning. We aim to pursue the following two
interconnected research thrusts: (i) improving high-performance autonomy with
reliable uncertainty quantification methods to ensure data-driven adaptability
and precise measurement of uncertainties and (ii) developing high-assurance
autonomy architectures and establishing switching rules for verifiable
observability and controllability. A framework will be developed that combines
the strengths of high-performance and high-assurance autonomy, facilitating
adaptive learning, accurate uncertainty quantification, and verifiable safety
measures. Novel methods will be developed for (i) on-policy, closed-loop
learning to boost performance, (ii) reliable uncertainty quantification to
provide data-driven adaptability, and (iii) verifiable observability and
controllability at the system level. A systematic, dual-strategy approach will
be pursued for safe data collection for the proposed high-performance autonomy
to reconcile the three desired properties for data: safety, on-policy, and
closed-loop. The proposed framework will be validated in a rigorous procedure
from modular simulation testing to integration and deployment on real aerial and
ground vehicles.

This research is supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and Open Philanthropy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.