* 2331363
* I-Corps: Non-gravity and Anti-gravity Electrohydrodynamic Inkjet Printing of Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Hantang Qin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable electrohydrodynamic (EHD) inkjet printer for in-space
manufacturing and anti-gravity 3D printing. The proposed EHD technology enables
3D printing using electrical forces to drive liquid-ink flow under a non-gravity
or microgravity environment. The proposed 3D printer is aimed at making high-
resolution patterns with high flexibility to adapt substrates and different
platforms and production lines, and a high degree of customization of structural
designs. In addition, the proposed technology may support micro-/nano-scale
additive manufacturing to migrate from fundamental studies to large-scale
production on Earth. The EHD printing system may be modified for flexible
electronics and optics fabrication applications, such as flexible sensors and
wearable devices. It is envisioned that the research outcomes may go beyond in-
space manufacturing to other fields of micro/nano manufacturing, quality
assurance, biomedical science, cyber-physical systems, and sensor design and
fabrication.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of electrohydrodynamic (EHD)
technology to be used in additive manufacturing (AM) processes. The proposed EDH
printing technology is a micro/nanomanufacturing technique that utilizes the
interaction between an electric field and a liquid jet to deposit small droplets
of ink onto a substrate. It is a unique technology that can work in non-gravity
environments because electrical force is the main driving force for material
flow and deposition. This makes the technology a good match for future in-space
manufacturing and anti-gravity printing applications. The proposed process and
hardware have been designed to ensure reliable printing performance under
extreme conditions such as vibrations, accelerations, and gravitational changes.
In addition, this technology has been validated through in-flight tests under
microgravity as a part of a series of tests funded by NASA. These explorations
may enable new innovations, including on-site AM, electronics repair,
hydrodynamics studies, and AM in space or at low earth orbit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.