* 2331041
* I-Corps: Radar absorbing materials for high-temperature, harsh environment applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Chengying Xu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of radar absorbing materials (RAM) for high-temperature harsh
environments. Currently, radar absorbing materials are too heavy and possess
limited temperature survivability in harsh environment applications. The
proposed technology utilizes ceramic composites rather than traditional polymer,
carbon, or iron materials for its radar absorbing properties, which represents
is a new approach to stealth coatings that may have wide application for the
defense industry. The technology is aimed at aerospace and defense applications,
such as aircraft engine nozzles and their aerodynamically heated parts and may
be used in the stealth coating industry. The development of high-performance,
microwave-absorbing materials may have an impact on the stealth warfare market,
especially that of fighter jets and missiles. The proposed material system
lowers the observability of stealth aircraft, enhances the air defense
capability, and may increase national security.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of high-temperature, microwave-
absorbing ceramic nanocomposite materials. The proposed materials have a wide
microwave absorption bandwidth covering the entire Ka-band (26.5-40 GHz), and
can sustain at high temperatures (>1000 C). Compared with current radar
absorbing materials, which are heavy and possess limited temperature
survivability (<400 C), the proposed nanocomposite design provides high-
performance microwave absorption in high and low temperatures and harsh
environment applications. There is interest in ultra-high temperature ceramics
because of their high melting points, retained mechanical properties under high
temperature, excellent corrosion resistance, and the refractory oxide on the
surface to provide good oxidation resistance. In addition, their high electrical
conductivity is another distinguishing property that may further be explored and
manipulated. Radar absorbing materials developed for high-temperature harsh
environments may be highly desirable for aerospace and defense applications,
such as aircraft engine nozzles and their aerodynamically heated parts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.