* 2331252
* RAPID: Characterizing the Sources and Chemistry of Nitrogen Oxides, Nitrous Acid, and Particulate Nitrate during the AEROMMA Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Meredith Hastings, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,997.00

In this RAPID project, the isotopic signatures of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
nitrous acid (HONO) emitted from marine sources and in plumes where marine and
urban emissions co-evolve will be characterized. Stable isotope techniques in
combination with concentration measurements will be employed as part of the
NOAA-supported Atmospheric Emissions and Reactions Observed from Megacities to
Marine Areas (AEROMMA) field campaign in the New York City region. This research
will provide data and information relevant for assessing effective mitigation
strategies for ozone and secondary air pollution over the greater metropolitan
NYC area.

The stable isotopic composition measurements in this research will help to
constrain the sources, sinks, and chemical processing pathways of reactive
nitrogen (Nr) species using the isotopic signatures associated with these
sources and processes. Field work will be performed at two ground sites: the
NYC-CUNY urban site located in Upper Manhattan and the Yale Coastal site in
Guilford, CT located downwind of the urban site. This effort includes the
characterization and quantification, under different meteorological and
pollution conditions, of nitrogen oxides (NOx), nitrous acid (HONO), nitric acid
(HNO3), and particulate nitrate (p-NO3-) through measurements of emission
factors, concentration profiles, and nitrogen and oxygen stable isotopic
composition in high time resolution. The project includes the participation of
both a graduate and an undergraduate student.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.