* 2331195
* Compass Pilot
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Chelsea Mauldin, PUBLIC POLICY LAB
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,078,880.00

The intention of the Compass Pilot is to explore opportunities that will
increase access to and participation in federal seed fund programs by
underrepresented groups. Scientific and technical innovation plays a critical
role in addressing societal challenges, such as healthcare disparities,
environmental issues, and economic inequalities. Yet those most affected by
these societal challenges tend to benefit less from U.S. federal seed fund
programs. Indeed, a smaller proportion of applicants to these programs come from
underrepresented groups than is relative to their share of the U.S. population.
Multiple federal funders have invested in outreach efforts, but the lack of
innovators from underrepresented groups accessing seed fund and research
programs remains a persistent and significant issue. Historical and systemic
injustices have led to generational wealth gaps, limited access to higher
education, and segregated social networks, preventing some from having the scope
and means to pursue funding in science and technology. Structural biases within
funding programs’ outreach, application, and review processes may also present
significant barriers to access. Applicants from diverse groups may not even be
aware of these programs because of limited outreach, and when they do learn of
these opportunities, they may not have access to the contextual information and
support required to navigate such complex processes. While this is not an
exhaustive list of all the barriers for diverse teams attempting to bring their
innovations to market, these observations provide the impetus for the proposed
work. These issues occur at a systemic level, but targeted and co-designed
initiatives — which are the intended outputs of the Compass Pilot - can make
significant differences over time.

Though other projects are aimed at bringing more under-represented populations
into existing programs, this project is focused on co-designing tools and
solutions with underrepresented communities. The Compass Pilot brings together
the best practices of three private sector innovation approaches human-centered
design, lean impact design, and agile development — to seed fund programming.
The project team, comprising staff from the Public Policy Lab (PPL) and
ConstructEd Studio, will collaborate with innovators from diverse groups and
subject-matter experts following PPL’s human-centered design methodology, which
includes agile development best practices. At the outset, the project team will
engage in qualitative research with innovators and other stakeholders to define
existing challenges, brainstorm preliminary ideas, and prioritize potential
tools. The team will then co-design tools with a “co-design cohort” of
innovators from underrepresented groups. Next, these tools will be piloted by a
“pilot cohort” of additional innovators and evaluated, using lean impact
methods, to assess efficacy and value. Lastly, pilot learnings will be
incorporated into a final set of tools. PPL and ConstructEd’s phased approach,
which has been tested across a range of service design projects, will allow the
team to follow a systematic process while also being responsive to participants’
feedback. Rather than predicting what the final outputs will be at the outset,
the team will work with stakeholders in iterative cycles through which
interventions are discovered and refined along the way. This process ensures
that final outputs are rooted in the needs and opportunities that arise during
research, co-designed with entrepreneurial innovators from historically
underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.