* 2331503
* I-Corps:  Analyzing and Optimizing Human Factors and Ergonomics of Virtual Reality Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Lap Fai Yu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software tools for analyzing and optimizing human factors and
ergonomics of virtual reality applications. Training is a crucial virtual
reality (VR) application with a significant commercial potential. The proposed
technology generates exertion-aware virtual training content, which is important
as content created without considering exertion may easily exhaust users or fail
to help users achieve their training goals. The envisioned exertion-aware
virtual training content may be widely deployed by different industries such as
fitness training and rehabilitation. The results may benefit the general public
by enhancing training effectiveness and accessibility, public health, and
quality of life. In addition, the proposed technology may have an impact on
human-computer interaction, content creation, virtual reality, and the future of
training.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an exertion-aware content
generation toolkit for software applications such as virtual reality training,
rehabilitation, and exercising. The proposed technology potentially may be
realized as a practical software development kit for a game engine for content
creators and extended reality developers’ use. The proposed toolkit incorporates
recent trends of gym equipment companies, virtual reality (VR) companies and VR
gyms on gamifying fitness training experiences based on motion-tracked gym
equipment and VR technologies. Via optimization, the technology is designed to
circumvent the tedious and difficult efforts needed to tune the exertion effects
of virtual training content manually, unlocking the full potential of VR for
training and fitness enhancement. Using the generated content, a trainee attains
the exercise goals, while the haptics feedback synchronized with the visual
content enhances the immersiveness and realism. In addition, this enhances the
trainee’s muscle memory and hence the effectiveness of the training experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.