* 2331095
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Wildfire-Resilient Ecosystems and Communities in the Southwest United States: An Early Warning System
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Donald Falk, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 198,987.00

Ecosystems of the Southwest U.S. are facing stress from rapid climate change and
expanding wildfires. Current wildfire conditions are leading to widespread
mortality events and ecosystem conversion. Areas of high climate vulnerability
that have experienced wildfire are especially susceptible to undesirable
ecological changes. This project addresses these challenges by creating a Fire-
Climate Response Early Warning (F-CREW) network. F-CREW is a collaboration of
ecologists, land managers, and rural and Indigenous community members who will
develop the foundation for a robust research program linking climate change,
wildfire, and risk. The overarching goal of F-CREW is to contribute to the
sustainability of both ecosystems and human communities during rapid change.
These research frameworks can address fundamental gaps in our understanding of
both ecological and social systems.

This planning Project has two objectives: (1) Identify areas of highest
vulnerability to rapid ecological change, and (2) Engage with diverse
communities affected by rapid ecological change. Through data synthesis and
review, combined with spatial analysis, a mechanistic framework is developed to
identify communities and places that are vulnerable to fire-mediated changes.
The F-CREW team also engages with fire- and climate-vulnerable communities
through local institutions, regional forums, and policy networks. A series of
collaborative workshops and site visits develops appropriate community
management protocols. Ultimately, the project addresses fundamental questions
such as: (1) which areas are most vulnerable to rapid ecological change, and (2)
what factors contribute to that vulnerability? The project clarifies the
particular role of wildfire in determining rapid structural change in ecosystems
of the Southwest U.S.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.