* 2331283
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Conference on Computational Photography (IEEE ICCP)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Mohit Gupta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the participation of students from US-based institutions in
the IEEE International Conference on Computational Photography (ICCP) 2023, to
be held as an in-person event between July 28-30, 2023, at the Monona Terrace
Community and Convention Center, in Madison, Wisconsin, United States. Currently
in its fifteenth iteration, ICCP is the premier annual conference dedicated to
computational photography and is organized with the vision of fostering a
community of researchers that all converge to this field from traditionally
distinct disciplines, including: imaging and optics, imaging and signal
processing, vision and graphics, sensors, and electronics. The ICCP 2023 program
includes keynote and invited talks from the above-mentioned and other
communities, paper presentations, poster and demo sessions, and networking
events. This program creates rich opportunities for cross-pollination of ideas
across research and application areas and provides both junior and senior
researchers with an environment where they can engage in brainstorming and
mentoring discourse.

This award facilitates the participation in ICCP 2023 of a diverse group of
students, including: students from underrepresented groups; students from
research labs that traditionally do not attend ICCP but work on closely related
problems; and students that would not otherwise have the resources to attend.
The award provides travel grants for 10 selected US-based students. Applications
are solicited broadly from across the US, and recipients of travel grants are
selected by the ICCP 2023 program chairs. Each travel grant partially covers
travel and lodging costs with a conference registration waiver. Recipient
students are invited to attend all aspects all elements of the ICCP 2023 program
(paper presentations, keynote talks, invited talks, poster and demo sessions,
reception, breaks and networking events); present their research work as a
poster at the ICCP 2023 poster sessions; and participate in an industry
consortium connecting them to senior industry mentors for research and career
development advice. Overall, the project will support the career development of
some of the brightest junior researchers in computational photography and will
increase diversity and student participation in ICCP 2023, and the broader
computational photography community. In turn, this will help increase the number
of active researchers and educators in STEM, advance the computational
photography field, and accelerate the research and development of technologies
with broad beneficial societal impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.