* 2331975
* Planning: Establishing an Industry Partnership for Sustainable Demolition Research on Climate Change
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Qian Zhang, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical description: The building and demolition industry is a major
contributor to energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, accounting for 38%
of global carbon emissions in 2019. Of particular concern is the demolition
sector, which contributes significantly to these emissions due to energy-
intensive activities that involve heavy machinery, consuming substantial amounts
of diesel fuel. This reliance on machinery results in significant emissions of
CO2 and other greenhouse gases. Furthermore, the demolition phase generates more
than 90% of construction and demolition (C&D) waste, including materials like
concrete and steel with a high carbon footprint. When disposed of in landfills,
these materials emit substantial embodied carbon emissions. However, proper
management can recover around 90% of demolition waste, presenting a significant
opportunity to reduce carbon emissions through recycling and reuse. Despite the
potential for significant carbon savings, little research has focused on the
carbon footprint of the demolition industry. Prior climate change research in
the construction industry has mainly centered on minimizing carbon emissions
during the construction phase, leaving the demolition phase largely unexplored.
To fully understand and mitigate the impact of demolition operations on climate
change, empirical studies on the carbon footprint of demolition are crucial.
This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by organizing a workshop and site
visits to build collaboration with demolition contractors and HBCU researchers.
Case studies of demolition projects will be developed to demonstrate the need
for sustainable demolition practices and facilitate discussions during the
workshop. Overall, this project will identify critical research questions,
focusing on equipment activities, fuel consumption, and recyclable materials, to
understand the relationship between demolition processes and carbon generation
and yield academia-industry partnerships to support research addressing them.
Furthermore, collaborations with HBCUs and demolition contractors will promote
diversity and inclusivity in STEM research and contribute to a more diverse and
inclusive workforce in the demolition industry.

Technical description: The building and demolition industry is a major
contributor to global carbon emissions, with the demolition sector being
particularly significant due to its energy-intensive activities, such as heavy
machinery use. In addition, more than 90% of construction and demolition waste
is generated during the demolition phase, and proper management of this waste
presents a significant opportunity to reduce carbon emissions through recycling
and reuse. This HBCU EiR Planning Grant proposal aims to develop a collaborative
network between demolition contractors and researchers from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to identify research questions related to
sustainable demolition practices in preparation for an HBCU EiR proposal where
we will propose an innovative demolition planning method to minimize its carbon
footprint. The proposed activities of this planning grant include 1) developing
case studies of demolition projects to facilitate discussion among
collaborators, where the carbon footprint of the projects is captured with
respect to equipment activities and resulting amounts of recyclable/reusable
materials; 2) organizing a two-day academia-industry workshop where we will
invite local demolition contractors and HBCU researchers to evaluate demolition
activities critical to carbon generation and material recycling and identify
research questions and potential research areas; and 3) visiting potential
collaborators' demolition sites to better understand their operational practices
and develop a collaboration plan with demolition contractors and HBCU
researchers for the planned HBCU EiR project. Through these activities, the team
will identify fundamental knowledge gaps present in sustainable demolition
practices and generate a proposal to minimize carbon emissions in the demolition
industry against climate change. This project holds significant intellectual
merit as it fosters academia-industry collaborations for impactful research
(i.e., supported with empirical case studies available from such collaborations)
in sustainable demolition practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.