* 2331648
* CHAI: Cyberinfrastructure Upgrades Supporting STEM Activities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Scott Friskics, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the instructional, research, and
development capacity at these institutions expands the opportunities for
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty
community to look beyond the traditional classroom for intellectual and
professional growth. This project aligns directly with that goal by
strengthening the STEM cyberinfrastructure for instructional and research
activities. The project aims to enhance cyberinfrastructure and cybersecurity
necessary to facilitate development of the institution in STEM fields and for
the protection of sensitive data.

The project seeks to upgrade specific STEM IT resources at the institution to
improve the resiliency and security of STEM operations, data management,
teaching, and research enterprises. Improvements to ANC’s network and
cybersecurity seeks to advance the college’s ability to implement advances in
STEM instruction and research. The activities for developing STEM
cyberinfrastructure will directly support current and future projects. Students
will benefit from increased access to online resources and virtual courses. STEM
research activities in environmental science and natural resources will be aided
and enabled by advances in cyberinfrastructure at the institution. Due to the
inclusion of the library in the upgrade, the community served by the college
will also benefit.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.