* 2331109
* Magnetic Octupole Based Next-generation Spintronic Devices in XY-like Chiral Antiferromagnets
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pramey Upadhyaya, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2026
* USD 356,142.00

Integrating magnetic order with present-day charge-based electronics offers
exciting opportunities to construct devices with orders of magnitude reduced
energy, time, and size for many modern information processing applications. This
has initiated the burgeoning field of spintronics. Two applications where
spintronic devices have recently emerged as particularly promising candidates
are: (a) processing large amounts of probabilistic data commonly found in fields
ranging from artificial intelligence to cryptography to quantum emulation, and
(b) transporting information on chips without the presence of Joule heating.
However, the magnetic materials predominantly used for fabricating such devices
thus far suffer from unwanted stray magnetic interactions, slow spin dynamics,
and/or poor efficiency in transducing information between the electrical and
magnetic domains. This has limited the scope of spintronic devices and created a
need to search for alternative material platforms to construct such devices. The
goal of this project is to study by combining theory with proof-of-principle
experiments, a new class of magnets called chiral antiferromagnets, in order to
address this challenge. Chiral antiferromagnets exhibit a non-collinear and
chiral arrangement of constituent electronic spins, which gives rise to octupole
magnetic order. This magnetic order simultaneously offers high-speed operation,
absence of stray interactions, and high transduction efficiencies. In
particular, the principal investigator will study and design novel octupole-
based probabilistic bits and superfluid-inspired spin conduits in chiral
antiferromagnets. These designs have the potential to achieve a 2-3 orders of
magnitude reduction in energy for running probabilistic algorithms and enabling
beyond state-of-the-art long-distance transfer of spin information,
respectively. Throughout this project, the principal investigator will also
provide training to a diverse set of undergraduate and graduate students in
topics ranging from magnetism to unconventional computing to quantum sensing.
This will enhance the United States' workforce at the intersection of
microelectronics and quantum information science.

The proposed research aims to establish foundational knowledge for exploiting
the octupole magnetic order in chiral antiferromagnets to construct novel
spintronic devices. The project focuses on chiral antiferromagnets with negative
chirality, where the octupole moments exhibit large-angle nonlinear dynamics
within an easy plane. Two complementary geometries - nanomagnets and nanowires -
will be explored to create p-bits and superfluid-inspired spin devices,
respectively. Due to the interesting interplay between magnetic interactions in
chiral antiferromagnets and strong exchange fields between spins, the new
octupole moment-based p-bits exhibit low barriers to octupole fluctuations and
high-speed octupole dynamics. This promises a 2-3 orders of magnitude
enhancement in flips per second over present-day p-bits, which is a key figure
of merit that governs the energy and/or time required to reach the solution for
running a wide variety of probabilistic algorithms. On the other hand, the
proposed exploration of octupole-based spin conduits in chiral antiferromagnets
is unique in that it combines the following properties in a single platform at
room temperature by demonstrating: (i) capability to efficiently inject spins to
initiate large-angle non-linear dynamics of octupoles, (ii) absence of stray
interactions, and (iii) low damping. This provides a promising avenue to solve
the long-standing challenge of superfluid-inspired long-distance transport of
spin at room temperature. To explore the proposed devices, the principal
investigator will develop experimentally benchmarked theories of the stochastic
dynamics of octupole moments across wide length scales, ranging from atoms to
circuits, in the presence of thermal and spin-orbit drives. The experimental
benchmarking will leverage the use of spin qubit probes and electrical
characterization. Beyond the potential to enable the proposed devices, the study
is expected to generate fundamental understanding and models needed to exploit
chiral antiferromagnets in the field of antiferromagnetic spintronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.