* 2331985
* Data Quality in Manufacturing Industrial Internet Integration
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Ran Jin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Janis Terpenny
* 11/30/2026
* USD 300,001.00

This research project is focused on data quality evaluation and improvement for
effective Artificial Intelligence (AI) deployment in manufacturing. In modern
manufacturing industries, AI-guided decision-making has revolutionized
production, product quality, design customization, and manufacturing
sustainability. However, the lack of quantitative data quality evaluation and
effective data preparation methodologies for manufacturing AI models pose a few
critical challenges, including untrustworthy AI decision-making, high energy
consumptions to process large but quality-poor datasets, and a lack of more
effective datasets to be shared across manufacturing systems for AI model
training. These challenges greatly slow down the adoption of AI technologies in
manufacturing industries, thus significantly impacting the global
competitiveness of US manufacturing. This research project defines and evaluates
quantitative manufacturing data quality metrics, advances scientific knowledge
for data quality assurance based on manufacturing features, and promotes dataset
preparation for AI modeling. As a result, the research not only enables fast
training and comparison of AI models due to improved manufacturing data quality,
but also reduces environmental impact on data computation, communication, and
storage. This research project also includes a comprehensive outreach and
education program for college students and manufacturing workforce development,
including panel discussion, outreach seminars to underrepresented students and
practitioners, and manufacturing AI competitions.

The goal of this research project is to define, evaluate, and improve data
quality to enable compatible usage of datasets in Manufacturing Industrial
Internet integrated by heterogenous machines, sensors, and computation devices.
The project builds the data quality methodology to address the challenges based
on manufacturing specific data format and modalities from different
manufacturing layouts. First, the data quality is defined as inversely
proportional to the variance of AI model performance. A latent neural
recommender system investigates the interface between datasets and AI models to
assess data quality when different AI models are used. Second, manufacturing
data quality is modeled based on the unique manufacturing data features from
graphs of different manufacturing layouts and data modalities. Third, after the
root causes of poor data quality are identified, golden datasets are generated
by ensemble active learning by contextual bandits to ensure robust manufacturing
AI model performance to data source variabilities. The data quality methodology
connects to the manufacturing hierarchical variable relationship, multimodal
data, and layout representations with effective feature representations.
Methodologies are validated by both real datasets in Semiconductor Manufacturing
and a Manufacturing Industrial Internet testbed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.