* 2331329
* EAGER: XAISE: Explainable Artificial Intelligence for Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The increasing availability of data from the first three paradigms of science
(experiments, theory, and simulations), along with advances in artificial
intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) has offered unprecedented
opportunities for accelerating scientific discoveries using data-driven science.
In particular Deep Learning (DL) has emerged as a transformative technology for
deriving insights from massive datasets in many scientific domains such as
material science, life-science, drug design etc. However, interpretability and
explainability of DL models remains a major issue and an open problem. The need
for explainable AI is often crucial in science and engineering, with
applications of national importance such as materials design, construction,
transportation, health-sciences, energy storage, etc., where the cost of wrong
decisions can be catastrophically large, making it critical to ensure that the
model is not just quantitatively accurate but is in fact learning from the
correct features, and learning things that make sense in an understandable
manner. But an abstract view of explanability is extremely difficult, because
explanation also requires context within the application domain. This project
seeks to develop addresses explanability within the use of DL by incorporating
and utilizing context from scientific application domains and by exploring
traditional machine learning techniques.

This project seeks to explore and investigate an approach of ML-DL integration
to realize explainable AI in terms of the four NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology) principles. The specific goals of this project are: to
design, develop, and implement XAISE â€“ a framework to enhance the explainability
of AI models for science and engineering applications with minimal impact on
accuracy; to adapt XAISE for heterogenous data types, e.g., numerical, images,
etc.; to scale XAISE to be able to handle large, multi-dimensional data; and
evaluate the applicability of XAISE for at least two application domains,
including materials science and nanotechnology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.