* 2331890
* PRIMES: Enhancing Capacity for Research in Applied Mathematics at Spelman College
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Brendan Hassett, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2025
* USD 318,866.00

This project aims to enhance research capacity in applied mathematics for
undergraduates and faculty in the Department of Mathematics at Spelman College,
a historically Black college for women. Through engagement with the Institute
for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM) semester on
Numerical Partial Differential Equations, the project will foster research
collaborations in numerical PDEs, expose Spelman faculty to ICERM programs, and
will offer undergraduate research opportunities and curriculum development in
numerical PDEs. The project’s research focus is to develop better computational
techniques to solve the equations that model spinodal decomposition, which is
the separation of binary mixtures into two phases. The goal is to create higher
order numerical approaches using mixed-model methods and to investigate the
stability properties of these methods. Additionally, the PI will explore the
potential of incorporating machine learning techniques to evolve the model in
time. Overall, this project combines cutting-edge research with educational and
diversity focused initiatives that will improve research capacity in applied
math at Spelman College and will encourage Black women to pursue graduate
degrees in applied mathematics.

This research project seeks to develop a higher order numerical approach for
solving the Cahn-Hilliard equation, a model for spinodal decomposition in binary
mixtures. The goal is to investigate the optimal splitting between the implicit
and explicit components in an implicit-explicit (IMEX) Runge-Kutta method that
yields an accurate and stable solution. The PI firsts extends a semi-implicit
approach by Shen to an IMEX implicit midpoint rule. Then the PI will determine
if the same splitting is beneficial in a third order diagonally IMEX Runge-Kutta
scheme. The research also explores using a mixed-model approach for the variable
mobility case that incorporates the constant mobility model. The goal is to
choose the optimal splittings to produce variable mobility behavior.
Furthermore, the project is incorporating machine learning techniques into the
mixed model time evolution. The stability and accuracy of all the proposed
methods will be thoroughly investigated. Understanding the dynamics of spinodal
decomposition in binary mixtures has significant applications in materials
science, chemistry, and engineering. Developing higher order numerical methods
and investigating their stability contributes to the advancement of numerical
techniques for simulating complex physical phenomena. Moreover, the integration
of machine learning into the numerical framework opens avenues for enhancing the
accuracy and efficiency of the simulations.

The project is funded jointly by the Infrastructure program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the HBCU-Excellence in Research Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.