* 2331082
* CAREER: 3D Printed Carbon-Metal Nanohybrid Aerogels for Highly Efficient Adsorptive/Catalytic Removal of PFASs
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Nirupam Aich, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2027
* USD 391,627.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are fluorinated organic chemicals
that have been manufactured and used in numerous consumer products and
industrial applications since the 1940s. During the last two decades, increasing
detection of PFAS in surface water, groundwater, soils, sludges, and biosolids
has raised significant concerns about their persistence, stability, and adverse
impact in the environment including toxicity to living organisms and humans.
Conventional water treatment technologies cannot effectively remove and destroy
PFAS due to their dilute concentration in contaminated water sources and unique
chemical features, including a combination of strong C-F bonds, hydrophobic
carbon tails, and hydrophilic terminal head groups. The overarching goal of this
CAREER project is to lay the foundation for the development of a novel and
integrated filtration/catalytic reactor system that can extract and destroy PFAS
from contaminated water sources. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigator proposes to use 3D printing to explore the fabrication of
adsorptive/catalytic graphene-metal nanohybrid aerogels with high surface area,
tunable surface chemistry, and hierarchical and interconnected pores for fast
water/mass transport to enable efficient extraction and degradation of PFAS from
contaminated water sources. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the development of new functional materials and
fundamental knowledge to advance the development of an integrated filtration and
catalytic system that could serve a point-of-use (POU) filter for the treatment
of PFAS contaminated water. Further benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of a graduate student at
the University at Buffalo and four middle/school teachers from the Buffalo
public schools.

Graphene-based aerogels have emerged as promising water treatment platforms due
to their unique structural properties including hierarchical/interconnected
pores with high surface area that enable fast water/mass transport, and
efficient material regeneration and reuse. The integration of photocatalytic
and/or redox-active metallic nanomaterials into graphene-based aerogels have the
potential to open new opportunities to design and build a new generation of
integrated filtration/catalytic systems for the efficient and cost-effective
treatment of PFAS contaminated water. As a first step toward this goal, the
Principal Investigator (PI) of this CAREER project proposes to leverage a unique
3D printing approach developed in the PIâ€™s laboratory to explore the fabrication
of tunable, self-standing, water-stable, and multifunctional photo/redox-
catalytic graphene-metal nanohybrid aerogels as safe and effective platform for
PFAS treatment and degradation. The specific objectives of the research are to:
(1) Develop a 3D printing approach for catalytic graphene-metal nanohybrid
aerogels and characterize the aerogel properties using state-of-the-art
techniques including X-ray computed tomography with nanoscale resolution; (2)
Investigate the relationships between the extents of PFAS sorption and catalytic
degradation, graphene aerogel size and porosity, and water chemistry including
the effects of pH, ionic strength, and natural organic matter on material
performance; and (3) Elucidate the mechanisms of adsorption and degradation of
PFAS by the 3D printed graphene aerogels using statistical modeling and a
combination of analytical tools including Fourier transformed infrared (FT-IR)
spectroscopy, X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, liquid chromatography coupled with high resolution
mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS), and ion chromatography (IC). The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the development of new adsorptive/catalytic materials and the generation of new
fundamental knowledge to advance the development of integrated
filtration/catalytic systems that could serve as point-of-use (POU) filters for
the treatment of PFAS contaminated water. To implement the educational and
training goals of this CAREER project, the PI will develop a new
undergraduate/graduate course at the University at Buffalo that will focus on
nanomaterial synthesis, processing, and applications to environmental
remediation. In addition, the PI plans to collaborate with teachers from the
Buffalo Public Schools (BPS) system to develop lesson plans to teach middle/high
school students about environmental pollution and remediation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.