* 2331031
* Conference: 2023 Epigenetics Gordon Research Conference and Seminar: Epigenetic Information: Mechanisms, Memory and Inheritance
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Mary Gehring, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2024
* USD 23,835.00

This award will provide support for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers
and early-career investigators to attend the 2023 Epigenetics Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) in Holderness, New Hampshire.
These conferences will be focused on understanding how non-genetic information
is inherited and influences phenotype across a wide range of organisms,
including plants, animals, and fungi, and across multiple scales, from single-
molecules to the phenomenological. The GRS provides an opportunity for students
and postdoctoral researchers to share unpublished, cutting-edge research among
peers, develop networks, and benefit from career mentoring. Discussion topics
include epigenetic reprogramming during development, transgenerational
epigenetic inheritance, and the evolution of chromatin.

The GRC will advance cross-disciplinary knowledge sharing through a scientific
program that includes both leaders and newcomers to the field from across the
world. The open exchange of ideas will promote the careers of early
investigators and maintain the vibrancy and innovation of the epigenetics field.
Discussion topics include heterochromatin, chromatin structure, RNA-directed
processes, epigenome maintenance, transposable elements, and epigenetics and the
environment.

The award is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program (Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences) and the Developmental Systems program (Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems) in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.