* 2331732
* Travel: Supplemental Funding Request: Collaboration Between Girl Power By Design and Managing Identities Projects
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Aaminah Norris, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 108,325.00

This travel award will support a collaboration between the CSforAll Expanding
Girl Power by Design project in the U.S. and the Managing Identities in Diverse
Societies Project in Italy. The Girl Power team is developing two theoretical
concepts to understand girls' STEM identity, while the Managing Identities team
is conducting a longitudinal study to identify supports for the well-being of
adolescents with and without a migrant background. Through this collaboration,
the two teams will inform and learn from each othersâ€™ approaches, ultimately
generating knowledge to support girls in STEM within the contexts of the United
States, Italy, and beyond. The Girl Power Team will conduct two short-term
visits to Emilia-Romagna, Italy, each lasting approximately three weeks, to
conduct comparative analyses of minoritized communities across the two
international contexts.

The primary purpose of this collaboration is to engage in a comparative analysis
of identity development of minoritized girls with access to and engagement with
culturally responsive curricula and technologies across two international
contexts. In this respect, the research team aims to identify whether the
phenomena of Reciprocal Recognition and Critical Amplification are ones that
function similarly beyond the localized context of the study in the United
States to the broader international context in Italy. The collaboration will
involve two short term visits to the research site in Emilia-Romagna, Italy by a
core team consisting of the U.S. PI, two senior researchers, and three graduate
students. As education researchers from Italy and the United States,
respectively, they will examine the impact of concepts of national identity,
safety, and criminalization on immigrant ethnic minority girl students'
identities in both countries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.