* 2331160
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence Generated Labeled Maps from Reality Capture Data
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Laramie Potts, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to streamline
the Architecture, Engineering and Construction community workflows so that
considerable cost savings are passed on to their customers. This I-Corps project
will enhance the scientific understanding of automatic feature extraction from a
variety of multiple sensor data and imagery over a wide range of field
conditions. This project will require innovative algorithms for processing and
compression of huge datasets. This project has potential impact on combating
climate change through automatic processing of massive amounts of data collected
from earth orbiting satellites, drones, or ships. Elements from this project can
be used to enhance workforce development programs to include occupational
training on geospatial information systems. This I-Corps projectâ€™s visualization
modules can support spatial thinking development in pre-college programs through
hands-on manipulation of digital models of the built environment. Spatial
thinking is highly correlated with competency in mathematics. The commercial
impact of this project will transform the geospatial mapping industry by
eliminating manual intervention and allowing machines to perform repetitive
mapping tasks with greater accuracy and speed. Accordingly, this project will
enable more accurate and efficient data collection, analysis, and decision-
making processes, relieve human stress and strain, and enhance productivity.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an automated data processing
system that will increase productivity in mapping workflows using reality
capture data. Architecture, Engineering and Construction companies are heavily
invested in reality capture technologies to map the infrastructure of the built
environment from point clouds and imagery. Such investments are meant to reduce
operational costs associated with field data collection and subsequent
production of design plans for construction and the development of information
systems for civil asset management projects. However, outdated workflows that
incorporate reality capture data often become entangled with unproductive
processes that slow down mapping operations, increase human-induced errors, and
yield a negative revenue impact. A viable solution is an innovative software
system that uses artificial intelligence algorithms to extract meaningful
information from point clouds and imagery to produce industry-standard documents
and annotated plans that satisfy pre-construction approvals/permitting
requirements. This I-Corps project will be capable of producing digital
information for intelligent infrastructure asset management, condition
assessment, risk management, and overall project management. This project
reduces human error and decreases the mapping production time with significant
cost saving to customers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.