* 2331429
* ART: Enhancements at the New Jersey Institute of Technology to Transform Translational Impact
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Atam Dhawan, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,499,999.00

This project supports acceleration of translation research and innovation that
will promote the advancement of scientific progress along with prosperity and
welfare of the nation through the enhancement of translational research. As an
example, the US has maintained a competitive edge over competing nations through
the translation of fundamental research from the lab to practical application,
which drives the innovation economy. Thus, a change in institutional culture
that leads to an increase in the number and robustness of translational research
ecosystems across the nation will serve to maintain that leadership role. This
project is important to society since it leads to a scalable, career path
oriented, and economically impactful outcome. The project is scalable since the
knowledge gained may be transferred to other institutes of higher education.
Additionally, improvements in education that align with expected job
opportunities will lead to future career pathways. And finally, the intellectual
property generated will positively impact regional economic development.

The objective of this project is to enhance the research translation ecosystem
at the New Jersey Institute of Technology and its impact on the society. This is
achieved through three main tasks: i) creating institutional infrastructure; ii)
education and training; and iii) supporting translational research projects,
aided by institutional learning and culture change through mentorship.
Institutional infrastructure is created through the creation of the NJIT Center
for Translational Research, which will serve as a central hub for all activities
and is governed by a diverse external advisory board. Cohorts of graduate
students, postdocs, and faculty will be offered two types of research
translation education: (1) developing curricular education for graduate
students, and (2) co-curricular workshops for faculty and postdocs based on NSF
I-Corps curriculum. Supporting translational research projects leading to the
immediate impact and serving as a platform for growing translational research,
innovation and technology commercialization ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.