* 2331263
* A National-Scale Testbed Supporting Artificial Intelligence Research Spanning the Computing Continuum
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Ilkay Altintas, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 3,106,691.00

New artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming how the nation conducts
scientific research. However, as scientists quickly adopt new AI techniques, the
architecture and design of a performant computational infrastructure to support
these new explorations, particularly as NSF has rapidly grown a new community of
AI research teams through programs such as the AI institutes, represent
fundamental open questions. Developing and evaluating new approaches to AI-
enabled scientific workflows, programming and runtime environments, integrating
data from diverse sources–in context of a national-scale computing continuum
spanning intelligent edge devices to centralized high-performance computing
centers–require at-scale test Cyberinfrastructure.

This project designs and builds a new national-scale testbed that supports
computer scientists developing and exploring novel distributed-AI computing
systems. The edge-based pilot testbed links low-power AI-enabled computers
distributed across the country with high-resolution environmental sensors and
instruments such as cameras, microphones, and weather sensors. The testbed
supports scientists exploring design concepts, operational modes, and real-time
sensor data workflows, contributing to the understanding of Earth's changing
climate and biosphere. The pilot testbed also addresses today’s urgent need for
a diverse, AI-trained scientific workforce by enabling students, researchers,
and community scientists to ethically engage in multidisciplinary AI research,
creating the next generation of scientists needed to responsibly develop AI
capabilities in every facet of our economy. By addressing the current lack of a
comprehensive, flexible toolset and infrastructure for AI-centric and
computationally mediated research, the project provides a crucial research
testbed that bridges current computational resources and the demands of
advancing AI capabilities. This effort is also supported by National Discovery
Cloud for Climate (NDC-C) resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.