* 2331610
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Organic Residue Analysis into Long Term Dye Preservation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* David Carballo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 20,900.00

Many features of the 21st century global economy – interconnectedness,
globalization, widely circulating commodities, and cash crop agriculture
increasingly oriented towards foreign export – were shaped by long-term
historical processes that trace back at least to the early modern period. This
project investigates one key commodity and cash crop of that period: cochineal.
This vibrant red insect-based dye played a central role in prehispanic Mexican
economies, artistry, and knowledge production for centuries, if not millennia.
Following the Spanish invasion and establishment of colonial New Spain,
cochineal revolutionized emerging globalized economies, artistic movements, and
scientific discovery. Cochineal made its way onto the red coats of British
military officers, the canvases of Europe’s celebrated painters, and even the
newly developed hypotheses of Enlightenment scientists. Yet, far less is known
about how colonial Spain’s demand for this dye changed pre-existing production
systems within Mexico. Cochineal producers left behind few written records, and
thus archaeology is particularly well suited to investigating how Spanish
colonization impacted their lives and the industry in which they participated.
By investigating Mexican cochineal production on an archaeological time scale,
this project contributes to broader efforts to understand how globalization has
impacted and continues to impact local agricultural systems and economies.

The researchers use organic chemical analysis to identify tools that were once
used to produce cochineal. By analyzing the change over time in the frequency of
these tools, they investigate various questions about the antiquity of cochineal
production in Mexico. More specifically, how widespread was the economic
practice of cochineal production, and how did it change over time? Additionally,
how did this economic practice intersect with the broader context of the Spanish
conquest, including demographic decline, incorporation into transatlantic
economies, and ecological change? This project’s methods rely upon recent
developments in archaeo-chemical analysis that make possible the identification
of chemical compounds preserved in ancient artifacts. These methods have the
potential to greatly expand the scope of what is considered possible to learn
about the past; however, they have been both underutilized and underdeveloped
due to the lack of training in organic chemistry most archaeologists receive.
This project advances scientific techniques in archaeology by refining existing
methodologies so that they are capable of detecting a wider range of chemical
compounds, and therefore, a wider range of human behaviors. This project
analyzes existing artifact collections from archaeological sites in the central
Mexican state of Tlaxcala, one of the largest centers of colonial Mexican
cochineal production. By building one robust case study of local production,
this project will strengthens analytical methods that can be applied to future
research projects examining the intersections between local dye production and
global trade.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.