* 2331782
* Collaborative Research: SLES: Safe Distributional-Reinforcement Learning-Enabled Systems: Theories, Algorithms, and Experiments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Xian Yu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 375,000.00

Reinforcement learning (RL), with its success in automation and robotics, has
been widely viewed as one of the most important technologies for next-
generation, learning-enabled systems. For example, 6G networking systems,
autonomous driving, digital healthcare, and smart cities are all enabled by RL.
However, despite the significant advances over the last few decades, a major
obstacle in applying RL in practice is the lack of “safety'' guarantees such as
robustness, resilience to tail-risks, operational constraints, etc. This is
because the traditional RL only aims at maximizing cumulative reward. While it
is possible to add penalties to rewards in a traditional RL algorithm to
discourage unsafe actions, many safety constraints, such as chance constraints,
cannot be simply treated as penalties. This project develops foundational
technologies for safe RL-enabled systems based on Distributional Reinforcement
Learning (DRL), which learns the optimal policy. While developing the foundation
of DRL for safe learning-enabled systems, research and education are integrated
by including new theories and algorithms developed in this project into their
graduate-level courses. All team members have been regularly supervising
undergraduate students and students from underrepresented groups. The team
continues to leverage Women's Place at Ohio State University and the Women in
Science and Engineering Program at Arizona State University to enhance the
broader participation of women students and researchers.

This project focuses on a comprehensive approach for the end-to-end safety of
DRL-enabled systems. The end-to-end safety includes (i) policy safety: learn a
safe policy to avoid the occurrence of catastrophic outcomes (corresponds to
risk-sensitive RL); (ii) exploration safety -- learn a safe policy safely by
avoiding dangerous actions during exploration/learning (corresponds to online
RL); and (iii) environmental safety -- learn a policy that is robust to
parametric uncertainty (environment change). This project includes four thrusts.
Thrust 1 (Foundation of constrained DRL) aims to establish theoretical
foundations of risk sensitive constrained DRL and focuses on policy and
environmental safety. Thrust 2 (Online constrained DRL) considers safe online
learning and decision-making and focuses on exploration safety and environmental
safety when learning a safe DRL policy. Thrust 3 (Physics-Enhanced constrained
DRL) exploits physics to enhance end-to-end safety. These three thrusts on
foundational research are interdependent, but each focuses on a unique aspect of
safe RL-enabled systems and addresses multiple safety notions. The fourth thrust
will provide comprehensive validation with both high-fidelity simulations and
real-world experiments using unmanned aerial vehicles.

This research is supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and Open Philanthropy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.