* 2331287
* Expanding Access to Graduate Education and the Advanced STEM Workforce
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Julia Kent, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Nina Maung-Gaona
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,169,896.00

Increasing the competitiveness of the American STEM workforce depends on
recruiting a larger and more diverse group STEM graduate students from across
the United States, including those from historically underrepresented groups:
racial and ethnic minorities, gender minorities in specific STEM fields,
students from U.S. regions with disproportionately low STEM graduate degree
attainment, persons with disabilities, first-generation students, low-income
students, and veterans. This project will support this goal through the
expansion of the National Name Exchange (NNE), a well established program that
connects underrepresented undergraduate students with institutions seeking to
diversify their graduate programs. Through research and communication
activities, the project has the potential to remove barriers to STEM graduate
study in three ways. First, it will provide a technological platform for
expanding the recruitment of graduate students from underrepresented groups.
Second, research using NNE data will be used to understand gaps in student
pathways to STEM graduate programs and inform both national and university
strategies for recruiting and supporting underrepresented students. Third, the
project will design, test and continuously improve resources to support
prospective graduate students and universities seeking to recruit them to STEM
graduate programs.

This project seeks to accelerate the recruitment of graduate students from
underrepresented groups. By expanding an existing technological infrastructure
for connecting underrepresented graduate students with STEM graduate programs,
the project will generate data needed to deepen our understanding of gaps and
interruptions in student pathways to graduate school and to remedy these
interruptions with information and resources. The data collected from student
enrollees in the NNE will be matched with National Student Clearinghouse records
to determine whether and on what time frame NNE participants enroll in a
graduate program. Using logistic regression, the research team will explore the
impact of minoritized status, self-reported undergraduate GPA, undergraduate
research experiences, Carnegie classification and other aspects of undergraduate
institution type. By exploring the probability of matriculation at different
intervals following expected undergraduate degree completion, it will be
possible to consider how these demographic and educational factors affect
pathways into graduate study. In addition to generating data that will help
universities improve their recruitment efforts, the project’s assessment
activities will help NSF determine the effectiveness of this technological and
data infrastructure for accelerating and scaling the participation of
underrepresented students in STEM graduate programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.