* 2331093
* I-Corps:  Bone healing using a small-molecule therapeutic
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Priyatha Premnath, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of alternate applications for an anti-cancer drug to promote bone
healing. While most fractures and bone injuries heal well, in some cases such as
osteoporosis, diabetes, and advanced age, the bone healing mechanism is hampered
leading to compromised bone healing. The proposed technology will focus on
repurposing a current anti-cancer drug for improving bone regeneration and/or
preventing bone loss. This drug is able to enhance bone healing by increasing
bone volume and bone mineral density. The mechanism also has shown potential to
prevent the loss of bone in an osteoporotic environment induced by loss of
estrogen in patients with menopause. Currently, all drugs for bone healing on
the market target bone cells to increase bone formation or reduce bone
resorption with limited success. The proposed drug targets mesenchymal stem
cells by increasing their osteogenic capacity. These results would be of
significant interest as conventional anti-cancer drugs also induce bone loss
while killing tumor cells, but the proposed drug has the opposite effect in that
it protects bone.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a small molecule therapeutic
to promote bone healing. The anti-cancer drug, UC2288, will be repurposed for
this application. Bones typically heal completely after fracture, but in cases
such as advanced age, this process is substantially altered resulting in
hampered and delayed healing or non-union of bone. This may result in changes in
biomechanics of the bone leading to other complications and ultimately affect
quality of life. It has been established that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) play
a vital role in the bone healing process, and in cases like advanced age, MSCs
have reduced bone forming capacity. Current treatment strategies focus on
downstream osteogenic factors, often showing limited success. Previous research
has demonstrated a link between the cell cycle regulator p21 and bone healing
where reduced expression of p21 has been linked to increased bone formation
after injury. To translate these findings to the clinic, efficacy of UC2288 was
tested in reducing p21 expression. It was shown that UC2288 may reduce p21
expression and increase expression of osteogenic genes in both human and murine
mesenchymal stem cells. In addition, in vivo efficacy of UC2288 was shown where
injections of UC2288 increased bone volume and surface area in mice after a
transverse fracture. Using the proposed drug at the site of fracture, it may be
possible to improve bone healing and patient outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.