* 2331631
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Developing an Eco Engine Jumpstart Kit
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Elaine Kohrman, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project across the following institutions: Benedict
College (S. Carolina), Rose State College (Oklahoma), and Somerset Community
College (Kentucky). These institutions (the “cohort”) will share strategies on
how to prepare for and participate in the current industrial shift given that
small colleges, representing historically underserved communities, typically
suffer from a common set of infrastructure problems that hamper the
institution’s ability to acquire resources and adapt to innovative trends in
industry and entrepreneurship. The cohort will develop and test an approach that
addresses these common infrastructure problems, primarily through leveraging
existing resources in new ways and collaborating with external partners in the
innovative ecosystem. The results will be captured in an “Eco Engine Jumpstart
Kit” to serve as a framework that will allow the nationwide network of Community
Colleges and HBCU institutions to effectively target critical infrastructure
pain points for improved engagement with the innovative ecosystem. This will
enable institutions to aggregate more resources in the ecosystem, develop
innovative and entrepreneurial students, and strengthen the competitiveness and
viability of the institution.

This project has five goals: 1) increase faculty engagement with sponsored
projects, 2) increase partner engagement in sponsored projects, 3) increase
student engagement in research & entrepreneurship, 4) increase capacity of
sponsored projects office, and 5) develop a technology transfer process. To
achieve these goals, the cohort will take an ecosystem-building approach in
implementation and a scientific methodology in development. The individual
institutions in the cohort have combined their knowledge of higher-education
infrastructure and entrepreneurial ecosystem-building to inform their strategy
on growing a community of innovation and entrepreneurship at each participating
institution. In development, the project will experimentally develop and test
solutions from the three original participating institutions and, once
confirmed, share developed best practices with other institutions across the
nation experiencing the same limitations. A mass adoption of the completed Eco
Engine Jumpstart Kit can aid in creating a nationwide network of community
college and HBCU higher-education institutions sharing best practices and
relationships for broader impact in the innovative ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.