* 2331156
* I-Corps:  Machine Learning Algorithm for Cardiovascular Disease Diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Tenderano Muzorewa, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cardiovascular screening/diagnostic software tool that empowers
clinicians to deliver higher quality care to all patient populations, including
the historically underserved and those across the spectrum of cardiovascular
disease risk. Cardiovascular disease misdiagnosis is as much as 50% higher in
women than men The proposed software is designed to improve diagnostic accuracy
for clinicians and provide better cardiovascular health outcomes for patients.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death globally, and this software
has the potential to reduce cardiovascular healthcare costs by reducing spending
on unnecessary testing, procedures, and illness that occurs when patients are
not screened early and diagnosed quickly and accurately. This technology focuses
on those cardiovascular conditions that are misdiagnosed frequently and aims to
improve health equity given the increased risk of misdiagnosis for women and the
contribution of these conditions to the ongoing burden of cardiovascular health
inequities that affect patients from minoritized genders and ethnicities.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a machine learning-based
algorithm to assist clinicians in identifying which patients are at high risk of
developing or worsening cardiovascular diseases. The proposed technology uses
information in patients’ electronic health records, and the algorithm focuses on
cardiovascular diseases that are not well understood, are often missed, and/or
disproportionately affect women. The machine learning (ML) algorithm was trained
and tested on the digital health records of a highly diverse group of patients
and may more accurately provide cardiovascular disease (CVD) diagnoses for women
and ethnic minorities than the current standard of care. Most ML tools for
diagnosing CVD use deep learning to automate the interpretation of images and to
interpret electrocardiogram (ECG) signals with similar or superior accuracy to
specialist physicians. The training model used for this technology is designed
to catch missed cases of CVD and is based on information that is commonly in
patients’ electronic health records. This is because in many cases of
misdiagnosis, CVD is not suspected by the clinician and CVD-specific tests/scans
are not ordered or signals appear normal. The technology leverages physiological
differences in patients and is developed with the aim of improving the accuracy
of triaging patients and being able to identify patients with CVD earlier than
with the existing rule-based systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.