* 2331234
* Conference: Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium 2024
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* GREGORY BERKOLAIKO, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 15,338.00

This project will provide support for the Texas Analysis and Mathematical
Physics (TexAMP) Symposium 2024 that takes place at Texas A&M University on
February 9-11, 2024. The TexAMP Symposia form an annual conference series
initiated in 2013 and held at various universities in Texas. Leading researchers
in their fields are invited to give presentations. These lectures are augmented
by contributed talks, where researchers from the region (Texas and neighboring
states) present their latest work. As such they provide a forum for getting
acquainted with state-of-the-art results in Mathematical Physics and related
areas of Analysis, and promote communication and collaboration among researchers
in the region. Importantly, these meetings allow graduate students and junior
faculty to learn about cutting edge research and to receive feedback on their
own work from an impressive group of first-class experts in the field. Several
generations of young researchers have polished their presentation skills and
established professional links at TexAMP events. Funds are to support young
participants (graduate students and postdocs) from universities in the region,
as well as contribute to the travel and accommodation costs of some of the
invited speakers. More information about the TexAMP Symposium 2024 can be found
at the following website: texamp.github.io

The seven invited lectures at the TexAMP Symposium 2024 will cover a broad
variety of research areas in Analysis and Mathematical Physics such as stability
of solitary nonlinear waves, qualitative analysis of Laplace eigenfunctions,
complex analytic tools in spectral theory, probabilistic dynamics of nonlinear
dispersive equations, geometric spectral theory, topological phases of matter,
and microlocal analysis. The symposium is structured to create many
opportunities for discussions, fostering an environment of collaboration and
collegiality. All speakers are asked to make their presentations accessible to
junior participants. Two sessions of contributed talks, where all participants
can present their research, are planned in the prime-time slots of the event.
Poster sessions are held during two extended refreshment breaks, to ensure
maximum attendance as well as sharpened attention from senior experts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.