* 2331987
* Conference: Nano-alloys &amp; compounds @ IMRC 2023
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Douglas Chrisey, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 8,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The expected impact of alloys – a metal made from two or more other metals – on
technologies of both today and tomorrow – and their impact on society – is
comparable to that of metals in the history of civilization! Moreover, interest
in nanometric alloys has grown due to observed differences at the nanoscale of
their physical and chemical properties compared to bulk alloys. Indeed, there
are three additional degrees of freedom at the nanoscale, i.e., size, morphology
and segregation/ordering, all playing a major role in the extraordinary
properties of nanostructured materials. The intellectual merit of the Nano-
Alloys and Compound Symposium is to promote and encourage new collaborations and
interactions, especially in the new topics of nano-alloys such as high entropy
alloys, machine learning algorithms. The symposium provides an international
forum on the latest developments in nano-alloys and compounds research, acting
as a gathering point for the international scientific community working in the
field, while being a catalyst to promote further synergy between experimental
and computational approaches.

Students participating to the Nano-Alloys and Compounds Symposium will also have
access to many other symposiums; as the International Materials Research
Congress hosting the Nano-alloys and compounds symposium, also host other
symposiums, and is run in multi-parallel sessions. This setup-up will have a
beneficial impact on students’ mindset as it will broaden their vision and
research interests. Their participation to this event will help them to perfect
their presentation skills, network and initiate new collaborations; and help
them finding potential new advisors and mentors. Also, students will have the
opportunity to attend tutorials sessions to learn more about a specific topic in
materials science.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

To fully exploit the structure and performance of nano-alloys, an theoretical
deduction of their the limits of stability of the various phases at equilibrium
is critically needed. Unfortunately, such knowledge is still lacking because
calorimetry experiments are extremely challenging to perform at the nanoscale
due to the small masses involved. Therefore, in-situ microscopy and theoretical
predictions are then a smart and necessary complement to difficult and time-
consuming calorimetric experiments. To combat this hurdle in understanding the
behavior of nano-alloys, a -two days event- symposium is being organized during
the International Materials Research Congress 2023. It will bring together
theoreticians and experimentalists to discuss new ideas to move the field of
nano-alloys forward.

The goal is contributing to fill the gap in knowledge between bulk materials,
where the properties are calculated by classical thermodynamics; and clusters,
where the properties are obtained by theoretical calculations, to advance the
fundamental understanding of nano-alloys.

By supporting this symposium, the National Science Foundation is promoting
interactions between US students, US scientists and international experts from
North, Central and South America, Asia, and Europe; all who are interested in
understanding the properties of nano-alloys. This symposium can be considered as
the American (North, Central & South) congress counterpart dedicated to Nano-
Alloys, complementary to ones held annually in Europe.

All contributions submitted by the participants to this symposium will be
considered for publication in MRS Advances, after rigorous peer-review.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.