* 2331639
* Conference: Bridging Child Language Research to Practice for Language Revitalization
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Melvatha Chee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2024
* USD 10,598.00

The study of first language (L1) acquisition — the process whereby children
learn their native language(s) — occupies a central place in the science of
human language. However, the Indigenous languages of the Americas are greatly
under-represented in this area of science. Furthermore, most such languages are
severely endangered, which amplifies the urgency for research on how these
languages are acquired, for the benefit of developmental science and for
Indigenous communities working to revitalize their traditional languages. This
conference award supports an organized session at the 2024 annual meetings of
two major scholarly organizations in linguistics: the Society for the Study of
the Indigenous Languages of the Americas (SSILA) and the Linguistic Society of
America (LSA). This organized session brings together two groups: (1)
researchers focused on the L1 acquisition of the Indigenous languages of the
Americas; and (2) practitioners working within language nests, which are early-
childhood language revitalization programs that immerse young children in an
Indigenous language. Creating a feedback loop between science and practice
generates a wide range of broader impacts by strengthening the revitalization
programs represented by participants and attendees, creating opportunities for
Indigenous language revitalization practitioners to extend their networks and
professional community, and broadening participation in STEM by Native
Americans.

This organized session redresses existing geographical and typological biases
within the existing landscape of L1 acquisition research by increasing the
representation of the Indigenous languages of the Americas. In focusing on L1
acquisition, the papers within the session deepen the scientific understanding
of specific Indigenous language structures, which have been of central
importance to linguistic theory but studied only in adult language. By breaking
down silos between acquisition researchers and practitioners, the session
expands and enriches the research questions for L1 acquisition studies, better
integrates Indigenous perspectives and ways of knowing into language science,
and builds a body of more linguistically and culturally appropriate literature
for practitioners and their language communities. Through creating positive
impacts on language revitalization, the session also contributes to improving
health and well-being within Indigenous communities. This award is made as part
of a funding partnership between the National Science Foundation and the
National Endowment for the Humanities for the NSF Dynamic Language
Infrastructure – NEH Documenting Endangered Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.