* 2331322
* 2024 Chemical Separations Gordon Research Conference and Seminar: Fundamentals, Applications, and Data Science for Integrating Separations and Chemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Mark Shiflett, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2024
* USD 17,950.00

The availability of energy-efficient and sustainable processes for chemical
separations plays a crucial role in the large-scale production of fuels,
chemicals, and pharmaceutical products. To address the complex scientific and
technological challenges of chemical separations, it is essential to bring
together diverse research communities and leaders in the field to discuss
emerging concepts and approaches. The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Chemical Separations, scheduled for January 21-26, 2024, in Galveston, TX, will
be an excellent opportunity for cross-disciplinary scientific discussions
related to emerging concepts and methods in chemical separations. By fostering
collaboration and knowledge exchange, these discussions can lead to the
development of highly efficient and selective separation technologies. Such
advancements have the potential to significantly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, lower the carbon footprint associated with chemicals and fuels
manufacturing, and decrease the costs of desirable products. The collective
efforts of researchers and industry professionals in this area can contribute to
a more sustainable and environmentally friendly future. The support provided by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
will offset the attendance costs for graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, and early-career scientists, promoting the participation of a
diverse group of attendees.

The 2024 Chemical Separations GRC directly addresses the recommendations of the
National Academies report, "A Research Agenda for Transforming Separation
Science," emphasizing substantive interactions between the chemistry and
chemical engineering separations research communities and integrating relevant
concepts in research and education. The GRC format fulfills this objective by
encouraging the sharing of cutting-edge, unpublished data, hosting highly-
attended poster sessions, and fostering a collegial, interactive environment.
Investigators from academia, national laboratories, and industry will be
represented at this meeting. This GRC stands out among existing separations-
focused conferences as it expands chemical separations discussions beyond
analytical techniques, encompassing separation materials design, process scale-
up, and operational considerations. This year also focuses on the challenges and
opportunities of integrating chemical reactions and separations for energy
economy across small- and large-scale processes. By facilitating knowledge
exchange, the GRC on Chemical Separations contributes to the advancement and
transformation of separation science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.