* 2331399
* ART: American University Translating Research into Action Center (TRAC)
* TIP,ITE
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2028
* Joseph Young, American University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 01/31/2028
* USD 5,220,577.00

To address increasingly complex societal challenges, public and private sector
leaders must leverage research to make evidence-based decisions. Yet public and
private sector practitioners are not always informed of the best research, and
university-based scholars often lack the skills or capacity needed to translate
their knowledge for them. This project will foster greater use of evidence in
the public and private sectors by producing new knowledge on best practices in
research translation, training scholars in the effective conduct of research
translation, supporting the dissemination of research findings that have the
potential to benefit society, building institutional capacity at American
University for promoting research translation, and cultivating a culture of
research translation at American University and other institutions of higher
education. By promoting evidence-based decision making in these ways, the
project will advance national health, prosperity, welfare, and security.

The project will include research, training, dissemination, and capacity-
building components. The research team will investigate best practices in
research translation, create a repository of translation methodologies, and
enable knowledge-sharing about effective translation practices among
institutions of higher education. The project team will apply this knowledge
through the development of training programs in research translation and the
pursuit of professional opportunities beyond academia for scholars at American
University and other Washington, DC-area institutions. At the same time, the
project will provide seed funding to support the translation activities of a
select number of high-impact research projects led by American University
faculty, on issues including the growth of a diverse and globally-competitive
STEM workforce, the development of effective trauma mitigation training for
counterterrorism professionals, and the use of machine learning to improve the
efficiency of clinical drug trials. The promotion of diversity, equity,
inclusion, and accessibility will be embedded into all the project components,
including through the recruitment and selection criteria for participating in
training programs or receiving seed funding support. A network of senior
administrators and faculty will serve as ambassadors for the project, further
promoting its institutionalization and sustainability through a series of
assemblies and other outreach within and beyond American University.

Partial funding for this project was provided by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education (IUSE) program, which supports improvements in STEM teaching and
learning for all undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.