* 2332058
* Planning: Novel mechanisms of plasticity and cognition: Probing DJ-1 as a key regulator of Calcium/Potassium dynamics
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Farr Niere, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 96,148.00

Synaptic plasticity, the cellular basis of learning and memory, is a dynamic
process that incorporates a number of ion channels, membrane receptors, and
intracellular substrates. Thus, it is important to explore the interplay between
these molecules to gain a more complete understanding of coordinated signaling
within the central nervous system. A number of candidate molecules have been
proposed as key factors in regulating synaptic plasticity, but the underlying
mechanisms are incompletely understood. Identifying key mechanisms that underlie
synaptic plasticity is pivotal to enhancing our overall understanding of
neuronal circuits and their contributions to cognitive processes that influence
learning and memory. Discoveries from this project can broadly impact our
society through the development of novel therapeutic treatments for
neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of dementia
that disproportionately affect African-Americans. Additional efforts in this
project include the education and research training of students who are
underrepresented in STEM, thereby, promoting diversity of the next generation of
scientists who will drive scientific innovation, creativity, and productivity.

The project centers on examining the interactions between the RNA-binding
protein DJ-1 and Small-conductance Calcium-activated Potassium channels (KCa2
also known as SK Channels) to regulate plasticity. DJ-1 controls the expression
and activity of several Ca2+ channel subunits that can determine intracellular
Ca2+ levels. Given that intracellular Ca2+ strongly influences KCa2 activity and
that KCa2 channels shape forms of synaptic plasticity such as long-term
depression (LTD), proposed studies will determine how DJ-1/Ca2+ channel
signaling regulates the expression and function of KCa2 to influence learning
and memory. The planning activities for this project encompass a multifaceted
agenda aimed to capitalize on shared expertise in neuronal mechanisms of
synaptic plasticity and models of cognition to (1) discover key new mechanisms
of learning and memory, (2) generate a related course-based undergraduate
research experience (CURE) on neuronal plasticity, and (3) promote neuroscience
within local high school curriculums through instructor engagement. The planning
period will provide opportunities to conceptualize hands-on experiments and
didactic lecture materials as part of developing a research-based course aimed
at enhancing undergraduate engagement and participation in neuroscience. The
planning period will also allow for the hosting of workshops aimed at empowering
local high school science instructors to develop neuroscience-based curriculums
and research experiences for their students. Collectively, this planning
opportunity will generate a team-oriented research proposal that will expand
understanding of plasticity mechanisms and produce novel research-based course
experiences for undergraduate students at North Carolina A&T State University
and for local high school students within Greensboro, NC.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.