* 2332200
* Conference: Workshop: 2023 NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) Principal Investigator (PI) Meeting
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Christine Kirkpatrick, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 01/31/2024
* USD 201,671.00

The 2023 Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI)
Principal Investigator (PI) Meeting (September 26-27, 2023, Houston) extends the
community building efforts of past Software Infrastructure for Sustained
Innovation (SI2) and CSSI workshops. The CSSI PI meeting provides a forum for
PIs to share technical information about their projects with each other, NSF
program directors and others; explores innovative topics emerging in the
software and data infrastructure communities; discusses and learns about best
practices across projects; and stimulates new ideas of achieving software and
data sustainability and ensuring a diverse pipeline of CI researchers and
professionals.

The workshop opens with a presentation by an NSF representative. A second talk
by NSF will be given on Day 2 followed by a Question & Answer period. The main
parts of the meeting will be made up of presentations, panels, roundtable
discussions, and poster sessions to maximize interaction among participants. The
workshop concludes with informal time set aside for collaboration meetings and
breakout sessions. The meeting concludes midafternoon on the second day. The
CSSI PI meeting shares the venue with the CyberTraining PI Meeting and has
shared plenary sessions and additional networking opportunities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.