* 2332863
* Conference: 2024 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar on Multifunctional Materials and Structures; Ventura, California; January 27-February 2, 2024
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Ioannis Chasiotis, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,600.00

This award will support the 2024 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Multifunctional Materials and Structures on the theme of Discovery of
Reconfigurable, Hybrid and Sustainable Materials and the accompanying Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) on the theme of Morphology and Hierarchy in
Multifunctional Materials Design. The GRC will be held in Ventura, California,
on January 28 – February 2, 2024, preceded by the inaugural GRS that will take
place at the same location on January 27 – 28, 2024. The GRC on Multifunctional
Materials and Structures is a leading technical forum on the latest developments
in the field, bringing together a diverse group of researchers to discuss recent
advances and unpublished research, spawn new ideas, and foster productive
interdisciplinary collaborations. The inaugural GRS will be organized and
attended exclusively by graduate students, post-doctoral scholars, and junior
researchers. Funding through this award will increase the number of graduate
student and post-doctoral scholar participants to prepare the next generation of
scientific leaders in this field. The potential societal benefits and impact of
multifunctionality include materials sustainability and energy resource
management through lifetime extensions of engineered components that are enabled
by new multifunctional response, embedded end-of-life functionalities, safer
systems through adaptive and self-awareness capabilities and improved energy
efficiency. The conference outcomes are expected to include novel concepts and
mechanisms for achieving hybrid multifunctional materials not possible before,
as well as new collaborations and ways of collaborating across disciplines.

This conference and the adjacent seminar seek to address fundamental scientific
issues associated with (a) material and structural multifunctionality, shape
reconfigurability and adaptivity, (b) discovery and synthesis of hybrid
multifunctional materials through theory and recent developments in machine
learning and data sciences, (c) computable and irregular materials and materials
far from equilibrium, (d) living engineering material systems and active matter,
and (e) hybrid, solid-liquid multifunctional materials and material regeneration
and sustainability. The conference will present key scientific issues and
bottlenecks in making major advances in these innovative research areas, with
prospective impacts to a broad range of applications. Researchers from a vibrant
international community of scientists and engineers, and a wide range of
disciplines encompassing physics, mechanics, materials science, engineering
science, chemistry, biology, mathematics, and computational science and
engineering, will address the issues associated with envisioning, designing, and
creating synthetic multifunctional materials and structures. They will identify
gaps and present potential solutions on the integration of novel functionalities
into engineering material systems and structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.