* 2332818
* EAGER: Plasmonic Sensing in Liquid with Metal-Insulator-Metal Nanosensors Embedded in Soft Matrices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Xiaojing (John) Zhang, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Water is a vital life-sustaining resource, with access to clean water being
fundamental to maintaining health. Over 2 billion individuals globally are
affected by significant water stress and pollution, making the development of an
efficient, cost-effective, and accessible water monitoring system a top
priority. Existing water monitoring technologies, including gas chromatography,
mass spectrometry, and turbidity measurement, are often too costly and
necessitate the operation by highly skilled personnel, rendering them unfit for
broad deployment in the most needing areas. Additionally, these technologies
usually lack the capability for immediate or on-site monitoring. This project
aims to explore nanoscale sensor designs for immediate and on-site water quality
monitoring. This system could potentially bring about transformative changes by
providing communities, especially those in resource-constrained areas, with the
tools needed for on-the-spot, real-time water quality assessments.

The core of the detection system comprises a metal-insulator-metal (MIM) Au-
SiO2-Au nanostructures and mesoporous alginate hydrogel thin films. The
project's objectives will be met through three research activities: (1)
Utilizing finite element analysis (FEA) to develop Au-SiO2-Au MIM nanosensors.
The FEA modelling on COMSOL will probe the influences of aspects such as shape,
size, and others on sensor performance, as well as study the plasmonic
enhancement factors, such as the form of inner and outer Au nanoparticles, the
thickness of the central silica shell, and the space between the exterior Au
nanoparticles. (2) Synthesis, testing and comparative analysis of plasmonic
enhancement of various Au-SiO2-Au MIM nanosensors with numerical simulation
results. (3) Embedding Au-SiO2-Au MIM nanosensors into a thin alginate hydrogel
film decorated with ZnO nanorods, tailored for factors like thickness, pore
size, and light absorption effectiveness. The purpose of this stage is to
securely attach the Au-SiO2-Au MIM nanosensors onto a fixed base, as opposed to
having them floating freely in the sample solution. This project is set to offer
new techniques and information to confront the difficulties in comprehending and
overseeing the global water crisis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.