* 2332539
* EAGER: Coherent Manipulation and Quantum Entanglement in Ultracold Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Kang-Kuen Ni, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kang-Kuen Ni of Harvard
University will use sophisticated laser techniques to explore quantum
entanglement between product states of a chemical reaction. Quantum entanglement
is a key concept at the heart of quantum information science (QIS) whereby two
particles can occupy a shared quantum state, even when separated over long
distances. While entanglement between electron and nuclear spins in, for
example, isolated ions and the metal centers in inorganic coordination complexes
have been observed, the idea that the product states in a chemical reaction
could be entangled has not been explored. Professor Ni and her group will first
generate entangled nuclear-spin states with the reactants then will leverage the
conservation of the reactant nuclear spins throughout the reaction to establish
whether or how long coherence is preserved in reaction products. Confirming
generations of entanglement product pairs from chemical reaction would expand
the known ways that entanglement can be created and allow chemical systems to
enter the list with added benefits such as their degrees of freedom that allow
for their trapping and manipulation. Professor Ni will work with high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in this research thus positively impacting
the Nation's quantum-enabled workforce.

The role of quantum entanglement between the product states in a simple chemical
reaction (2KRb -- > K2 + Rb2) is being explored to establish whether and how
long phase coherence is preserved in the chemical reaction products. To do so,
entangled nuclear-spin states within the individual reactants will first be
generated. The conservation of the reactant nuclear spins throughout the
reaction will be measured using two-photon Raman-based approaches to establish
coherence between the various products. Product population correlation will be
probed by a combination of resonant enhanced 2-photon ionization and coincident
detection. Results from this simple chemical reaction have the potential to
serve as a blueprint for understanding quantum entanglement in more complex
chemical reactions and thus have the potential to forge a quantitative
connection between chemical reaction dynamics and quantum information science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.