* 2332110
* Conference: FOCS Conference Student and Postdoc Travel Support
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Shanghua Teng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) is one of the premier annual research
conferences that cover the breadth of theoretical computer science. It is a
conference of very long standing that has continued to play a formative role in
the field; it is also at the leading edge of connections made to other areas.
This project aims to increase the impact of this conference on students and
postdoctoral researchers, particularly those from under-represented groups, by
encouraging and enabling their participation, especially in cases where travel
expenses would otherwise preclude their attendance.

Concretely, this project assists students and postdoctoral fellows in attending
the 2023 Annual FOCS conference, sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society
Technical Committee on Mathematical Foundations of Computing (TCMF). The coming
FOCS will take place in Santa Cruz, CA, November 6-9, 2023. As computing becomes
ubiquitous, it is crucial to expand the participation of young scholars in
cutting-edge research. FOCS has served as one of the most important venues for
groundbreaking research in theoretical computer science – and, increasingly, as
a key ambassador to other areas within and outside computer science. We
anticipate the conference presentations and discussions will expose students and
postdoctoral researchers to a broad set of fundamental questions and ideas. We
expect the community to benefit in turn, as such junior researchers have
contributed substantially to the growth of theoretical computer science over the
years. With an emphasis on junior scholars in need, supporting the participation
of junior researchers from underrepresented populations in the stimulating
exchange of ideas benefits all conference attendees. As the tools and techniques
from theoretical computer science (such as novel models, algorithms,
impossibility results, and unexpected connections in data science and machine
learning) are becoming vital to several domains inside and outside computer
science, it is anticipated that such broader participation of junior researchers
will benefit society at large.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.