* 2332541
* NeTS: Small: Continuous Monitoring and Localization of Network Neutrality Violations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 99,999.00

Networks that carry application data can apply differential treatment, e.g., by
giving different performance to different applications and providers. Such
behavior is colloquially referred to as net neutrality violations, and formally
as traffic differentiation. For example, in U.S., video streaming is often
artificially limited to low data-transfer speeds, meaning that only low-quality
video can be supported. Further, this is sometimes done only to certain video-
streaming providers, creating an unlevel playing field. This project supports
the Wehe software ecosystem, which provides mobile apps and other software that
reveals when network providers differentiate service and publishes results for
stakeholders.

Wehe requires continual maintenance so that Wehe tests continue to correctly
identify when they experience differentiation. To address this, this project
will bring Wehe software into compliance with current operating systems and apps
that experience differentiation and produce strategies to make Wehe more
resilient to future changes. Second, Wehe does not isolate which network is
responsible for differentiation. To improve Wehe’s ability to identify the
correct network responsible for net neutrality violations, this project will
develop new statistical methods based on network performance tomography and
implement new tests in Wehe that leverage these methods to reliably identify the
network responsible for differentiation.

The project work will benefit Internet subscribers, policy makers, and service
providers by revealing violations of net neutrality, and ensuring that policy
decisions are informed by empirical evidence. Internet subscribers can learn
whether their providers violate net neutrality via the Wehe mobile app, the
general public can see aggregate findings on net neutrality via a public Web
site for reporting Wehe results, and findings from the project will be shared
with stakeholders such as policy makers. Subscribers will benefit from
transparency and understanding alternative options, and content providers can
adjust their applications to improve efficiency. The project will also identify
unintended negative side-effects of middleboxes, and produce recommendations to
improve network efficiency.

Details about the project, its findings, and other artifacts are located at:
https://wehe.meddle.mobi. The project has produced public datasets, software,
results, visualizations, and other insights for six years. The goal is to
continue publishing and updating such artifacts in perpetuity, or for as long as
the project is relevant.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.