* 2332606
* 2024 Membranes: Materials and Processes Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2024,03/31/2025
* Justin Johnson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2025
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides funds to offset the travel and registration expenses for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers attending the Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on “Membranes: Materials and Processes” and the associated
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS). The coordinated events will be held serially at
Colby-Sawyer College, New London, NH, on July 27 to July 28, 2024 (GRS) and July
28 to August 2, 2024 (GRC). The seminar and conference focus on a broad range of
membrane separation technologies critical to many industrial and environmental
processes. Advancements in these technologies will contribute to improved
chemical process efficiencies, environmental sustainability, energy
independence, and enhanced competitiveness in the global market. The GRS and GRC
also provide valuable educational, career development, and networking
opportunities for students and early-career researchers.

The 2024 Gordon Research Conference on Membranes: Materials and Processes is
centered around the theme of "Multidisciplinary Pathways for Membrane Separation
Applications." The conference will allow graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, academics, and industrial and national laboratory researchers to
congregate and discuss cutting-edge technology and current research trends and
to share mutual experiences while building informal networks with peers that may
lead to future collaborations and scientific achievement. By promoting
multidisciplinary approaches and focusing on critical societal needs, this
conference will drive advancements in membrane science and technology for
various energy, water, bioprocessing, and environmental applications. The
conference will have sessions on resource recovery and manufacturing of critical
materials, membranes for electrochemical processes, machine learning and
artificial intelligence for the discovery and design of materials, removal and
recovery of forever chemical contaminants, synthesis and characterization of
membrane building blocks, enabling the energy transition through next-generation
membranes, and grand challenges to inspire interdisciplinary membrane research
and development. The formal and informal discussions between the speakers and
attendees will provide valuable feedback on current research efforts and enable
the participants to further develop and refine new ideas. The organizers have
also made special efforts to promote diversity and inclusivity among the
speakers and attendees. Notably, the conference will include an informal “Power
Hour,” where all meeting participants can gather to discuss the challenges faced
by members of underrepresented groups face in STEM. This event helps to create
an awareness of these critical issues among the broader community and to
encourage action from the community as a whole.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.