* 2332293
* Ethical Industry 4.0: Embedding Legality, Integrity and Accountability in Digital Manufacturing Ecosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Hongyue Sun, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Janis Terpenny
* 11/30/2026
* USD 565,778.00

This project is centered around the creation and validation of an innovative
digital framework to foster an ethical manufacturing ecosystem where machine
ethics, including legality, integrity, and accountability, is mandated
throughout the product design-fabrication-service life cycle. In the era of
Industry 4.0, manufacturing systems are enhanced with advanced technologies and
interconnectivity. While this evolution significantly expands the
functionalities and accessibility of manufacturing machinery, it also introduces
unprecedented ethical challenges in manufacturing regulation, such as malicious
use of customizable fabrication (e.g., counterfeit goods and 3D printed
weapons). This project pioneers the exploration of ethical Industry 4.0 and
anchors principles of legality, integrity, and accountability as fundamental
components in the digital manufacturing ecosystem. Specifically, the team
designs and implements a set of computational methods and digital tools to
provide ethical assurances spanning each stage of the design-fabrication-service
life cycle from design, to fabrication, to service. By leveraging existing
research platforms and local manufacturing partners, the ethical framework can
be integrated and validated within real-world manufacturing testbeds. This
project has multi-dimensional educational and societal impacts. The project can
necessitate the inclusion of ethics and regulation compliance promotion within
Industry 4.0. Moreover, the project also contributes significantly to the
education of the future manufacturing workforce, promotes public awareness of
manufacturing ethics, and brings benefits to the US manufacturing sector and
general society.

This research project explores principles of ethics as new functional components
and constructs a digital framework that tackles technical obstacles in ethical
Industry 4.0, including intellectual property (IP) protection, data security and
privacy, regulation, and compliance. The team investigates and develops an
ethical cyber layer, incorporating a set of computational algorithms,
architecture, and software, to enhance the legality, integrity, and
accountability of the digital manufacturing system. The technical thrusts in
this project are threefold: (1) an efficient and robust ethical design checking
mechanism using nonlinear matching algorithms for complex 3D digital models
imported to manufacturing machines to avoid IP theft and malicious design; (2)
ethical fabrication monitoring tools for manufacturing machines via secure
computation with high privacy needs, limited annotated samples, and diverse
operation conditions; and (3) ethical product tracking to analyze product
texture fingerprint and assist the forensics of source machine identification
with illegal and non-integrity usage. The validated resources and tools,
including advanced models, algorithms, software and test benches, and
educational materials, will be publicly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.