* 2332661
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT-SAT: INtegrated Testbed Ensuring Resilient Active/Passive CoexisTence (INTERACT): End-to-End Learning-Based Interference Mitigation for Radiometers
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Vuk Marojevic, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

As next-generation communication and satellite systems utilize more frequency
bands, the potential interference risks to passive radiometer sensors used for
environmental and atmospheric sensing are increasing. Thus, it is imperative to
develop efficient methods to detect, characterize and mitigate anthropogenic
sources of interference at passive radiometers. Radio frequency (RF) research
domains, specifically those addressing the active/passive coexistence, are in
critical need of datasets that enable learning-based detection, identification,
and classification, as was observed in image processing domains. The goals of
the project INTERACT (INtegrated Testbed Ensuring Resilient Active/Passive
CoexisTence) are 1) to collect/to currate active/passive RF coexistence datasets
with ground truth information 2) to develop data-driven learning-based RF
interference (RFI) detection and mitigation approaches enabled by the generated
data. The datasets will be collected by an airborne passive microwave radiometer
system to be deployed on the NSF's AERPAW (Aerial Experimentation and Research
Platform for Advanced Wireless) platform. The proposed research will further our
undertanding on spectrum sharing through passive sensing methods, RF datasets,
and learning based RFI mitigation approaches.

The project INTERACT proposes three key innovations: 1) A new Unmanned Aerial
System (UAS) based passive radiometer system will be developed. This system
together with the experimental development of various active transmission
scenarios covering different geometries, transmitter parameters and waveforms at
non-restricted bands will result in the first-ever large experimental RF dataset
with ground truth information for passive/active RF coexistence. A digital twin
for passive radiometry in the emulation environment of AERPAW will be developed
to enable experimenters to facilitate extensive, yet realistic RF mitigation
experiments in a Cloud environment. 2) Novel data-driven end-to-end learning-
based RFI detection and mitigation approaches will be developed. The proposed
solutions will focus on approaches that can achieve high-resolution RFI
detection in the time-frequency domains, learning based radiometer calibration,
and joint mitigation to estimate the scientific observation of radiometers under
RFI. These solutions do not require centralized servers and are designed to work
on passive radiometer systems in order to detect and mitigate RFI without any
information exchange between coexisting systems. 3) The research will produce
new deep reinforcement learning and subspace-based RFI mitigation approaches
using the feedback from active and passive systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.