* 2332983
* Conference: Increasing participation of EPSCoR states in Translational Research
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2024
* USD 97,710.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Conference project will be knowledge sharing and fostering collaborations to
address translational research needs in NSF’s priority areas. This workshop will
generate a network to connect researchers from EPSCoR states to communicate and
benefit from each other’s expertise in successful proposal writing. This
workshop will target researchers and research administrators from minority
serving institutions underrepresented on the overall NSF awarded funding
landscape. This workshop will further promote NSF’s priority of STEM education,
interdisciplinary, and convergent research in a collaborative environment. In a
bottom-up approach, this workshop expects to bring administrators from research
offices from EPSCoR states to convey strategies and methodologies for efficient
collaborations, proposal writing, and networking. A written report outlining all
key discussion items and future recommendations and an online discussion form
will be important outcomes of this workshop.

The proposed project will provide a venue for EPSCoR participants (researchers
and research Leadership personnel such as VRPs, Deans, etc) to share a vision
for research and STEM education in innovation. The conference will have cultural
and social activities to promote networking among participants from the EPSCoR
States. The workshop program will include presentations from NSF program
directors to discuss trends and research priorities and to provide pathways to
leverage NSF opportunities towards translational research in science and
engineering in their respective institutions. This will empower EPSCoR
participants for future proposal submission preparation and help them aim for
appropriate NSF programs for future funding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.