* 2332417
* Conference: Conduct a Workshop to Develop a Proposal Addressing African Air Quality
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* William Vizuete, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This workshop will identify key science questions that can help reveal novel
atmospheric chemistry processes and data fusion techniques that could be applied
to address poor air quality in African megacities. African megacities have a
unique mix of pollutants, emission sources, and meteorology. The future economic
development of these cities are distinct from other more well-studied regions in
the US and Europe. This workshop will assess and report on observational and
modeling requirements that can address the unique chemistry in the atmosphere of
an African megacity. Understanding the evolving influence of African megacities
on regional to global atmospheric chemistry is critical for both air pollution
control at local scale levels as well as predicting their role in climate
change.

The workshop will be held on the campus of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill and is planned as a 2.5-day meeting for September 13, 2023. A
workshop web page will be used to announce workshop agenda, presentations, and
final consensus reports. This effort will help develop a globally engaged
scientific workforce that can focus on collaborative efforts to address the
unique issues associated with air quality in African megacities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.