* 2332183
* EAGER: Characterizing Driver Interactions with Emergency Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Robert Kluger, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 209,506.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) funded project
explores a new concept on how individual drivers behave during interactions with
emergency vehicles (EV) in an experimental, virtual reality setting. Emergency
vehicle response is critical to public health, and positive encounters with
active emergency vehicles by drivers can both improve response time and reduce
the risk of motor vehicle crashes. However, driver tendencies during these
interactions are poorly understood, due to limited data availability and high
dimensionality. This project designs and tests a novel approach that leverages
data and insights from external sources (e.g., the SHRP2 Naturalistic Driving
Study and MCity 2.0) to validate experimental models. The success of this
exploratory effort is likely to unlock opportunities for deriving a library of
EV encounters from virtual reality simulator systems and other datasets.
Additionally, realistic models of behaviors have the potential to advance
microsimulation of emergency encounters and enable the systematic study of
management strategies. The common method could also be applicable to other rare
driving scenarios.

An adaptive scheme is developed and implemented in a virtual reality driving
simulator experiment. This simulator emulates data during encounters with
emergency vehicles in a controlled setting. The priors are updated with the
result from microsimulation to identify scenarios offering the most information
given the existing models. The collected data is then used to estimate driversâ€™
interactions with emergency vehicles including lane-changing behaviors,
acceleration and braking, reaction time, awareness, and more. These elements are
classified into reaction types by clustering of multivariate time series using
the hidden Markov model. The validation involves a comparison of the developed
models based on emulated data to features extracted from naturalistic driving
data.

This project is jointly funded by Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.