* 2332525
* Planning: EES-HSI Program: Expanding Diversity in STEM by Broadening Participation in CUREs through Multi-Institutional Experiential Learning Programs
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Anna Marti-Subirana, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 47,361.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this planning proposal aims to identify strategies
and funding opportunities directed to enhancing activities necessary to build
STEM education capacity at 2-year HSIs, by creating cross-institutional Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) as an educational model for
integrating undergraduate research into introductory non-major and major STEM
community college courses that can be continued as Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REUs), and progress as undergraduate projects when students
transfer to a 4-year university STEM major. CUREs are high impact practices
embedded into the course curriculum that have been proposed as an inclusive
strategy for increasing access to the educational benefits of research. While
the impact of CUREs on student success parameters has been widely demonstrated
in 4-year institutions, little is known of the benefits of CUREs in 2-year
colleges, specifically those with significant percentages of underserved
students, such as HSIs. Discussions will be focused on how cross-institutional
CUREs can improve STEM educational outcomes at 2-year institutions, engage
students in undergraduate research, and close the gap in STEM degree completion
of underrepresented students. Planning session outcomes will be critical in
advancing knowledge of the benefits and unique challenges involved in the design
and implementation of cross-institutional CURE programs. They will also aid in
the identification of core elements that contribute to cross-institutional
collaborations for improved student learning outcomes and enhanced interest in
STEM career pathways among underrepresented students.

Planning sessions aim to lay the foundation for understanding benefits,
methodology, and viability of implementing multi-institutional CUREs. CUREs will
be designed with the goal of creating cohorts of STEM students and taking them
through an academic pathway that involves experiential learning, mentoring,
immersion in the process of science and engineering design, and opportunities to
advance and persist in STEM careers. To address these topics and assess the
feasibility of the proposed STEM cross-institutional CURE program, they will
hold discussions that will build and expand upon their prior work with
undergraduate research and CURE implementation at Phoenix College (PC), STEM
mentoring programs at PC (Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement
Program), and NSF funded Center for Bio-mediated and Bio-inspired Geotechnics
and Center for Nanotechnology Enabled Water Treatment experience in managing and
conducting REU programs. Planning sessions will build on NSF-funded MCCCD STEM-
CURE Program (NSF EES 1832543) and recommendations from PC HSI Conference:
Improving STEM Education at HSI Community Colleges by Introducing High Impact
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) (NSF HRD 2211811) and
will increase knowledge and understanding of adapting CUREs for STEM students at
2-year HSIs. Results will be disseminated to governmental agencies and higher
education organizations via educational research journals, presentations at
regional and national conferences, and institutional social media outlets.
Findings will inform funding priorities for high impact educational
interventions in 2-year HSIs, and provide effective models for STEM student
engagement and persistence. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Program will also generate new knowledge
on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.