* 2332342
* PRIMES: Matroids, Polyhedral Geometry, and Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2026
* Anastasia Chavez, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 01/31/2026
* USD 304,102.00

This PRIMES award for a partnership between PI Chavez and the Institute for Pure
and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) combines the pure and applied sides of matroid
theory while advancing undergraduate research experiences at Saint Maryâ€™s
College of California (SMC), a Hispanic serving and primarily undergraduate
institution. Two major aims are: 1) formalize a partnership between SMC and
IPAM, including the PI's participation in the Spring 2024 Geometry, Statistical
Methods, and Integrability long program, and 2) advance the PI's scholarship and
its impact on undergraduate success by supporting undergraduate research
assistants and funding a year of teaching leave to successfully attain these
goals. The PI will conduct several research projects, some of which will include
undergraduate student research contributions, that strengthen the connection
between the pure and applied sides of matroid theory. Additionally, the PI is
dedicated to enhancing diversity and inclusion in STEM and will continue with
high school outreach, supporting SMC student groups, and engaging with projects
that highlight voices of minoritized mathematicians.

The project includes the following scientific activities. (1) Investigate the
relationship between KP-soliton solutions and flag positroids through classical
and tropical geometric lenses. This project furthers the connection between this
applied interpretation of positroids and our understanding in the tropical
geometric setting. (2) Extend current polyhedral and geometric results on the
partial permutahedron and use a new approach to describe triangulations of the
classical permutahedron. This offers new insight on a classical object, adds
useful information to the family of generalized permutahedra, and is a great
setting for undergraduate research. (3) Use polytopal methods to address
questions about positroid, polypositroid, and flag positroid invariants. Two
projects in this direction are: (a) prove positroid polytopes are Ehrhart
positive, and (b) describe Ehrhart polynomials of flag positroids. These results
will deepen the combinatorial connection of polytopes, positroids, and the
nonnegative Grassmannian. The expanding importance of matroid theory in both the
classical and applied sense shows how necessary cross-disciplinary research is
to bridging these two areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.