* 2332061
* EAGER: Mapping Open Science through the Journal Editors Discussion Interface
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Plato Smith
* 07/31/2025
* USD 274,990.00

This project will conduct exploratory research to pursue an opportunity arising
from the Journal Editors Discussion Interface (JEDI) group of repositories
previously launched from the Data Preservation Alliance for the Social Sciences
(Data-PASS). JEDI’s main focus is on the aspects of the editorial process that
concern data and code and their management, citation, and accessibility;
additional aspects of research transparency; and reproducibility, replication,
and verification. JEDI provides a mechanism for journal editors to interact with
each other and with other stakeholders in the academic ecosystem. Editors can
pool their collective experience, and make their hard-won expertise available to
their successors and other new editors.

JEDI has hosted numerous discussion threads on Open Science (OS) and journal
editing. Drawing on information and materials provided in these discussions by
its members, JEDI has begun to compile a substantial collection of OS resources.
While the network’s editor-centered approach has been strikingly successful, it
has also demonstrated the need for exploratory research to prepare JEDI to take
a more directed approach to its resource collection. The project will draw from
existing OS taxonomies to map the individual elements of OS, and how they
connect (and are sometimes in tension) with one another. The team will curate an
account of OS which, while reflecting mainstream views of the topic, is framed
for the needs and interests of journal editors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.