* 2332640
* EAGER: CAS: From polymer mixtures to sustainable foams with controlled hierarchical porosity and mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Eleftheria Roumeli, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Plastics play a crucial role in society, but their environmental impacts, from
petroleum-based sourcing to end-of-life disposal, raise significant concerns.
Foam applications, in particular, present challenges due to non-renewable and
toxic building blocks, as well as non-recyclability, and non-degradability of
the resulting polymer foams. Current sustainable foam approaches involve
reassembling useful polymer building blocks extracted from biomass. Yet, these
approaches lead to waste and suffer from scalability limitations. This project
introduces the novel and potentially transformative concept of synthesizing
foams directly from polymer mixtures obtained from unprocessed renewable
feedstocks, thus eliminating the need for extraction. By studying polymer
interactions and foaming mechanisms, precise control over structure and
properties can be achieved. If successful, this project will produce foams that
exhibit similar processability and mechanical properties as petroleum-derived
counterparts, while also offering the advantages of degradability and
recyclability, pushing the boundaries of truly sustainable polymer foams. The
knowledge gained will extend to other polymer mixtures with similar molecular
features, expanding the impacts beyond biomass-based polymer mixtures. The
findings and methodologies will be integrated into materials processing and
polymer science curricula, as well as public outreach activities. The project
will train students in sustainable polymer science/engineering principles,
fostering and educating environmentally conscious materials professionals.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In the context of foam applications, achieving precise control over the
molecular composition and hierarchical structure in conventional polymers, such
as polyurethanes and polystyrenes, has played a pivotal role in their widespread
utilization across various industries. However, a significant challenge arises
from the fact that these widely used polymers are derived from non-renewable and
toxic monomers, and result in foams that are non-recyclable and non-degradable.
Sustainable alternatives involve synthesizing monomers from biomass-derived
small molecules or extracting polymers from biomass and reassembling them into
foams. However, these approaches necessitate extraction processes, leading to
waste generation and scalability limitations, and they donâ€™t necessarily lead to
degradable or recyclable foams. To overcome these challenges, this project
presents a novel approach that eliminates the need for extraction processes and
instead utilizes the inherent polymer mixtures present in renewable feedstocks.
The objective is to prepare hierarchical polymeric foams with controlled
structure and mechanical properties directly from polymer mixtures found in
unprocessed biomass. The central hypothesis is that by harnessing charge
complexation and thermomechanical processing, precise control over the
hierarchical structure, porosity, and mechanical properties of the foams can be
achieved. Abundant algal biomass will be used as a renewable polymer feedstock
to validate this approach. The analysis will encompass evaluating foam
structure, porosity, pore morphology, and mechanical properties, to establish
structure-property relationships. Additionally, studies will be conducted on
recyclability and degradation in soil. The outcomes of this research will
advance sustainable foam manufacturing processes, enabling the production of
high-performance, degradable, and recyclable foams from renewable polymers. The
knowledge gained will extend beyond biomass-based polymers, contributing to a
broader understanding of other polymer mixtures with similar molecular
characteristics. Furthermore, the materials investigated in this proposal will
be integrated into teaching, education, and outreach activities. .

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.