* 2332143
* EvaluATE: The Evaluation Hub for Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Lori Wingate, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2028
* USD 6,211,812.00

Recognizing the value of systematic and effective evaluation and current and
emerging issues in the education of the skilled technical workforce, the
Evaluation Hub for Advanced Technological Education: EvaluATE supports a
comprehensive effort to provide evaluation support services and
materials/resources for the NSF Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program
and its community of PIs, evaluators, project staff, and other stakeholders. The
EvaluATE Hub seeks to advance and sustain a community in which evaluation is
driven by principles; is valued, systematic, and effective; and is used to
improve the education of technicians in advanced technological fields. In
conjunction with programmatic evaluation activities, EvaluATE will also conduct
a series of studies to advance knowledge about evaluation and evaluation
practice, which focus on diversity, equity, and inclusion in education and
evaluative activities; and the use of evaluation for improvement and
accountability. The project aims to address documented needs of the ATE
community for current and emerging evaluation of the ATE program and technician
education, more broadly. In addition, it seeks to build on, enhance, and advance
the activities and impact of EvaluATE through its programming,
resources/services, and research.

Four goals guide the execution of this effort. First, is to enhance the number,
diversity, proficiency, and visibility of potential ATE evaluators through
increasing the pool and diversity of qualified evaluators for ATE. Second, is to
increase awareness and use of evaluation by ATE project and centers. Third, is
to enhance the empirical understanding of the ATE programâ€™s activities,
achievements, and other ATE-related activities. Fourth, and finally, is to
advance innovation in evaluation methods and develop an empirical knowledge base
about ATE evaluation. EvaluATE activities include: 1) administration of the ATE
Annual PI Survey; 2) investigation of diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts
across the ATE community; 3) creation of an ATE Outcomes Bank and supportive
resources; 4) establishment of an ATE Evaluation Ambassadors/Champions program;
5) establishment of a badging or credentialing process associated with
qualifications for ATE evaluators and professional development for current and
future evaluators; and 6) creation and dissemination of evaluation resources,
materials, and support services for current and future PIs and their activities.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.