* 2332841
* EAGER: Revolutionizing Wikipedia’s Relationship with New and Emerging Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Loren Terveen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Millions of people view Wikipedia’s articles daily, and many services rely on
the quality of Wikipedia to power their business and AI ventures. This project
will contribute new and validated, high-fidelity designs for the fundamental
mechanisms Wikipedia uses to organize knowledge, with the goal of enriching the
types of knowledge it includes and expand the evidentiary standards it employs.
Wikipedia's success rests on a radical knowledge production process—anyone can
edit the articles—coupled with a strict evidentiary epistemology that mandates
"reliable sources" and a "neutral point of view". But along with the success has
come systematic problems and controversies over what knowledge is "valid." These
processes may have the effect of excluding much valuable knowledge, including
(1) knowledge based on different ways of knowing, such as oral histories; (2)
less established knowledge, including emerging knowledge about new medical
treatments and therapies; and (2) knowledge directed toward different goals, for
example personal experiences that contextualize textbook knowledge. These
exclusions occur through the decisions of Wikipedia editors: which edits they
allow and which they undo and what rules they enforce.

Research will fill the theory-practice gap in Wikipedia research via well-
evaluated, high-fidelity prototypes that can change the evidentiary practices in
the online encyclopedia. This goal will be accomplished through four phases of
work: Phase 1: Translate theory and practice into low-fidelity prototypes for
new knowledge representations. Phase 2: Validate initial designs with a small
panel of Wikipedia experts. Phase 3: Develop the most promising ideas from Phase
2 into high-fidelity, functional prototypes. Phase 4: Evaluate the high-fidelity
prototypes through an asynchronous online community for design critique and
generation. Expected scientific outcomes of this project include new design
prototypes and policies for Wikipedia that expand and enrich its knowledge-
production epistemology, and expert and stakeholder insights into the potential
feasibility, efficacy, and acceptability of the designs and policies. This
multi-stage, iterative design process is applicable to other complex and risky
arenas, such as designing interventions for credibility assessment in social
platforms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.