* 2332467
* EAGER: A New Aerial Platform for Turbulence Measurements in the Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Nathan Rose, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 126,139.00

This project seeks to advance research in the measurement of winds. Why is it
important? Having refined measurements of winds improves weather forecasting.
For instance, if we can better predict how winds behave during disaster
situations such as wildfires and train derailments that involve toxic gas
pollution, we can forecast the behavior and impact of wind factors in local
areas and prevent or minimize health risks to the public. This would allow
better coordination of emergency response and resources and minimize the
economic impact at the local, state, and national levels. To achieve these
goals, drone technology will be used in this project. One major benefit of
drones is that they can access locations in the atmosphere near the ground that
are unsafe to humans or difficult to access otherwise, such as mountainous
terrain, lakes, and glaciers. Another benefit of drone technology is that a
drone can hover over difficult terrain for a long time, allowing data collection
to develop and test wind forecasting models. This type of in-person research in
difficult terrain is currently impossible or very difficult to achieve, which
has resulted in major weaknesses in wind behavior understanding and in wind
forecasting models. Collecting wind data with drones is not only very novel, but
also cost-effective. The wind collection technology using drones would address
the current research weaknesses and help protect the public in their daily lives
or in emergency situations.

The project aims to explore the ability of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
multirotor drones to measure turbulence. The approach is innovative because it
only relies on the use of easily retrievable data from COTS drones. There is no
need for custom-built frames and tuning of flight control parameters, making the
approach cost-efficient and easily accessible to the scientific community
without an engineering and/or technical background. The major goals are to
investigate 1) the accuracy of these drone-based turbulence measurements, and 2)
the dependency of the accuracy on drone size and weight. Measurements will be
performed next to a large array of start-of-the-art sonic anemometers over flat
terrain in the NSF funded M2HATS field study, offering an unprecedented
opportunity for an intercomparison experiment. Eight multi-rotor vehicles will
be used, including two different types of COTS multirotor drones to retrieve
data necessary to estimate turbulence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.