* 2332104
* Planning: Integrating Distributed Energy Resources with Grid-Interactive Efficient Buildings for Net Zero Energy and Community Resilience
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Sagnika Ghosh, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

There is an urgent imperative to tackle global warming, climate change, and the
growing energy demand. The purpose of this planning grant is to initiate a new
research effort that will contribute to the integration of renewable energy
resources with building heating, air conditioning, and lighting systems. This
integration will support the decarbonization of buildings, bolster climate
mitigation efforts, foster cost reductions and support equitable access to
resilient power systems for remote underserved communities. This planning grant
is a first step in creating and sustaining a long-term multi-disciplinary
research program at Tennessee State University (TSU), a historically Black
university, that combines faculty expertise in renewable power, power grid
security and resilience, and building energy systems. The grant supports the TSU
faculty team in fully developing their long-term research plans and seeking
partnerships with national laboratories and other universities for a multi-year
collaborative research effort.

This planning grant aims to build collaborations and establish high impact
research at Tennessee State University with access to industry partners and
national labs. The planning grant provides an opportunity to strategically plan
the collaboration's scope and align research areas related to the integration of
Distributed Energy Resources (DERs) and Grid-interactive efficient buildings
(GEBs) by assessing available resources and facilities. DERs have been
increasing in popularity as a sustainable source of energy to combat issues that
could affect future generations. Most sources of energy that are supplied in the
U.S. are nonrenewable such as coal, and fossil fuels, which make up about 88%,
and the other 12% comes from renewable sources. DERs can include behind-the-
meter renewable generation such as rooftop solar photovoltaic (PV) units, wind
turbines, fuel cells, and battery energy storage. Buildings account for 75% of
all U.S. electricity use and 40% of the nation's total energy and account for
35% of the country's carbon dioxide emissions. The large portion of energy use
provides promising demand flexibility, resilience and energy saving potential.
GEBs are energy efficient buildings with smart technologies, which actively
employ DERs to optimize energy consumption for grid services, cater to occupant
requirements and preferences, contribute to climate mitigation efforts, and
achieve cost reductions. By establishing strong relationships and effective
collaboration practices during the planning phase, the grant serves as a
foundation for long-term collaboration between the involved research
institutions. This sets the stage for future joint projects, grant applications,
and sustained intellectual collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.