* 2332176
* Conference: Assessing the Impacts of Engaged Research and Its Use: Evidence and Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* James Arnott, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,978.00

Improving the societal benefits of science requires systematic attention to the
ways in which research is conducted and how different approaches may result in
various kinds and degrees of impact. Existing studies on research impact drivers
suggest that more engaged approaches—where researchers meaningfully collaborate
with societal partners during the research process—can increase the use of
research to support decision-making. However, we know relatively little about
how various forms or levels of engagement result in different societal benefits
in the real world; some types of engagement may even be harmful or
counterproductive. Improving understanding in this area requires empirical and
critical study of the types of engaged research and their outcomes. A primary
aim of this project is to build connections and coordination capacity among the
many approaches to understanding, supporting, and improving engaged research and
its uses. The team will convene scholars and institutional leaders across
sectors to synthesize existing evidence and identify future directions related
to the impacts and uses of engaged research.

The heart of this project involves planning, execution, and follow-on reporting
from an interdisciplinary and solutions-oriented workshop facilitated. The
workshop will convene a small group of experts from a diverse range of
disciplines, issue areas, geographies, and types of expertise for a weeklong
intensive dialogue. The participants (n = approx. 30) will work together to
synthesize existing knowledge, identify gaps, build understanding and
connections, and forge next steps on the relationship among 1) the quality,
intensity, and longevity of engagement in the research process, 2) research
impact (e.g., use of evidence in decision making), and 3) outcomes of interest
(e.g., improved health or educational outcomes). The output from this meeting
will include a report and a call to action intended to inspire and inform
decision-making at scientific institutions, including the National Science
Foundation, keenly interested in expanding their support for engaged research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.