* 2332353
* EAGER: SMART-DMSP: Streamlining Metadata, Automation, and Research Tracking for Data Management and Sharing Plans
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Maria Praetzellis, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Plato Smith
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,903.00

This project will investigate multiple strategies to enhance and support the
adoption of machine-actionable Data Management and Sharing Plans (maDMSPs) in
the academic environment. As federal mandates for DMSPs continue to increase,
maDMSPs offer an efficient means to generate optimal DMSPs and serve as a
crucial mechanism for ensuring compliance with these policies. The project
focuses on structured metadata, PIDs (persistent identifiers), DOIs (digital
object identifiers), and research output tracking to streamline data management
and effectively implement maDMSPs. In addition, the project aims to uncover new
opportunities for optimizing data management and tracking research outputs by
automating processes, improving quality, and adhering to standards. The research
project consists of two main work packages. The first work package aims to
advance maDMSPs by retooling the DMPTool and experimenting with three key
feature areas: automated updates to the DMSP, incorporating externally created
DMSPs, and developing dashboards for stakeholders. The second work package
explores the potential of machine learning (ML) in a maDMSP workflow, focusing
on automating the conversion of narrative text documents into maDMSPs,
generating narrative DMSPs from structured data inputs, and addressing privacy
concerns surrounding sensitive information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.