* 2332010
* Collaborative Research: SII-NRDZ-SBE: Enabling Fairness-Aware and Privacy-Preserving Spatial Spectrum Sharing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Alison Watts, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 149,097.00

Worldwide increase in spectrum usage has made efficient spectrum sharing an
important economic topic. One way to share the spectrum is to allow secondary
users (SUs) to dynamically utilize the spectrum that primary users (PUs) do not
use at a particular time and location. It is vital to design spectrum management
mechanisms to promote efficiency, fairness, and privacy while preventing
collusion. Efficiency ensures that the spectrum users who value the spectrum the
most end up with it. Competition preservation ensures that collusion among
secondary spectrum buyers is prevented. In particular, collusive behaviors among
SUs can result in a lower price awarded to the PU. In the long run, the PU will
be less willing to share or sell the spectrum, resulting in this important
resource not being fully utilized. Privacy establishes that a spectrum user’s
private information regarding location or pricing is not revealed, which
prevents malicious attacks to a broadband provider or consumer to avoid
broadband outages or interference. Fairness establishes that similar spectrum
users are treated similarly, thus creating trust in spectrum sharing. The
research team employs methods from economics and computer science to develop
novel spectrum sharing mechanisms that take account of all four properties. The
three main objectives are (1) to construct mechanisms that preserve competition
while maintaining efficiency, (2) to design privacy preservation schemes that
ensure efficiency, and (3) to identify economic approaches and algorithms that
meet all four properties.

Current spectrum sharing algorithms generally focus on either maintaining
efficiency or privacy. The researchers consider both of these properties at the
same time as well as competition preservation and fairness. The research
enhances the knowledge of those studying auctions who are interested in privacy
preservation, fairness, and coalition prevention as well as those interested in
the implementation of such mechanisms. In particular, in Thrust 1, new auction
mechanisms include location, in consideration of negotiation power and
information availability, to increase spectral efficiency and prevent collusion.
Furthermore, privacy preservation is a topic that has become popular recently
although there are few privacy preservation mechanisms in the economic
literature. Thrust 2 adds to the knowledge of how to achieve both higher
spectral utilization and user location privacy in a game-theoretic framework.
Novel algorithms for location obfuscation mechanisms and utility functions will
be more suitable for spatial spectrum sharing with directional transmissions.
Thrust 3 focuses on new economic approaches and algorithms will ensure joint
competition preservation, efficiency, fairness, and privacy in spatial spectrum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.