* 2332924
* I-Corps:  Portable airbrush-based device to treat hemorrhage and promote accelerated healing of traumatic wounds
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Krishnaswami Raja, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable technology designed to arrest severe bleeding and
provide long-term comprehensive wound care. In the United States, thirty to
forty percent of civilian deaths by trauma are the result of hemorrhage and it
is the main cause of death on the battlefield. Currently, none of the
technologies used to address hemorrhage are approved for long-term use. The
proposed technology is designed to seal and heal traumatic wounds without the
need for stitches, and may be used to treat gunshot victims and other traumatic
wounds at the point of occurrence. In addition, it may be operated by a non-
specialist on the war front or by civilian first responders, and may provide
comprehensive long-term wound care. This is particularly important with the rise
in gun violence, in pandemic-like situations where emergency rooms are
overwhelmed, and in remote regions of the world where access to medical care is
limited. In addition, the proposed technology may be used to treat large surface
areas encountered in burns or bedsores, and the technology also may be developed
to treat wounded animals.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a medical device to treat
hemorrhage and promote accelerated healing of traumatic wounds. The proposed
technology uses an airbrush powered by a portable CO2 cylinder to propel a
polymer solution in acetone with suspended nano-turmeric, an anti-microbial
agent, and an analgesic. The solvent evaporates midair to directly deposit a
bioactive and bioresorbable nanocomposite on the wound area to arrest hemorrhage
on the spot, provide accelerated wound healing, and long-term wound care. In
addition, the device avoids the potential exposure of first responders to
patient blood. The bleed arrest and accelerated wound healing properties of the
technology have been evaluated with mouse models. Further, the solution is
exclusively composed of ingredients that are FDA approved for long-term use in
humans, which may represent a step forward in comprehensive wound care. The
proposed device may arrest hemorrhage, prevent infection, promote accelerated
wound healing, and help save lives globally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.