* 2332366
* Conference: Human, Engineering, and Scientific Aspects of Disease Transmission in Natural and Built Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Peter Vikesland, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

This NSF award will support a workshop entitled Human, Engineering, and
Scientific Aspects of Disease Transmission in Natural and Built Environments.
The workshop will be held during Fall 2023 at the Virginia Tech Executive
Briefing Center in Arlington, Virginia. The overarching goal of the conference
is to discuss and summarize the current state of the field including the latest
advances and critical knowledge gaps on 1) how pathogens and diseases are
transmitted in natural and built environments and 2) how human behavior affects
and impacts pathogen/disease transmission, mitigation, and prevention in
natural/built environments and within communities. Workshop attendees will
include environmental engineers, environmental scientists, epidemiologists,
policymakers, and other stakeholders. Attendees will exchange ideas and promote
the development of new convergent research concepts focused on the topic of
indoor and outdoor disease transmission within communities. NSF funding will
enable the workshop organizers to provide travel grants to invited speakers,
post-doctoral scholars, graduate students, and junior faculty from
underrepresented groups.

The proposed workshop will be organized by the Virginia Tech Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering. The goals of the conference are to (1) catalyze
and facilitate the exchange of knowledge between engineers, scientists, health
professionals, social scientists, and others with complementary expertise in
pathogen/disease transmission, prevention, control, and mitigation; (2) identify
and delineate critical knowledge gaps in the science and engineering of
pathogen/disease transmission, mitigation, and prevention in natural/built
environments and within communities; and (3) facilitate the networking of
complementary groups of researchers to enhance the potential for future and
transdisciplinary research collaborations to advance the fundamental science and
engineering of pathogen/disease transmission and mitigation, and pandemic
preparedness and prevention. The expected outcomes of the conference will
include the drafting, development, and publications of a report and a peer-
reviewed feature article that will discuss and suggest new, holistic approaches
to assess and mitigate disease transmission in natural/built environments and
within communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.