* 2332942
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: Cultivating Innovation and Research Capacity for Life Sustaining Emerging Technologies (CIRCLET)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Donna De Silva, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project between the following institutions: Hawaii
Community College, College of Southern Nevada, and Northern Marianas College.
While growing partnerships is a crucial aspect higher education research and
development efforts, the collaborating institutions have experienced numerous
situations where informal partnerships are developed only to be compromised by
inactivity, lack of proper communications and management to sustain long term
relationships. The collaborating institutions are committed to establish
stronger partnerships by developing opportunities with stakeholders in AgTech,
Agroforestry and Environmental Science for the development of skilled workforce
and improve the economic health of their respective regions.

The collaborating institutions will develop formalized and sustainable
partnerships via agreements and the direct participation of partners within
their respective institutions; provide dedicated staffing to ensure meaningful
engagement with partners by setting regular meetings and short-term and long-
term goals that ensures meaningful relationships and tangible outcomes; and
ensure proper tracking of partnership projects via development of Customer
Relationship Management (CRM) applications that ensure relationships and
projects between partnerships are properly tracked and recorded.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.