* 2332442
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Hybrid Methods in the NIMBLE Hierarchical Statistical Modeling Platform
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Daniel Turek, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 47,692.00

This project will enable researchers in many fields of science to harness
advanced computer algorithms to analyze complex data sets. In many fields,
researchers seek to determine what hypotheses are supported by data collected in
complex study designs. Data may be complex because they are collected in many
locations, at many points in time, from related sampling units, under different
sampling conditions, with different sample sizes, and/or with imperfect
measurements. Such complexities arise in research fields such as biology,
astronomy, education, environmental science, political science, and psychology,
among others. When analyzing complex data, it can be difficult for researchers
to determine which potential patterns are real and which are spurious. To solve
this problem, researchers utilize computer algorithms to thoroughly explore all
possible underlying relationships among variables that might explain the
observed data. Such algorithms can be slow, costly, and difficult to create, so
it is important to make them faster and easier for researchers to use. The
investigators of this project have previously created a software package called
NIMBLE (Numerical Inference for statistical Models using Bayesian and Likelihood
Estimation) for this purpose. NIMBLE has been successfully used for many complex
data analysis problems. Compared to other relevant software, NIMBLE enables
researchers to use a wider range of algorithms and to customize algorithms to
each research problem. This has allowed much faster performance in some cases,
which in turn allows more comprehensive analysis of complex data. In the current
project, the investigators will extend NIMBLE’s capabilities. They will make it
possible to use some kind of accurate mathematical approximations for
statistical calculations in combination with existing algorithms, which in turn
will allow researchers to create new kinds of hybrid algorithms for data
analysis. They will also make it possible to use certain kinds of very efficient
calculations in some problems, which will greatly improve performance. The
investigators will also provide support and training to users of the software as
well as creating educational modules to help the next generation of
undergraduate and graduate students learn to use these methods.

NIMBLE is unique among hierarchical statistical modeling software because it
combines a language for statistical models, a language for model-generic
algorithms, and a compiler to generate and use C++ source code for models and
algorithms. In the current project, NIMBLE will be extended to support hybrid
methods by enabling algorithms to be nested within models. This will allow
methods such as sparse grid quadrature to integrate over one set of model
dimensions to achieve the calculations needed by another algorithm such as
Markov chain Monte Carlo. In turn, this capability will allow composition of
methods such as Laplace approximation and methods that use it. This project will
also extend NIMBLE’s algorithm language to support sparse matrix algebra
methods, allowing this efficient approach to be used by algorithm developers to
enhance computational efficiency. Together, the advances in this project will
enhance statistical research by enabling NIMBLE to serve as a hub for
composition of models and methods, whereby a data analyst can create one
statistical model and use many different methods with it. Finally, this project
will include training and support for new and existing users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.