* 2332864
* AI Institutes Virtual Organization (AIVO): Expanding the Network
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Stephen Brown, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,573,373.00

The National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research Institutes program is a
multi-agency and multi-sector effort implementing the U.S. federal government
strategy to advance a cohesive approach to AI-related opportunities and risks.
Launched in 2019, the program now includes 25 AI Institutes. Each Institute is a
large-scale effort involving a network of multiple funded organizations, many
research professionals, and community partners working together to advance and
apply AI knowledge and methods and build new platforms for AI research
infrastructure and innovation. In this project, the AI Institutes Virtual
Organization (AIVO) builds a community hub activity that connects these
individual Institutes into a network of networks that is greater than the sum of
its parts. The key activities of AIVO in this project include the planning and
hosting of annual meetings of the Institutes for knowledge exchange,
coordination of public engagement with the Institutes and their work, and a
range of new programs for building new collaborations among the Institutes and
with the broader research community. The nine interrelated efforts under this
project establish excellent conditions to form communities and address topics
across Institute boundaries.

AIVO is an NSF-funded, community-led activity for coordination, collaboration,
and community building in the AI Institutes program community. In this project,
AIVO will expand community engagement in nine interrelated projects: 1) planning
and conducting the program-wide leadership conference, Summit for AI Institutes
Leadership (SAIL 2023); 2) planning and conducting a public engagement event co-
located with SAIL 2023 for the exposition of AI Institutes to broader society
and the exploration of new collaborations; 3) planning for future such
leadership and public engagement conferences; 4) development and integration of
dynamic and collaborative features for the AIVO web site to deliver a live look
at Institute activity, implement collaborative features, and make the projects
and personnel of the Institutes accessible to the public; 5) a program to
support Institutes in developing new international collaborations; 6) the
hosting of intra-Institute collaboration platforms to facilitate community
growth; 7) a program to provide travel assistance grants to Institutes to
increase attendance of early-career researchers at key AI conferences; the
formalization and support to special interest groups (SIGs) to bring together
personnel from diverse institutes around priority topics; and 9) development and
hosting of AIVO Workshops to build inter-institute community around common
themes of interest. Together, the efforts of this virtual organization represent
a robust suite of Institute support programs and expertise to enhance the impact
of a key national investment in AI and reach a much wider audience through
diverse engagement mechanisms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.