* 2332088
* Conference: Advancing Undergraduate Research at HSI Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Pushpa Ramakrishna, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,025.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by gaining insights on the use
of Undergraduate Research Experiences (UREs) at Hispanic Serving Institutions
(HSIs) as a means of creating inclusive learning environments in order to
increase student retention, persistence, and success. In an effort to be truly
Hispanic serving, evidence-based practices can be employed to reduce inequities
in STEM education to increase academic outcomes for all students. Undergraduate
research has been shown to be a high impact practice (HIP) that is useful in
developing students’ problem-solving skills, work habits, connecting their
classroom experiences to the real world, and improving persistence with the
benefit of helping students develop a “science identity.” In particular,
evidence has established that undergraduate research experiences are known to
significantly increase the number of underrepresented students persisting and
graduating in STEM. The workshop plans to convene community college faculty from
HSIs, undergraduate research organizations, professional societies, and various
stakeholders who are experts in undergraduate research from across the Nation.

This workshop will convene HSI community college faculty and professional
organization leaders to share their successes and challenges to achieve these
main goals: (1) Promote inclusive learning environments to increase student
retention, persistence and success in STEM through the high impact practice of
undergraduate research experiences at HSI community colleges, and: (2) Provide a
space for discourse on undergraduate research experiences by catering to the
unique needs of the HSI community colleges. The workshop will enable thought
leaders to give their insights through a think tank approach. The participants
will be provided opportunities to discuss themes such as: equitable access to
UREs for all students, scaling and sustaining UREs at HSI community colleges,
measuring impacts on student learning and assessing the cultural value of the
student experiences, and networks and partnerships. During each of the sessions,
the discussions will focus on the aforementioned themes at the level of the
institution, classroom (faculty), students, and professional societies. Expected
outcomes from the workshop will (1) Determine the unique needs of the diverse
student population among the diverse HSI institution types for adoption and
implementation of the UREs for equitable access to UREs for all students; (2)
Identify the opportunities and barriers for the adoption, scaling and sustaining
UREs in the STEM fields at the level of the institution, faculty/classrooms,
students, and professional societies. A white paper will be composed, based on
the conference activities, outlining the unique needs of STEM students at HSI
institutions along with identifying potential barriers to providing equitable
access for students. This project is funded by the HSI Program, which aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.