* 2332760
* SWIFT-SAT: Network Adaptation Based on Physics-Inspired Learning Framework for Radio Coexistence of Terrestrial and Satellite Information Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Zhi Ding, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2026
* USD 749,997.00

Major advances in information technologies have stimulated numerous novel
concepts and wireless innovations including 3GPPâ€™s 5G terrestrial and non-
terrestrial network (NTN) services. As high volumes of data traffic from a rich
plethora of applications ranging from artificial intelligence, automation, IoT,
and virtual/augmented reality continue to cram into existing system of limited
capacity, the ever-increasing spectrum need motivates the expansion of wireless
networking into new radio bands. As the terrestrial radio spectrum expands,
spectrum coexistence between terrestrial and satellite systems becomes
increasingly critical.

This collaborative SWIFT-SAT project aims to develop physics-inspired learning
frameworks by integrating physical radio propagation models and data-driven
learning machines to facilitate efficient and harmonious coexistence between
terrestrial and satellite systems. Leveraging prior knowledge from measurement
data and the constraints imposed by radio physical models, the proposed research
activities are geared towards establishing accurate radio interference models
and databases to empower advanced network optimization and adaptation. Accurate
radio coverage map (radio-map) estimation is critical to interference-limited
coexistence between terrestrial and satellite systems. Major project thrusts are
directed at dynamic estimation and prediction of radio-map as well as their
integration into wireless network optimization and adaptation under coexistence
constraints. Requiring only sparse observations in spatial, frequency, and
temporal domains, the investigators employ physics-inspired and model-driven
learning approaches to accurately estimate co-channel and adjacent channel
interferences based on radio-map estimation of coexisting wireless systems. The
project innovation further includes learning-based approaches guided by
propagation models for intelligent wireless network optimization and
interference diagnosis facilitated by radio-map information. Through the
proposed innovation, model-based radio coverage estimation can anticipate
interference anomalies, can detect or diagnose network outages quickly, and can
respond with effective network adaptation policies. The proposed solutions and
project outcomes are expected to significantly impact future technology
development for interference-limited coexistence between terrestrial and
satellite systems. More broadly, this work promotes reliable and intelligent
wireless systems across data acquisition, communication, sensing, and
distributed computing. Broader impacts from this project include many new
educational opportunities stimulated by this research. Already in partnership
with local inner-city schools, the project team plans to incorporate into this
project learning opportunities in STEM for K-12 and under-represented talents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.