* 2332594
* EAGER: Establishing Near-Ultraviolet Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy for Highly Sensitive Imaging of Native Biomolecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Fake Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Adam Wax
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

During brain tumor resection, pathologists are often consulted to help guide
surgical decisions. However, current surgical pathology procedures are time-
consuming and labor-intensive, involving tissue cryosectioning and chemical
staining. Coherent Raman microscopy is a promising technology to render label-
free pathology-like images of tissue. Current coherent Raman imaging uses
visible or near-infrared (NIR) light and has limited sensitivity when imaging
native DNA molecules in the nucleus of a cell. This project will leverage near-
ultraviolet (NUV) light and coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS) imaging
to break the sensitivity hurdle. The NUV-CARS imaging system will be applied to
develop label-free digital pathology for brain tumor diagnosis. This technology
holds the potential to advance the fields of surgical pathology and image-guided
surgery. This project will provide training opportunities in biophotonics and
data science for undergraduate and graduate students with diverse backgrounds.

The goal of this EAGER project is to establish NUV-CARS microscopy for high-
resolution, highly sensitive imaging of native biomolecules and apply this
imaging tool to develop label-free digital pathology for brain tumor diagnosis.
While NIR-CARS is able to perform rapid chemical imaging of live cells and
tissue, it suffers from a low detection sensitivity when imaging native
biomolecules. NUV-CARS will leverage the electric pre-resonance effect to
achieve a significantly enhanced sensitivity for imaging chemical bonds in
native biological molecules. Novel nonlinear optical strategies with quartz
optics will be implemented to manage the non-resonant background and UV
photodamage. With NUV-CARS, the true chemical contrast of DNA molecules will be
obtained to render pathological images similar to the images with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining, which will be used for fresh tissue-based brain tumor
diagnosis. This research will advance the knowledge in the fields of NUV
coherent Raman and multiphoton fluorescence, paving the way for groundbreaking
advancements in scientific knowledge and technological applications. NUV-CARS
imaging with machine learning algorithms will enable fresh tissue-based digital
pathology for brain tumor diagnosis, which can be readily applied to other types
of cancer surgeries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.