* 2332264
* CADMap: Creating Mapped Solid Models of Deformed As-Manufactured Geometries that Link to an Original Reference Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Qing Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Janis Terpenny
* 10/31/2026
* USD 599,973.00

The accurate, precise, and comprehensive representation of shape details of
manufactured components is critical for the design, control, and optimization of
next-generation, cyber-based manufacturing systems. However, in many cases, the
design intent encoded in the Computer-Aided Design (CAD) model cannot be applied
directly to the as-manufactured part because the physical part never perfectly
matches the geometry of the designed part. Therefore, linking measurements back
to the design is challenging. This project establishes a systematic and
generalizable mapping methodology between as-designed models and as-built
geometries in the presence of large deviations. The methods developed as part of
the project define mappings that leverage the design information in the context
of the as-built part, which is otherwise impossible with simple reverse
engineering. This work will facilitate data mapping from different resources and
modalities in manufacturing and across the product lifecycle. Hence this project
will enable digital twin systems and Manufacturing 4.0 that rely on connectivity
and information exchange between digital models and physical parts. In addition,
the integration of education and outreach will broaden participation in
manufacturing and train the next generation of engineers and researchers with
state-of-the-art CAD modeling, manufacturing, and data analytics expertise.

The overarching goal of this research is to establish a systematic mapping
framework between as-designed models and the as-built geometries to be used for
applications in next-generation manufacturing systems. The specific research
objectives of this project include: (1) creating a rough mesh fit of the as-
built point cloud that represents the exterior of the as-built part to enable a
mesh-based mapping between as-built and reference geometries. The approach of
this project looks at the entire object as a unit and its natural deformations
to accommodate large deformations. (2) Fitting the CAD model to the as-built
geometry while preserving the design topology information embedded in the
original CAD. The approach of this project makes conscious choices to retain the
topology of the reconstructed shape. (3) Establishing a systematic mapping
between as-designed models and the as-built geometries. The team introduces the
idea of persistent mapping that uses a defined procedure based on identified
features or landmarks to parameterize the object surface piece by piece. Finally
(4), Evaluating the effectiveness and demonstrating the usefulness of these new
methods for specialized case studies in additive manufacturing and
nondestructive evaluation. The project will facilitate the digital integration
of design and manufacturing within larger product lifecycle ecosystems,
especially in sectors with requirements for process monitoring and quality
assurance, e.g., additive manufacturing and nondestructive evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.