* 2332675
* SWIFT-SAT: Efficient and On-Demand Spectrum Coexistence for Satellite-Terrestrial Systems
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 749,999.00

The escalating demand for wireless communications, fueled by emerging
applications, has led to radio spectrum congestion. This project designs
efficient schemes for spectrum coexistence between satellite and terrestrial
systems. One spectrum sharing approach used today is called a Spectrum Access
System (SAS), a centralized database and control system that assigns channels to
users in real-time such that other users are protected from interference.
Existing SAS solutions support terrestrial-terrestrial sharing in situations
where every device transmits as well as receives. The new schemes developed in
this project extend the SAS concept to manage satellite-terrestrial spectrum
sharing. Key challenges addressed in the project include (a) some devices on the
ground and in orbit are passive receivers that cannot be detected by spectrum
sensing, and (b) the SAS must manage aggregate interference of multiple
transmitters with awareness of dynamically changing receiver beams. The findings
from this project will provide valuable insights for ongoing efforts by
government policy-makers to open mid-bands and high-bands for spectrum sharing
and commercial use.

The project has three main research thrusts. The first thrust explores
architectural options for the satellite-terrestrial SAS. Key considerations for
the architecture include: effective data collection regarding systems,
locations, and beams; efficient calculation of aggregate interference; efficient
calculation of coexistence solutions, which may involve scalable decentralized
algorithms run by affected users; and minimization of changes to existing
satellite system protocols. The second thrust develops effective SAS-based
methods to achieve interference protection for satellite systems, including
channel estimation and aggregate interference computation. Factors considered
include directional antennas, advanced interference management schemes such as
MIMO and successive interference cancellation, terrain blockage, idle periods,
partial spectrum utilization, and risk-based interference protection. The third
thrust designs a multi-time scale coexistence scheme: precalculated solutions
for satellites with fixed beams or ground systems, and real-time calculated
solutions for satellites with unpredictable beams and mobile ground systems. The
initially nonlinear optimization problem is linearized to obtain Mixed Integer
Linear Program (MILP) formulations. Multiple algorithms to solve the MILP
problems are developed: use subproblem partitioning to enable real time
optimization on GPUs, use reinforcement learning to develop low-complexity
algorithms, and use federated learning to enable decentralized solution across a
network of terrestrial users. Evaluation of the research includes technical and
policy assessment of candidate architectures, verification of channel
predictions, and software prototypes of coexistence algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.