* 2332805
* EAGER: Understanding How Employees Discover and React to Health and Wellbeing Benefits
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Keaton Fletcher, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,655.00

Organizations in the United States spend nearly a trillion dollars per year to
provide employees with access to health and wellbeing benefits, yet many
employees are unaware of, or do not understand, what health and wellbeing
benefits they have access to. This lack of awareness and understanding reduces
benefit use, reduces the positive impact of benefits on employees’ health and
wellbeing, and limits the useful of benefits as signals that employers support
their employees. This project explores how and when employees discover and react
to the health and wellbeing benefits their organizations offer, including the
role of technology in this process. This project directly and positively impacts
the overall health and wellbeing of the workforce by creating clear suggestions
on how organizations can better foster employees’ understanding of their health
and wellbeing benefits.

This project lays the groundwork for understanding the role of the employee as
an active agent in searching for information regarding their health and
wellbeing benefits. The study includes two waves. The first wave is a
quantitative survey, using a stratified random sample of participants from the
four most populated states. Questions capture what health and wellbeing benefits
employees are aware of their organizations providing, as well as how, when, and
from whom they became aware of these benefits, and perceptions of organizational
support. The second wave is a qualitative study in which a subset of
participants from Wave 1 are interviewed and asked to provide benefit
communication artifacts from their organization. This approach allows for deep
dive into the process of becoming aware of one’s health and wellbeing benefits,
including the role of cyberinfrastructure. Overall, this project has the
potential for novel theoretical and practical insights regarding benefit
awareness and communication.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.