* 2332306
* RAPID: DRL AI:  Data Driven Approaches to Integrating AI in K-12 Education Using Social Media Analysis
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Hanqi Zhuang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,995.00

Large language models, especially ChatGPT, have seen exponential growth and have
demonstrated early potential to transform teaching and learning. Given the
rapidly changing field, there are limited systematic studies on how students and
teachers are engaging with these new generative AI tools, leaving schools with
little to no data to help them integrate AI in K-12 education. This RAPID
project aims to develop a general framework and accompanying computational tools
to understand how students and teachers are engaging with generative AI tools.
By gaining insights into both the enthusiasm and concerns from teachers and
students, the project seeks to equip AI integration teams with a deeper
understanding of AI usage in educational settings. This understanding will help
identify opportunities, and lay a foundation for transformative changes to K-12
education. The resulting data analytics will provide rich information about
teachers' use, perceptions, fears, and frustration in adopting AI in the
classroom. It will also offer new insights into students' use, trends, level of
interest, and an initial view of their sense of responsible and ethical use of
AI. Combined, this will inform the public on the digital readiness of teachers,
students, and school districts, including responsible/ethical use of AI in the
classroom and student preparation for careers in AI. The project will also
potentially contribute to the AI standards in K-12 education. Furthermore, the
project's findings will be broadly disseminated, with the primary objective of
providing practical guidelines that can be incorporated into educational
practices.

This project proposes a data-driven approach to understand how high school
teachers and students have begun using AI tools. The project will collect time-
sensitive data from social media platforms and develop methods to identify
topics and trends driving the exploration and use of AI tools by students and
teachers. The key tasks in this project are as follows: 1) identifying social
networks and related communities, 2) developing tools to collect relevant past
and current posts, and 3) performing data analysis to identify topics, trends,
and to elicit key challenges and opportunities for effectively using AI tools in
teaching and learning. The data analysis workflows will be used to identify
trends, topics, questions, and concerns among student and teacher groups. Topic
modeling and user activity analysis will be used to develop student and teacher
perspectives. This proposal was received in response to the Dear Colleague
Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12
Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097) and funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.