* 2332057
* Towards efficient state estimation in wall-bounded flows: hierarchical adjoint data assimilation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Qi Wang, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 259,701.00

A novel framework is currently under development, aiming to translate sparse
observations of turbulent flows - where a fluid's speed varies chaotically -
into accurate, detailed predictions of such flows. Observations from field tests
are often limited by space and resolution. Despite these limitations, the
predictions derived from such observations are crucial in a myriad of fields
such as meteorology, oceanography, and aerospace engineering, yielding rich
interpretations from sparse data. The process of merging these observations with
complex simulations, known as Data Assimilation, poses significant challenges
due to the intricate nature and wide range of scales present in turbulence. To
address this, our project plans to develop a Hierarchical Adjoint-based Data
Assimilation framework aiming to bridge simulations across multiple resolutions,
while taking into account the sparse measurements at different scales. This
project could significantly advance our understanding of turbulence and improve
the synergy between numerical simulation and field tests, thereby enhancing the
fidelity of these simulations. The project will develop open-source software
tools encapsulating the Hierarchical Adjoint-based Data Assimilation (HADA)
framework. These tools will be made available to researchers and practitioners
alike, promoting broader usage and further development. Documentation and
tutorials will accompany the software to facilitate ease of use.

The technical core of this project revolves around a unique combination of
adjoint-based data assimilation techniques and hierarchical methodology. We aim
to employ an optimal eddy viscosity model to stabilize the adjoint fields,
addressing existing challenges such as energy growth and slow convergence rates
typically associated with adjoint-based techniques. The proposed Hierarchical
Data Assimilation framework gradually reconstructs flow fields across a
hierarchy of spatiotemporal resolutions, using eddy-viscosity fields as a bridge
between different grid resolutions. This approach enhances the performance of
adjoint-based data assimilation in turbulent flows, while simultaneously
reducing the computational demands that conventional methods often incur. By
delivering a reliable, efficient, and scalable state estimation tool, this
framework can advance inverse problems for engineering and environmental
systems. The enhanced understanding of adjoint sensitivity in turbulent flows it
provides could significantly improve predictions and decision-making processes
in areas such as weather forecasting, climate modeling, pollution dispersion,
and other relevant areas. Moreover, the research will also foster
interdisciplinary collaborations and serve as an invaluable educational
resource.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.