* 2332212
* I-Corps:  Artificial Intelligence-based mobile application to mitigate health risks of firefighters
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Sunil Kumar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based mobile application to
reduce firefighter deaths. Firefighters are fourteen times more likely to suffer
a sudden cardiac event (SCE) in response to an alarm, and 136 times more likely
to suffer a fatal SCE after firefighting than nonemergency duties. The proposed
technology is designed to monitor the physiological data of firefighters using
commercially available personal wireless wearable health trackers, evaluate
cardiovascular risk factors, and alert the firefighter about impending risks.
The goal for this proposed technology is to reduce firefighter mortalities and
morbidities associated with cardiovascular disease. Approximately 92% of out-of-
hospital cardiac arrests result in death suggesting that many people do not
recognize the symptoms, and don’t act on early warning signs. Early
identification of cardiovascular health risks (e.g., hypertension, arrhythmia,
sleep apnea) that increase the possibility of SCE, continuous monitoring of
disease progression, and addressing risks in a timely manner may increase the
chances of preventing or surviving a SCE. The health trackers are low-cost, and
can continuously track physiological data (heart rate, sleep behavior) and
physical activity (step count, travel distance, floors climbed), and may be used
to upload this data wirelessly to the cloud via a mobile device. Long-term
benefits may include a decrease in cardiac incidence that may lead to lower
healthcare costs and improve the safety of firefighters. In addition, the
proposed technology may be used by the general population, which may have a
broad health benefit to society.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a mobile software
application for the fire service to reduce firefighter deaths due to sudden
cardiac events (SCE). The proposed technology utilizes commercially available
health tracker technology integrated with Artificial Intelligence (AI) models
that have been trained and developed using firefighters’ health data and
customized using relevant clinical studies from the fire service. The proposed
software is built with react-native cross-platform (iOS/Android) and is
integrated with deep learning models to remotely diagnose arrhythmia,
hypertension, atrial fibrillation, and sleep apnea, which are prevalent
cardiovascular risk factors in fire service data leading to sudden cardiac
events – a leading cause (50-60%) of firefighter morbidity and on-duty deaths.
The proposed Internet of Things system captures the physiological data from
wearable health trackers and feeds it to cloud-based AI models for real-time
remote diagnosis. Based on custom risk thresholds, the user may then be notified
when a health risk is detected by the AI models. In addition, wide-spread
prolonged usage of the proposed software application also may provide a database
of firefighters’ physiological data that may then be used to further refine the
technology, lead to new understandings of physiological, and potentially
pathological, responses to firefighting, and stimulate new data-driven clinical
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.