* 2332341
* EAGER: Exploration of 3D-Transistors with 2D-TMDs for Ultimate Miniaturization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Kaustav Banerjee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Continued miniaturization of metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect-transistors
(MOSFETs) to yield unremitting improvements in system integration density,
performance, and energy-efficiency has necessitated the exploration of
alternative novel device architectures. Gate-all-around (GAA) architecture is
one of such promising alternatives to the state-of-the-art FinFET (essentially a
double-gate MOSFET), that with its superior gate control over the channel,
reduced short-channel effects, and increased ON-current, can sustain transistor
miniaturization down to few nanometer channel lengths if implemented with
suitable channel materials. In this regard, the implementation of GAA
architectures with emerging layered two-dimensional materials (2DM) can
significantly enhance the capabilities of the GAA transistors, compared to
implementations with conventional semiconductors such as Si, because of the
several advantages that 2DM offers. These benefits include excellent
electrostatics (gate control of channel charge) afforded by the atomic thinness
and pristine interfaces of the 2DM body that enable channel length scaling
without sacrificing gate control, uniform body thicknesses offering low device-
to-device variability and robust device performance, large bandgap and moderate
carrier effective mass (compared to Si) offering suppressed OFF-current. The PI
is a pioneer in the field of 2D-CMOS and has made major contributions to every
aspect of these transistors - from fundamental charge injection and transport
theory to the design and experimental demonstrations of some of the best
transistors reported in the literature. The two-year exploratory project will
involve the design, fabrication, and characterization of 2DM based GAA FETs
(including nanosheet FETs) to extend the scalability of the MOSFET and thereby
sustain Moore’s Law. The application space of the project includes every
conceivable electronic product that runs on MOSFETs including microprocessors
and memories. Therefore the project is expected to have wide implications for
the semiconductor and electronics industries. Moreover, the PI will use various
well established educational platforms to disseminate the research results and
to make them available to a wide range of users. The overall project also ties
research to education at all levels involving K-12, undergraduates, graduates,
and minorities, partly via participation in programs designed by education
professionals, besides focusing on recruitment and retention of underrepresented
groups in nanoscience and engineering.

The project will employ a distinctive atoms-to-applications theory to study and
demonstrate the promise of employing two-dimensional materials (2DM) in
designing gate-all-around (GAA) field-effect-transistor (FET) architectures,
which is radically different from the approaches pursued till date. While
theoretical simulations from the PI’s group guided by first principles quantum
transport theory – non equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF), have demonstrated
that suitably designed planar 2D-FETs with 2D transition-metal-dichalcogenide
(TMD) as the channel material can outperform Si counterparts in both low-
standby-power and high-performance transistor designs for sub-10 nm channel
lengths, such a scaling and performance analysis study for GAA architectures
have not been carried out yet. Fundamentally, the process and growth
optimizations required to realize such functional device architecture are also
at their infancy and have not been specifically tailored for this architecture.
The project therefore includes a detailed performance and scalability analysis
for both current and capacitance metrics of 2DM enabled 3D GAA transistor
architectures (such as nanosheet FETs) employing first principles density
functional theory (DFT) and NEGF transport formalism; employment (and
improvement) of advanced contact engineering for efficiently contacting stacked
n-/p-2DM channels in 3D geometry; identification of optimal high-κ dielectric
stack for integration into the 2D-TMD GAA transistor architecture; and finally,
fabrication and realistic demonstration of single- to multi-stack channel proof-
of-concept GAA transistor architectures permitted by available nanofabrication
facilities. The interdisciplinary nature of the research project, spanning
fundamental 2D materials physics, device design, and nano-fabrication
techniques, as well as theoretical simulations and compact modeling, will ensure
that the proposed research ideas are feasible and tailored to deliver optimal
results.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.