* 2332459
* EAGER: Biophysical Study of Solution Behavior and Vulnerability of Viruses with Complex N-glycans
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Preethi Chandran, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,996.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. Viruses appear to change their aggregation state depending on the
solution conditions in the transmission pathway. This project is designed to
determine the extent to which the solution state is universally determined by
the virus glycosylation. Since virus infectivity, immune-stealth, and
transmissibility changes with aggregation, our goal is to determine if highly
mutable viruses like influenza can be additionally intercepted based on the
susceptibility of their solution state. The broader impact of the project is to
better understand disparities in virus transmission from differences in the
solution conditions in different populations.

While there has been a lot of interest in how these virus sugars are recognized
by proteins of the immune system and signaling pathways, little is known about
how the biophysics of the sugars fundamentally and broadly protects viruses in
their twin purposes of transmission and infection. This project has two goals:
1) To investigate if complex N-glycans broadly determine virus aggregation state
of viruses, and the infectivity, antibody (Ab) resistance, mucin binding in
different solution conditions; and 2) To determine how NA and Hb envelop
proteins on influenza A virus, which have Sialic acid -cleaving and -binding
properties, respectively, systematically change the solution behavior and
vulnerability of Influenza A virus to suits its virulence needs. Methodologies
include dynamic light scattering, atomic force microscopy, florescence
microscopy, rheology, and cell culture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.