* 2332009
* Conference: Radio Stars in the Era of New Observatories
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Lynn Matthews, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 09/30/2024
* USD 38,142.00

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology Haystack Observatory will host a
three-day workshop titled “Radio Stars in the Era of New Observatories” from
April 17-19, 2024. The workshop will provide a forum for the presentation and
discussion of new advances in solar and stellar astrophysics enabled by the
current generation of radio, millimeter and submillimeter facilities, including
the Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array, the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter
Array, the Very Long Baseline Array, and the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank
Telescope. In addition, an underlying theme will be strategizing on how to best
exploit planned future facilities to advance solar and stellar science. The
workshop will bring together observers and theorists to encourage discourse on
how radio wavelength observations provide new and unique insights into stellar
astrophysics and complement studies at other wavelengths. It will also seek
participation by experts working outside of the radio domain, as well as in
areas such as computation and technology development. The Radio Stars workshop
will encourage the participation of students and early career researchers and
provide the opportunity for interaction with established leaders in the field of
stellar astrophysics in a supportive and inclusive environment. Invited speakers
and other workshop participants will be recruited from underrepresented groups.
Scientific highlights from the meeting will be shared with the general public
through MIT Haystack’s social media platforms.

The aims of the workshop are to: (1) enable the dissemination of cutting-edge
research in stellar astrophysics, including results derived from NSF-sponsored
facilities; (2) foster learning and creative innovation through interactions
between theorists, observers, computing experts, and instrument builders; (3)
provide opportunities to identify key outstanding questions in stellar
astrophysics and develop strategies for use of radio wavelength observations as
a tool for addressing them; (4) provide a forum to discuss laying the groundwork
for stellar radio science with instruments of the future. The workshop will be
summarized in a “Conference Highlights” publication and meeting presentations
will be made available online through the conference web site. Sessions at the
workshop will examine radio emission from both hot and cool stars during the
pre-main sequence through post-main sequence evolutionary phases. Topics covered
will include stellar radio emission processes, stellar magnetism, and the role
of radio emission as a probe of stellar atmospheres, stellar evolution, and the
interactions between stars and their environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.