* 2332775
* RAPID: Assessing Evidence for Marine Resource Utilization at Eroding Coastal Sites in Northern Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Gudny Zoega, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,250.00

This award supports the rapid-response coring and sampling of an archaeological
site in imminent danger of loss due to climate-driven coastal erosion.
Hafnarb√∫dir is a large, early specialized marine fishing or whaling site with
the potential to rewrite understanding of Viking Age economies in Iceland. The
site consists of numerous small structures, features, and bone deposits perched
precariously on an eroding sea bank. Much of the archaeology of Viking Age
Iceland centers on farms and farmsteads, though archaeologists and historians
recognize that many key economic activities occurred beyond the farmstead. This
site therefore has the potential to shift conventional narratives of Viking Age
life to more accurately reflect its social and economic complexity, while
advancing understanding of North Atlantic marine and coastal adaptations more
generally.

Working collaboratively with Icelandic researchers and students, the team will
determine site boundaries, date deposits and recover material for preliminary
analysis. Site documentation includes profiling, mapping, photography, and an
intensive coring regime to bound site limits, locate concentrated anthropogenic
deposits, and recover tephras in stratigraphic context. Flotation samples will
be collected for identification, dating, and location of activity areas.
Whalebone recovered from the site will be subjected to collagen fingerprinting
and ancient DNA analysis to identify represented species. Finally, the research
team will conduct a systematic review of historical documents related to the
site and nearby farms. Broader impacts of the work include engagement with local
Icelandic communities, experiential learning by student participants, and
dissemination of project updates and findings through social media, public
lectures, conference presentations, and peer-reviewed journal publications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.