* 2332003
* Planning: Using Emerging Technologies for Increasing Student Enrollment and Learning in Infrastructure and Building Construction Technology at HBCUs
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Yuhan Jiang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,999.00

This HBCU-Excellence in Research planning grant will help bridge the gap between
industry and higher education. The project aims to contribute to current US
efforts to improve national infrastructure by spearheading construction outputs,
gathering comprehensive information on the current and future employment skills
that are needed from the infrastructure, and building construction firms.
Properly training HBCU infrastructure and building construction technology
program students with the industrial-needed emerging technologies will 1) equip
groups underrepresented with employment skills and enable them to have equitable
access to personal economic success, and 2) ensure the industry has sufficient
and skilled workforces to meet the growing demand for construction services and
deliver quality projects on time and within budget.

This one-year HBCU-EiR planning grant will help the research team to develop a
full proposal for a three-year HBCU-EiR research project which aims to use
emerging technologies to encourage underrepresented minority students to pursue
advanced infrastructure and building construction degrees at HUBCs and prepare
the students for careers in the infrastructure and building construction
industry. Hence, the primary goal is to explore and strengthen the collaborative
relationships with the infrastructure and building construction industrial and
academic experts to understand the gaps, and current and future needs of
employment skills to enhance the intellectual merit of the planned research. The
secondary goal is to create opportunities (i.e., new workshops) to expose
emerging technologies in construction to K-12 schools, community colleges, and
HBCU undergraduate programs to enhance the broader impacts of this planning
grant. Moreover, the team will network with the administrators of HBCUsâ€™
construction technology programs to exchange information, resources, and best
practices (i.e., curriculum and course modules). As a result, an HBCU
Infrastructure and Building Construction Consortium (HBCU-IBCC) will be
established to further enhance the broader impacts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.