* 2332550
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 ACM Ubicomp/ISWC Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Edward Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 29,753.00

This project will partially support a Doctoral Colloquium for a pair of co-
located conferences, the ACM Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp) and the International Symposium on Wearable Computers
(ISWC). UbiComp and ISWC are premier venues for cutting-edge research in design,
development, deployment, evaluation, and understanding of wearable and
ubiquitous computing systems. The Doctoral Colloquium of each conference has
historically offered the top students in the field a valuable opportunity to
present their work and receive feedback; many students who have participated in
previous UbiComp Doctoral Colloquia have gone on to become leading academic and
industrial researchers in the field. The funding will support studentsâ€™
participation, including student travel and lodging expenses, as well as the
direct expenses of executing the Doctoral Colloquium. The funding will also
allow students who are not supported on existing grants to participate,
broadening the composition and perspectives of attendees to everyone's benefit.

By combining the two colloquia, the organizers seek to preserve the individual
attention paid to each student by the panel while maximizing the
interdisciplinary interaction between students. The event will bring together 24
dissertation-stage doctoral students in the fields of wearable and ubiquitous
computing for a full-day session of presentation and discussion. Two panels of
four internationally respected faculty and industrial researchers will be
convened (one within each field); these mentors will provide detailed feedback
to individual students, more general feedback on all student presentations at
the colloquia, and career development advice through a closing joint panel.
Student participants will be selected based on a 6-page extended abstract
describing their work and its contributions both to the research community and
to broader impacts, with the selection committee considering both the value to
the student and the value they will bring to the colloquium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.