* 2332674
* I-Corps:  Blood Pressure Monitoring by a Miniaturized Cuffless Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Liwei Lin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wearable device to measure blood pressure. Uncontrolled
hypertension impacts an alarming 116 million Americans, resulting in 1 in 5
deaths from heart disease and stroke. In addition, preeclampsia affects 3% to 5%
of pregnancies in the US, potentially leading to severe consequences such as
seizures and permanent organ damage. Continuous blood pressure monitoring
significantly reduces these risks, but current solutions have limitations. Cuff
measurement requires inflation and is only effective for up to 24-48 hours,
while optical sensors are inaccurate due to sensitivity to skin tones, user
motion, and limited penetration depth. The proposed technology is a sensor and
algorithms that may be integrated into a wearable device, providing enhanced
data accuracy and improved continuous monitoring compliance in a reliable,
convenient, and cost-effective manner. This may provide an option for long-term
blood pressure management.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a subcutaneous blood
pressure monitoring sensor and biosensing algorithms. The proposed technology
uses miniaturized non-invasive piezoelectric micromachined ultrasound
transducers (PMUTs) integrated with cutting-edge silicon technology and
biosensing algorithms. The technology has been shown to provide superior
environmental resistance, deeper skin penetration using ultrasound, long-term
stability with competitive power consumption, and cost savings. In addition, the
ultrasound beamforming ensures precise targeting of blood vessels, making the
technology resistant to user movement interference. These innovations have
enabled the development of wearable devices offering non-invasive, cuffless
solutions in versatile forms such as wrist, chest, and arm bands. Enhanced data
accuracy and increased user compliance make the proposed cuffless blood pressure
monitoring system an option for continuous, long-term blood pressure management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.