* 2332937
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Interconnecting knowledge systems to advance the science and application of fire in ways that respect Tribal Sovereignty
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Jeffrey Kane, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2025
* USD 199,574.00

Over the recent decades, much of the western U.S. has experienced abrupt
increases in wildfire activity, posing numerous challenges and undesired impacts
to humans, ecosystems, and landscapes. Resolving these challenges requires a
different restorative approach that centers Indigenous fire stewardship,
advances fire science through cross-cultural collaborations and
interdisciplinary research, and expands participation within the fire science
and fire management workforce. The Karuk Tribe, located along the Klamath River
of northwestern California, holds a long history of stewarding the regionâ€™s
ecosystems with fire and are well recognized leaders in the advancement of
prescribed fire and fire management on an international scale. While strides
have been made to enhance Tribal Sovereignty and engagement with fire
management, further work toward interconnecting knowledge systems to promote
equitable solutions remains. This planning project will coordinate a series of
events focused on interconnecting Indigenous and Western knowledge systems to
create reciprocal relationships of exchange and center Native protocol for data
and knowledge use to develop effective solutions to altered wildfire regimes. A
primary outcome of the project will be to solicit input on high priority fire-
related research, monitoring, and educational needs of the Karuk Tribe and to
assemble a team of researchers and practitioners to develop tangible,
innovative, community-based project ideas for future development.

This innovative planning project will coordinate a series of collaborative
workshops and working group meetings focused on interconnecting Indigenous and
Western knowledge systems related to fire science and management within the
Karuk Ancestral Territory. As part of these efforts, the investigators plan to
advance four core areas related to the application of fire: 1) interdisciplinary
and cross-cultural research, 2) co-production of knowledge with managers and
practitioners, 3) intergenerational learning, and 4) restoration monitoring and
research. The researchers plan to address these objectives by leveraging the
success of existing partnerships between the Karuk Tribe, California State
Polytechnic University, Humboldt, and other organizations, to provide a setting
that is inclusive of cultures, backgrounds, and disciplines and supports
tribally directed efforts in such a way that respects Tribal Sovereignty and
leadership. Specific outcomes of this project will be to: 1) develop and refine
protocols, policies, and agreements of collaboration among academics and the
Karuk Tribe; 2) advance tribal sovereignty and leadership through identifying
tribally centered research, management, and educational priorities; 3) foster
cross-cultural and interdisciplinary collaborations to address wildfire related
challenges; and 4) developing action plans to craft innovative and
interdisciplinary proposals that are receptive to NSF program directives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.