* 2332409
* Strengthening an Inclusive Innovation Ecosystem through an Historically Black Colleges and Universities Community of Practice
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Neela White, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,510,230.00

Since 2017 with the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP),
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) has led efforts
to support inclusive innovation by specifically developing and leveraging the
talent at HBCUs and their potential to serve as economic engines in their local
communities and leaders in the innovation arena. The AAAS HBCU Innovation
Initiative via it’s Community of Practice (CoP) has provided training,
mentoring, and resourcing of over 350 HBCU students and faculty from 38
institutions to develop innovations addressing grand challenges and global
issues framed by the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

This three-year project will build upon the CoP’s goal of creating and
leveraging an inclusive innovation ecosystem to empower HBCU students and
faculty to not only pursue, but lead national efforts in the invention,
innovation, making, and entrepreneurship arena. Anticipated outcomes from the
inclusive innovation ecosystem include fostering the transdisciplinary talent at
HBCUs and positioning students and faculty to become change makers to solve the
grand challenges in their community, the U.S., and globally. The targeted
project activities will provide students with a stronger sense of identity in
seeing themselves as inventors, innovators, makers, and entrepreneurs. Faculty
will be empowered to support student innovation career pathways and receive
training and resources to lead innovation efforts in their classrooms and
research labs.

This project will advance the field by providing knowledge of best practices and
strategies in broadening participation in innovation related areas and advancing
innovation capacity at HBCUs by employing a CoP and inclusive ecosystems as
models and frameworks. The embedded research study will engage and leverage the
expertise of HBCU social science researchers as collaborative partners in
knowledge generation on how best to advance innovation capacity at HBCUs. This
key stakeholder partnership and participatory research approach with HBCU
scholars will lay the foundation for future efforts to identify, scale and
sustain institutional capacity building in innovation on HBCU campuses.
Activities will equip HBCU students and faculty with the training and resources
to develop innovation related prototypes addressing critical societal issues.
Mentoring, coaching and training will assist students and faculty in serving as
innovation leaders on their campuses. An external evaluation team will assess
the overall project impacts, and to address the specific research questions that
will guide the research study. The activities align with the following
objectives: 1) Expand and scale student and faculty training in innovation, tech
transfer, and product commercialization through participation in the AAAS HBCU
Making and Innovation Showcase, 2) Expand faculty training to include a targeted
pd and leadership track, 3) Advance on-campus capacity building, 4) Expand the
CoP to leverage new strategic collaborative partnerships, and 5) Advance the
evidence base on inclusive innovation via an embedded research study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.