* 2332169
* CLIMA: Climate-Resilient Infrastructure Adaptations for Maladaptive Levee Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Cibin Raj, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 757,974.00

Millions of people and trillion dollars of property in the US are protected from
flooding by levee systems. However, most federally monitored levees fall short
of minimum accreditation standards. Further, climate change exacerbates
flooding, likely making current levee protection inadequate in the future.
Upgrading and extending existing levees require substantial investments and may
not lead to net positive effects for all communities across a given river
network. This CiviL Infrastructure research for climate change Mitigation and
Adaptation (CLIMA) project aims to address this problem by exploring a theory-
guided systems modeling framework for designing climate-resilient levee
infrastructure that supports floodplain communities in an equitable way.

The project focuses on two interrelated questions: (1) How interactions between
a levee networkâ€™s performance, future climates, natural infrastructure, and
behavioral feedback drive changes in flood risk across communities; and (2) How
design adaptations reimagine a levee network that supports equitable, resilient,
and sustainable communities. To address them, the project creates a novel
systems modeling framework to evaluate levee adaptation strategies, considering
factors often overlooked in levee decision-making, such as natural flood
infrastructure, variability in levee performance, climate change, unintended
consequences of levee construction, and social equity. This framework sees
levees as part of a larger adaptive network, where levee decisions made in one
community affect others in the same watershed. Through the adaptation lens, the
project advances knowledge of the potential of natural flood infrastructure to
reduce the need for levees and achieve co-benefits (such as reducing freshwater
pollution), the geotechnical factors that drive levee performance at the
watershed level, and the interventions and policy options for adapting levees to
changing flood conditions. These advancements have the potential to benefit
floodplain communities nationwide by facilitating the identification of
resilience-building strategies. By utilizing extensive biophysical and social
datasets, including new sources like geotechnical field and community surveys,
the project creatively couples computational models of natural infrastructure,
levee infrastructure, flood inundation risk, and levee decision-making. This
integrated approach yields detailed roadmaps of levee adaptations and levee
analytics, allowing for better-informed decisions that prioritize equity,
resilience, and cost-effectiveness.

This project is supported by the Humans, Disasters, and the Built Environment
(HDBE) Program and the Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS) Program of the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) of the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.