* 2332015
* Planning: Digital Twin for Building Performance Simulation and Optimization in Adaptive Reuse Planning
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Rania Labib, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,502.00

The adaptive reuse of existing buildings presents an essential strategy for
addressing societal challenges related to aging infrastructure, urban
development, and environmental sustainability. However, current methodologies
often fall short in predicting and optimizing building performance due to a lack
of accurate data and robust tools. In the realm of sustainable and energy-
efficient building design, the untapped potential of advanced technologies such
as digital twin technology, integrated with rich building data transformative
solutions. Incorporating digital twin technology into adaptive reuse planning
not only contributes to efficient resource utilization and waste reduction but
also significantly reduces environmental impact, thereby addressing critical
sustainability issues. In this project, the Principal Investigator (PI) will
utilize this planning grant to develop a proof-of-concept digital twin system,
specifically designed for adaptive reuse planning. The PI will conduct workshops
to promote knowledge exchange among faculty members from various HBCUs and
engage with potential collaborators and industry partners, laying the groundwork
for the research ahead.

The project involves developing a sophisticated digital twin model that
incorporates diverse data sources, including architectural and structural
parameters, historical data, environmental factors, and urban regulations.
Leveraging the power of machine learning algorithms and high-performance
computing, this model will perform real-time simulations and predictions of
building performance. The project aims to enhance energy efficiency by
predicting and optimizing building performance parameters, thus informing
adaptive reuse planning. The PI will be developing a robust methodology for data
collection, model development, performance simulation, and energy efficiency
evaluation. This endeavor will result in a user-friendly framework that empowers
non-experts to conduct complex simulations and make informed, energy-efficient
decisions. This approach introduces a revolutionary, technology-driven method to
adaptive reuse planning, potentially transforming the field by making the
process more efficient and effective, ultimately fostering more sustainable
cities. In this crucial planning stage, the focus is on strategic coordination,
engaging potential collaborators, conducting preliminary investigations, and
proof-of-concept studies, thereby laying a robust foundation for this ground-
breaking research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.