* 2332744
* PARTNER: Neuro-Inspired AI for the Edge at UTSA (NAIAD)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Dhireesha Kudithipudi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project is an ExpandAI Partnership between the University of Texas San
Antonio (UTSA) and the AI Institute for Edge Computing Leveraging Next-
generation Networks (ATHENA). In this project, a minority-serving institution
leads a new collaboration with an AI Institute focused on scaling up already-
established research and education programs at UTSA and to pursue shared,
complementary goals around developing AI with use for society in mind and for
developing the next generation of AI education and workforce talent. The
collaborative research focuses on the AI research that is inspired by how the
brain works, and to use that to create robust computational models and design AI
systems for embedded use in everyday devices. The project will also build
community and new centers of excellence in AI where such activities were not
previously well developed.

Despite the remarkable recent progress in AI systems, they are typically power-
hungry. This project investigates the incorporation of neuro-inspired mechanisms
in AI system and their potential to improve the energy efficiency and robustness
of AI solutions for the edge. This collaboration is a multidisciplinary
partnership between researchers at the University of Texas at San Antonio’s
MATRIX AI Consortium and the NSF AI Institute ATHENA. This new partnership will
conduct collaborative research that advances core AI capabilities for the edge
by creating novel AI models that draw inspiration from neural mechanisms and
will design neuromorphic computing systems that offer functionality, robustness,
and energy efficiency specifically targeting deployment in edge computing. The
project also features immersive research programming designed to strengthen AI
competencies in UTSA and ATHENA and further disseminated to the broader
professional community to support contribute to an inclusive future AI
workforce. The project is partially funded by NSF’s Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation (LSAMP) program within the Division of Equity for
Excellence in STEM.”

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.