* 2332512
* Planning: HBCU-UP: OPEN: Collaborative STEM Education, Research, and Workforce Development in Biomanufacturing Through Biotechnology and Bioinformatics Training
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Tyrell Carr, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. This project will coordinate planning activities for Saint Augustineâ€™s
University (SAU) to reimagine STEM by focusing on its proximity to Research
Triangle Park, NC and the growing industry in biomanufacturing. The planning
work outlines a strategy for developing new, innovative, and transformative
partnerships with neighboring universities and industry affiliates and
integrating biotechnology and bioinformatics training to prepare SAU students
for the biomanufacturing workforce and/or entry into STEM graduate programs.
This partnership effort will provide faculty internship opportunities in
biotechnology and bioinformatics at a major research university and a bridge to
biomanufacturing sciences training program for students at SAU. This strategy
also involves the integration of biotechnology and bioinformatics content and
skill acquisition into laboratory courses at SAU.

The goals of this project are to (1) integrate biotechnology and bioinformatics
training in the genetics laboratory course and molecular cell biology laboratory
course for biomanufacturing workforce development, (2) provide STEM majors with
a biomanufacturing sciences training experience through a summer program, and
(3) support advanced training in biotechnology or bioinformatics for STEM
faculty. Within the genetics laboratory course, STEM majors will be exposed to
hands-on training centered on CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing and high-throughput DNA
sequencing to genetically engineer an organism and characterize an organism at
the molecular level, respectively. Within the molecular cell biology laboratory
course, STEM majors will be exposed to hands-on training in high-throughput
selection to identify and recover a protein of interest and characterize protein
interactions. The summer biomanufacturing sciences training program will provide
STEM majors industry-based technical and research skills training in protein
expression, recovery, characterization, and bioactivity. STEM faculty supported
to receive advanced training in biotechnology or bioinformatics will be expected
to integrate training in laboratory courses and research. The project will also
support expert facilitators to provide students with advanced training in
biotechnology, bioinformatics, and biomanufacturing. Overall, the working
hypothesis of this project is the integration of biotechnology and
bioinformatics in laboratory courses and summer training will lead to students
accomplishing the following goals: project ownership, self-efficacy, mastery of
techniques, overcoming challenges in research, increased communication skills,
and feeling a connection to a larger scientific community. For evaluation
purposes, aspects of these goals will be assessed through structured anonymous
feedback mechanisms. A potential contribution to science is preparing
competitive STEM majors for the biomanufacturing workforce or entering fields of
study that support biomanufacturing sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.