* 2332571
* Collaborative Research: Industries of Ideas: A prototype system for measuring the effects of research investments on regional firms and jobs
* TIP,TF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jason Owen-Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2026
* USD 632,413.00

The Industries of Ideas: A prototype system for measuring the effects of
research investments on regional firms and jobs proposes to test a first of its
kind end-to-end data-driven pilot framework for assessing the impact of research
investment in specific technology areas on corresponding regional firms and
jobs. The CHIPS and Science Act supports investments in key technologies to
drive innovation, create jobs, and establish technology hubs across the United
States. Understanding the impacts of such investments in the ten technology
areas described in the CHIPS and Science Act can be challenging given current
data and methods because new technologies such as AI, quantum computing,
biomanufacturing and others are difficult to map to specific sectors and are
also quickly evolving. There are no current means to systematically identify all
the industries, employers, and workers which those technologies might affect. To
address these challenges the Industries of Ideas project will engage with
various stakeholders through outreach and community engagement, create a
prototype dashboard for effective accessible visualization and communication of
relevant information, and develop metrics for effectiveness of the outcomes. The
initial focus of this project is on the State of Ohio — a large, diverse state
with much of the requisite data infrastructure already in place and with two
rapidly emerging technology areas, viz., Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Electric Vehicles (EV). The project will establish plans and partnerships for
scaling this effort from a single state to the national level.

The tracking of investment impacts is challenging in multiple ways. Identifying
investments in rapidly evolving, trans-disciplinary technology areas that do not
align with existing classification systems is difficult. Existing methods and
data also cannot identify the companies, jobs, and individuals affected by
research investments in emerging technologies a priori, rendering traditional
sample survey methods inadequate. Reporting at the regional level can be
challenging due to data limitations and privacy requirements. Requirements for
timely reporting are also hindered by the current state of relevant data sources
which exhibit significant time lags in producing the data. The project addresses
these challenges by using a framework based on data linkage and inductive,
iterative expansion of inclusion restrictions to take advantage of established
network effects. Core to the approach is the idea that research funding enables
the work of innovators, which generates valuable ideas and skilled people who
then contribute to the economy through networks created by the mobility of
knowledge-workers. The proposed novel approach categorizes firms into "idea
industries" based on: (1) the research-trained individuals employed by those
firms and (2) the research projects to which they supply inputs. This is
achieved by linking together close to real-time bibliometric/textual data,
university administrative records, and state workforce data, and using a
“snowball” logic to identify industry and workforce effects of scientific
investments that are difficult to measure otherwise.

The project builds upon existing, proven platforms with which the project team
has significant experience. The novelty of the work is in its integrative,
scalable, iterative nature. The project will engage the regional community and
create measures, plans and support for expansion to other regions of the
country. The project will develop a prototype dashboard that can be improved and
expanded upon iteratively over time. The work will also develop methods and
templates for system building that can be integrated with other analysis
efforts, allowing for triangulation across multiple data sources and approaches.
The framework is designed to be expanded in three ways: (1) by including more
technology areas and additional states; (2) by incorporating additional data
sources like information on post-secondary certificate and degree recipients;
and (3) by transitioning from prototype development to a software platform and
data production system suitable for a wealth of use cases.

The project will collaborate closely with three major stakeholder groups, viz.,
university leaders, regional innovation ecosystem leaders, and state agency
leaders to help inform the design of the system, develop metrics for success,
and make improvements to the system. The outreach and engagement with the
stakeholder community will help secure the broadest possible use of the
prototype and build support and momentum for planned future expansions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.