* 2332598
* Conference: Interdisciplinary Open Practices Workshop: Understanding &amp; Designing Organizing Practices for Open Ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* John Meluso, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

Many people think that scientists, private companies, and governments should
share their activities with the public. The activities involved with this
sharing are called “open work.” Working openly helps people learn from each
other, keep track of what other people are doing, and check each other’s work.
Not much is known about the best ways for people to work openly. To learn more
about how open work can contribute to the Nation’s interests, the
Interdisciplinary Open Practices Workshop (IOP Workshop) brings together
researchers from different fields of science, private companies, and government.
Workshop participants work together to figure out what is known and to plan
projects to determine what is not known about open practices and how they can be
used. This project produces a final report that provides information to
scientists, leaders, and workers about the benefits of open work and how open
work can benefit the progress of science and technology. The goals of the IOP
Workshop are to learn which open practices work better than others and under
what circumstances those practices work best. In the workshop, researchers
present information about how open work happens in different fields: open
science, open source software, open government, open education, open source
intelligence, and others. Presentations by open work experts and students and
working group discussions demonstrate current trends and explore new research
topics. Experts also discuss new science on open work (also called “open
organizing”). This new science shows how people who work openly can make
decisions about how transparent they want to be and decide who will be permitted
to make decisions in their groups. These decisions include determining how
people from different backgrounds will be included and how easy it should be for
other people to reproduce their work. Finally, researchers share datasets with
each other to spark new ideas and collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.