* 2332207
* RCN:SC: MSN Force:  A Midwest Semiconductor Collaborative Network for Work Force Training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Mohammed El-Naggar, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2028
* USD 551,796.00

The semiconductor industry has significant ramifications for the national
security, economy, and society of the United States. The ongoing shortage of
semiconductor chips has been impacting different sectors throughout the country,
resulting in significant consequences for both the domestic semiconductor
industry and the downstream sectors that rely on these chips. To address this
issue and to advance and sustain U.S. leadership in the semiconductor industry,
various initiatives have been undertaken at the federal, state, and industry
levels to support and facilitate the expansion of domestic chip manufacturing
capacity. Notably, these efforts have gained momentum in the Midwest, where the
semiconductor industry substantially contributes to the gross regional product,
and recent investments have been made to establish a regional semiconductor
technology ecosystem. In light of the ongoing semiconductor chip shortage,
creation of a Midwest Semiconductor Collaborative Network for Workforce Training
is proposed, comprising members from various institutions of higher education
(including R-1s, 4-year colleges, and regional community colleges), industry
leaders, associations, and research center partners. MSN Force intends to
establish a collaborative network that addresses the increasing need for highly
skilled workers in the semiconductor industry within the Midwest. Our ultimate
goal is to create a replicable model that can be implemented nationwide, meeting
the growing national demand and ensuring continued U.S. leadership in this
critical field.

MSN Force aims to address the growing demand for skilled semiconductor
professionals and research in the Midwest region. The distinguishing feature of
MSN Force lies in its collaborative approach, bringing together six institutes
of higher education (IHEs) and five non-academic partners. While planning to
scale up with the involvement of other notable Midwest IHEs in the short term,
this consortium will work in synergy to develop and execute a curriculum that
emphasizes experiential learning and strong industry engagement. By pooling
resources and expertise, MSN Force seeks to ensure equitable access to workforce
training resources for its students. Over the course of a 5-year program, MSN
Force will conduct bi-annual workshops, steering committee meetings, and pilot
training programs. The project intends to physically train up to 100 students
while providing virtual training opportunities to promote broader participation.
MSN Force seeks to develop a comprehensive and cutting-edge workforce training
program that builds on the principles of experiential learning. These principles
will be integrated into the training modules focusing on consecutive stages of
the semiconductor production cycle, from device simulation to chip design,
packaging, assembly, and testing. The program's design prioritizes an equitable
workforce target and will serve as a blueprint for semiconductor workforce
training networks and experiential learning initiatives. The proposed workforce
training programs will follow a continuous improvement model, incorporating
feedback from various stakeholders, including students, educators, industry
experts, non-profits, and IHEs. By regularly updating and coordinating training
activities, MSN Force aims to have a measurable impact on existing workforce
training strategies applied in IHEs and the semiconductor industry. Overall, MSN
Force's collaborative and experiential learning approach is set to meet the
workforce demands of the semiconductor industry while promoting inclusivity and
sustainability in the Midwest region and beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.