* 2332166
* RCN-SC: Research Coordination Network for Design and Testing of Neuromorphic Integrated Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Jason Eshraghian, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 10/31/2026
* USD 648,206.00

The project is facilitating a Neuromorphic Integrated Circuits Education (NICE)
research coordination network (RCN) that will lower the barrier of entry for
students and researchers interested in the design, fabrication and testing of
neuromorphic integrated circuits (ICs). As artificial intelligence (AI)
continues to permeate society, there has been an ever-increasing demand for
efficient AI hardware, accelerators and integrated circuits (ICs). The field of
neuromorphic engineering has been instrumental in advancing AI hardware, with
concepts like compute-in-memory, pooling, and attention being integrated into
mainstream IC designs. However, to sustain the growth of the field, there is a
pressing need to address the education and workforce gap in the discipline of IC
design and fabrication. By leveraging the popularity of AI, machine learning and
neuromorphic engineering disciplines, the project is motivating researchers to
acquire design skills that can then be applied to various domains of IC design.
At the centerpiece of this RCN is the Annual Telluride Neuromorphic Cognition
Engineering (TNCE) workshop which is an influential and highly anticipated event
in the field of neuroscience and artificial intelligence. This workshop brings
together leading researchers, experts, and students from various disciplines to
explore and advance our understanding of neuromorphic computing and cognition.
As a part of this RCN, the project is leveraging the workshop infrastructure to
organize discussion groups, facilitate hands-on training events, and form
sustainable research cohorts around the theme of neuromorphic ICs.

The intellectual merit of the RCN is to understand and exploit emergent
neurodynamics and noise-induced processes in neuromorphic devices and hardware
to efficiently solve specific computing tasks. To achieve this the RCN is
utilizing the extensive expertise within the network to investigate novel
neuromorphic architectures, circuits and hardware that could lead to significant
performance advantages when compared to other computing architectures that use
central processing units (CPUs), graphical processing units (GPUs) or quantum
processors. The RCN consists of three coordination sub-networks: (a) The NICE-
RCN Co-design Framework is concentrating on the development of behavioral models
and software. These tools will enable the simulation and evaluation of different
architectures on benchmark tasks; (b) The NICE-RCN IC Design Framework will
focus on designing neuromorphic Process Design Kits (PDKs) using open-source IC
fabrication tools accessible through Efabless, as well as the Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Corporation (TSMC) PDK tools provided by Muse
Semiconductors; (c) The NICE-RCN IC Testing Framework will establish a testing
infrastructure and create benchmarks for evaluating the performance of
neuromorphic ICs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.