* 2332142
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Assessing Managed Retreat as an Adaptive Response to Wildfire Risk
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kathryn McConnell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 97,772.00

Recent years have seen large numbers of buildings destroyed by wildfires,
displacement of people from their homes, and high financial costs to
individuals, governments, and the private sector. As the phenomena become more
frequent, some researchers and policymakers have suggested relocating people and
infrastructure away from high-risk areas, a strategy known as managed retreat.
The existing understanding of retreat is based mainly on studies of flooding and
sea-level rise. Few examine whether retreat is an effective or equitable
response to wildfire. This award supports a research project to bring together
wildfire researchers, scholars of flood-based managed retreat, community
members, and practitioners to co-develop a research agenda focused on the costs,
benefits, and feasibility of retreat with respect to wildfire.

Managed retreat, the relocation of people and infrastructure away from
environmental hazards, has been suggested as an adaptive solution to wildfire
risk. This planning grant establishes a working group of scholars,
practitioners, and community members with the expertise to study different forms
of wildfire managed retreat. The group convenes through Organizing Committee
meetings and a two-day workshop. The workshop is organized around three
propositions: 1) wildfire-exposed communities possess distinct mobility
aspirations, capabilities, and perceptions of retreat; 2) conventional
approaches to managed retreat, such as home buyouts, are less effective in a
wildfire context due to long-term land management requirements; and 3) wildfire
managed retreat requires the development of new policy and planning tools. A
published proceedings report identifies knowledge gaps and future research
priorities. This line of analysis forms the basis for future large-scale
projects to advance the understanding of climate relocation planning and inform
wildfire policy agendas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.