* 2332393
* Advancing STEM Technician Education &amp; Innovation: The Community College Leadership Role
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Ellen Hause, American Association of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2026
* USD 7,478,103.00

Community and technical colleges have long been leaders and innovators in STEM
reform and improvement efforts in the United States. As community-based
institutions, they are uniquely positioned to keep pace with advances in
technology to offer technician education programs that meet growing and evolving
workforce needs. By providing affordable and accessible entry points into higher
education and enrolling nearly 40 percent of all U.S. undergraduate students,
community colleges represent a significant national pathway to meeting the
growing and diverse needs of a global workforce critical to our nation’s
competitiveness and future economic growth. As workplace and employer skill
demands evolve, it is imperative that community colleges continue to engage in
efforts to cultivate students’ ability to learn new skills, such as analytical
and creative thinking, as they become increasingly essential. This project
features activities designed to broaden the impact of community college
leadership in advancing STEM technician education; encourage greater numbers of
community colleges to develop or strengthen ATE-related programs; create and
support venues for developing and nurturing STEM professional and leadership
development opportunities for two-year college administrators, faculty, and
students; cultivate innovation and entrepreneurship; support institutional STEM
capacity building; and raise awareness of the resources and contributions of
community colleges working in STEM technician education.

Project activities include: 1) Hosting three national ATE Principal
Investigators’ Conferences to provide professional and leadership development
for the ATE community, 2) Launching a national application to select cohorts of
the MentorLinks activity to enable community colleges to develop new or
strengthen existing STEM technician education programs, 3) Leading the Community
College Innovation Challenge (CCIC) to foster the development of students’
innovation and entrepreneurship skills through a national team pitch competition
and summer Boot Camp modeled on NSF’s Innovation Corps (I-Corps) program, and 4)
Developing an ATE Future Leaders Fellows pilot to: (a) enable 12 community
college STEM professionals to participate in the AACC Roueche Future Leaders
Institute or AACC Future Presidents Institute; (b) contribute to a national
dialogue on STEM capacity building and creating a grant culture in support of
ATE awards; and (c) raise awareness of the STEM education landscape to help
shape the practice and competencies of community college leadership. The project
will also conduct national outreach on the role and resources of community
colleges in the ATE program and evaluate all grant activities to ensure the
activities meet the needs of the two-year community and technical college
community. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.