* 2332722
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT-SAT: DASS: Dynamically Adjustable Spectrum Sharing between Ground Communication Networks and Earth Exploration Satellite Systems Above 100 GHz
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Steven Reising, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2026
* USD 322,971.00

Next-generation wireless networks and satellite passive sensing systems will
benefit from broader spectrum access, specifically above 100 GHz, to provide
connectivity with extremely high data rates and more precise weather and climate
tracking, respectively. Spectrum sharing, however, needs to guarantee that
passive sensing applications are not harmed by interference, since artificial
signals may affect the reliability of Earth remote sensing. Research on sharing
solutions for communications and remote sensing above 100 GHz is timely, since
its outcomes can influence standardization and policy for next-generation
wireless networks and embed sharing in the protocol stack rather than in an
overlay as an afterthought. In this project, researchers engage with standards
organizations and regulatory bodies to promote the findings and will provide the
communications and remote sensing communities with open datasets and models to
build trust and confidence in sharing solutions, creating a bridge between the
two communities. Finally, multi-disciplinary educational material is developed
for coursework across institutions, and for summer schools jointly addressed to
remote sensing and communications students, to train the next generation of
spectrum professionals. The spectrum above 100 GHz enables different
applications. Traditionally, remote sensing has focused on specific molecular
absorption lines in multiple narrow sub-bands above 100 GHz. More recently,
developments in radio frequency (RF) circuitry, antennas, and digital signal
processing (DSP) – together with the spectrum crunch in the frequencies
traditionally used for wireless networks – have pushed communications to
consider the large bandwidths potentially available in the sub-terahertz
spectrum for sixth generation (6G) backhaul and access networks. Current
spectrum allocations, however, prevent communications networks from using more
than 12.5 GHz of contiguous spectrum in the 100-200 GHz range. This is largely
due to the need to protect passive remote sensing services, which measure
natural phenomena and thus cannot tolerate RF interference (RFI). This rigid
spectrum allocation scheme prevents both services from benefiting from larger
bandwidths, for faster communication links as well as increased precision and
opportunities for remote sensing. While this is true for other spectral regions,
the characteristics of the spectrum above 100 GHz make the case for more
flexible sharing and coexistence solutions. This project develops such
techniques by (i) characterizing the RFI of next-generation 6G devices to
sensing satellites, including experimental measurements with the TEMPEST-H8
sensor and the TeraNova testbed; (ii) developing large-scale RFI models for 6G
networks; and (iii) spectrum sharing strategies for current and next-generation
wireless systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.