* 2332802
* CAS: Cooperative Site and Electrolyte Design for Optimizing Interfacial Electrokinetics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Huiyuan Zhu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 265,161.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Drs. Huiyuan Zhu and Hongliang Xin of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University are studying new strategies to improve the performance of
catalysts that recycle carbon dioxide (CO2) using renewable electricity.
Traditional metal electrodes, including precious metals (Au, Ag) and base metals
(Cu, Zn), have shown encouraging performance toward CO2 reduction. However, the
process is limited by low energy efficiency and poor product selectivity. These
processes are conducted in water, and the competing reduction of water to H2 is
largely responsible for this inefficiency. This proposal addresses this
challenge using ionic liquids as non-aqueous electrolytes together with
electrode materials designed to work with ionic liquids. The educational
components of the project include the following: (1) The interdisciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduate students in electrochemical techniques,
materials characterization, and molecular modeling. (2) The involvement of
diverse underrepresented groups including female students in science and
engineering. (3) The implementation of STEM outreach programs to K-12 students
from diverse groups and low-income families through hands-on demonstrations that
illustrate the importance of nanomaterials, modeling, catalysis, and energy in
our daily life. Undergraduate summer interns from underrepresented minority
groups will be recruited to work on this project through a partnership with
Hampton University. With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the
Division of Chemistry, Drs. Huiyuan Zhu and Hongliang Xin of the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University are studying a cooperative site and
electrolyte tuning strategy for the rational design of electrocatalytic systems
to get beyond energy-scaling limitations, specifically for electrochemical CO2
reduction reactions (eCO2RR) on bismuth-based bimetallic nanocatalysts with non-
aqueous ionic liquid electrolytes. The known Sabatier principle, arising from
the adsorption-energy scaling relations at geometrically similar sites,
generally imposes volcano-shaped constraints on the attainable catalytic
performance. The Zhu-Xin team hypothesizes that the crucial charge-transfer
intermediates toward CO2 reduction can be stabilized by cooperatively tailoring
the p-band of active Bi sites via doping and heterocyclic cations of ionic
liquids, while the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is suppressed.
Using a combination of precision synthesis, electrocatalysis, advanced
characterization techniques, as well as molecular modeling tools, the team seeks
to uncover structure-reactivity relationships at the interface of nanoparticles
and ionic liquid electrolytes. Success of this proposed research has the
potential to advance fundamental understanding of CO2 reduction chemistry and
provide guiding principles for catalyst design to address current challenges in
eCO2RR. The atomistic insights into physicochemical properties of solid-
electrolyte interfaces from this project may provide guidance for the design of
other electrocatalytic transformations. Beyond scientific and technical impact,
this project will train students at the interface of materials chemistry,
quantum-chemical modeling, and catalysis, and prepare them for career pathways
in academia and/or industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.