* 2332096
* Equipment: Scanning Electron Microscope for United Tribes Technical College
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jeremy Guinn, United Tribes Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2024
* USD 116,500.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular infrastructure at
these institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project
aligns directly with that goal.

The necessity of modern sophisticated equipment is almost as great a priority as
the necessity of compelling STEM instruction and research. United Tribes
Technical College is installing a scanning electron microscope on its campus.
While used extensively in UTTC’s instruction and research, the nearest one has
been several hours away, so having one in-house significantly enhances the
research and instruction in which faculty and students are immersed. Such access
has a disproportionately positive impact on the view students have of scientific
inquiry and career options.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.