* 2332593
* EAGER: Exploring the Role of Acoustic-Prosodic, Lexical, and Demographic Factors in Trustworthy Speech Perception for Conversational Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Sarah Levitan, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 98,140.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research explores the role of acoustic-
prosodic, lexical, and demographic factors in the perception of trustworthy
synthesized speech for conversational agents. With advances in machine learning
and speech technologies, conversational agents are becoming increasingly capable
of engaging in human-like conversations. However, trust is crucial for effective
communication and collaboration, and understanding the signals of trustworthy
speech is essential for successful interactions. While researchers across
disciplines have sought to discover the signals of trustworthy speech, mostly in
human speech, there remains a gap between what is currently understood about
trustworthy human speech and what can be implemented and used in conversational
agents. This project will implement a series of innovative and exploratory
perception studies designed to systematically investigate the prosodic, lexical,
and demographic properties of trustworthy synthesized speech. To evaluate trust
perception in contexts that require vulnerability and trust, real-world
applications such as emotional support dialogues will be used. By uncovering the
specific influences of acoustic-prosodic, lexical, and demographic factors, this
research will advance our understanding of how trust is formed and maintained in
human-machine interactions. The findings of this work will contribute valuable
insights to improve the perceived trustworthiness of conversational agents.
This, in turn, will enable the increased adoption of transformative technologies
that will benefit society in important application areas, including assistive
robot companions in homecare settings for the elderly and homebound,
psychological assessment and treatment, and assistive medical care in hospitals.
The main objective of this research is to identify acoustic-prosodic, lexical,
and demographic factors in trust perception of synthetic speech. The project
will systematically test the effects of these factors of synthesized speech on
human trust using a large-scale crowdsourced perception study. Highly controlled
parameters will be manipulated to test the effects of acoustic-prosodic features
including pitch, intensity, and speaking rate, as well as lexical features such
as dialogue act, politeness, and complexity. In addition, the study will examine
individual differences in trust perception across speaker and listener traits.
By exploring individual factors as well as interactive effects of combinations
of prosodic, lexical and demographic factors, this research will provide a
comprehensive understanding of their influence on user trust. The findings will
inform the design, development, and deployment of conversational agents, leading
to the creation of more trustworthy and engaging human-machine interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.