* 2332390
* RARE-1: Understanding the Physics of Human Whistling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Francisco Ruiz, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 338,417.00

Whistling with our lips is a skill that a majority of us humans master at an
early age. In many societies, whistling is an expected stage in the process of
growing up. But as many as one-third of the population do not master the skill,
and this is not for lack of musical talent since professional musicians are also
counted among non-whistlers. Whistling involves the coordination of many muscles
at the front and back of the oral cavity and requires making a very precise
shape with one’s lips. Most fundamentally, and despite this being a common human
function, we still do not know how the sound is produced. Musical instruments of
similar timbre, like the flute, contain a sharp edge where an air jet can be
diverted to either side. But a person’s lips do not have any sharp edges, and
there are no alternative spaces where the air might go. Unlike flutelike
instruments, whistling is also reversible, so that the sound can be produced
both when the air is flowing out of or into the mouth. Fundamental research on
the fluid dynamics of whistling has been scant, with the last serious effort
having taken place more than fifty years ago. In this proposal, we plan to
update and go beyond that research using modern experimental techniques, with
five specific aims: (1) validation of a hypothesized mechanism for sound
generation, (2) determining whether the process is essentially axisymmetric, (3)
finding the most relevant dimensionless parameters controlling the process, (4)
optimizing those parameters toward practical use, and (5) designing musical
instruments based on the physics and optimized parameters, and testing them in a
music instruction environment.

This will be the first time in over fifty years that this human function is
studied systematically as a Fluid Mechanics problem, primarily through
measurements of acoustic power amplification over a multidimensional parameter
space, aided by flow visualization and solid structure characterization. Cross-
sectional diameter and eccentricity, profile diameter and eccentricity will be
added to the parameters studied by others, which will allow us to find the
dimensionless groupings that best collapse the measurements into simple
correlations. A mechanism for sound generation in human whistling is
hypothesized, to be validated through systematic measurements involving those
geometric parameters, plus average flow velocity, density, and sound speed,
controlled via temperature. Visualization will reveal whether periodic vortex
shedding occurs, and how important it is for the physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.