* 2332007
* Molecular-level Understanding Of Atmospheric Aerosols (MUOAA 2024); Corsica, France; April 1-5, 2024
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Sergey Nizkorodov, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 14,224.00

This project provides support for US scientists to attend the Conference on
Molecular-Level Understanding of Atmospheric Aerosols to be held in Corsica,
France, on April 1-5, 2024. The objective of the conference is to provide
molecular level perspectives on aerosol properties that are critical to the
impact of aerosols on air quality, climate, and environmental as well as human
health.

Challenges currently exist in understanding the formation of aerosol particles
from gaseous precursors and the initial growth of these particles, the internal
structure of aerosols, aerosol phase behavior, heterogeneous and multiphase
(photo)chemistry, gas-surface interactions, the ability of aerosols to initiate
ice and cloud nucleation, the evolution of aerosol optical properties, and the
role of bioaerosols in the atmosphere. The conference will take place over five
days and include oral and poster sessions spanning the topics listed above.

The majority of the support for the conference will go toward travel support for
student, postdoctoral, and early career professionals to help promote their
careers. The meeting agenda, presentation titles, and abstracts will be archived
on the meeting website, open and available to all. Summaries of the discussions
will also be archived on the website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.