* 2332482
* Planning: HSI Project: Supporting STEM Undergraduates through On-Campus Employment and Mentorship
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ryan Culbertson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this planning project aims to support initial
conceptualization, planning and collaboration activities that will formulate two
new larger-scale NSF proposals, as well as supporting STEM undergraduates at
five HSIs through on-campus employment and mentorship at the Prefreshman
Engineering Program (PREP). On-campus employment has been shown to benefit
students’ academic and social engagement; however, many on-campus jobs are not
pay-competitive with off-campus jobs and many students lose the opportunity to
gain enrichment that on-campus jobs can provide. Supported STEM undergraduates
will receive competitive stipends, as well as culturally relevant mentorship
(CRM) training and mentoring themselves through peer interaction, program staff,
and STEM professionals. As mentors for PREP, students will be in an environment
where they are able to apply STEM skills and knowledge and learn the importance
of culturally relevant practices in mentoring, creating a positive benefit to
all through STEM and personal growth, leading to increased STEM participation
and retention.

The specific aims of this project are to improve the retention and graduation of
students pursuing associate's or baccalaureate degrees in STEM at five HSIs
through STEM-focused on-campus employment, to enhance undergraduate STEM
education by expanding CRM, and to build capacity for fundamental research in
undergraduate STEM education. Data collected from this project will help
identify how STEM-focused on-campus employment opportunities during the summer
as near-peer STEM mentors for pre-college mentees could improve academic and
social capital and college success. Results will be used to develop two larger
scale NSF proposals that will expand upon this project’s efforts and scope.
Knowledge gained from this project aims to highlight the importance/positive
effects of on-campus employment, near-peer mentoring, and networking with STEM
peers and professionals during the summertime. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.