* 2332346
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Social-Ecological Engineering and Design of Sustainable (SEEDS) Boreal Forest Fuel Breaks
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Katie Spellman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 10/31/2025
* USD 199,865.00

Wildfire is part of northern forest ecosystems, but fire activity is increasing
as the summer climate gets hotter and drier. Communities in the boreal forests
of the Arctic are under pressure to adapt to increasing risk from wildfires, and
many are creating fuel breaks to stop fires from burning from forest lands into
communities. Fuel breaks use forest harvest or thinning of trees and branches to
reduce the amount of fuel in a treated area. After cutting, forests will
naturally regrow fuels and repeated thinning is needed to maintain the fuel
break. As an alternative, planting treatments or other management of vegetation
could convert forest stands to plant communities that reduce wildfire risk over
the long term. Careful planning and investment in revegetation could also create
plant types that support other benefits. To identify solutions that reduce fire
risk, sharing knowledge and identifying local needs and opportunities are
needed. This project will use scientific and Indigenous and local knowledge to
map new local solutions to reduce fire risk that also meet other community
needs. Management scenarios and analysis of costs and benefits will assist
communities and managers in developing customized local solutions. The project
will support new innovations and planning to develop proactive and adaptive
wildfire solutions for the North.

The planning project will connect scientists, managers, and local people to
create a network for sharing knowledge on fuel break management in northern
boreal forests. Because boreal forests in the North have had little commercial
forestry or agriculture, there are few resources to support local vegetation
management. Efforts to manage revegetation with native plants are hindered by
practical challenges related to a) local availability of native seeds for
revegetation, b) identification of desired outcomes and appropriate strategies
to achieve them, and c) local capacity for plant propagation. A series of
network meetings will gather participants to share experiences and perspectives
for fuel management, revegetation, and reduction of wildfire risk around
northern communities across Alaska and Canada. The network will incorporate
perspectives from science, Indigenous knowledge, and applied management to
identify and communicate visions, needs, and barriers related to alternative
fuel break management in the North. Core network members will summarize the
shared knowledge into a public report and website that identifies common needs,
resources, and benefits that can used by northern communities to meet objectives
for fire risk reduction while providing other benefits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.