* 2332161
* Planning: HBCU-UP: Strengthening Data Science Research Capacity and Education Programs through Academia-Industry Partnership
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Chiwoo Park, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 09/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. To fill a gap between academia and industry in the field of data science,
the project team at the Florida A&M University-Florida State University (FAMU-
FSU) College of Engineering will develop an academia-industry partnership model
in data science research and education in collaboration with the Operations
Research and Advanced Analytics (ORAA) Group at American Airlines (AA). The
project activities across research and education are designed to benefit both
undergraduate and graduate students who are interested in pursuing a career
related to data science. The existing industrial engineering curriculum at the
FAMU-FSU College of Engineering is expected to be strengthened, especially two
core courses, namely Big Data Analytics in Engineering and Introduction to
Machine Learning. This project will also support faculty investigators in
expanding their research portfolio to aviation, a sector critical to the
prosperity and competitiveness.

The following specific objectives will be pursued under this project: (1) To
design and launch an annual case competition focusing on aviation data analytics
for undergraduate and graduate students; (2) To create an aviation data science
pathway for underrepresented engineering students through industry-led and
student-centered mentoring and professional development training; and (3) To
advance the practice of airline operations through joint efforts by graduate
students, engineering faculty, and industry professionals, using advanced data
analytics. A few methodological contributions in machine learning and
mathematical programming would be made after successfully addressing a few key
research topics on prediction of checked baggage at flight level, aircraft
configuration and load planning, and long-term demand prediction for spare
parts, among others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.