* 2332041
* CREST HBCU-RISE: Engineered Renal Tissue using an Artificial Intelligence-Driven Approach
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Derrick Dean, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
HBCU Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (CREST HBCU-RISE) this
project aims to provide a fundamental understanding of how to incorporate
artificial intelligence in the design of 3-dimensional scaffolds for renal
tissue. Approximately 37 million people in the US suffer from chronic kidney
disease (CKD). This condition can progress to end stage renal disease (ESRD),
which is irreversible, and can only be treated by dialysis or kidney
replacement. Dialysis helps a person extend their life however their quality of
life can be affected by various complications such as accelerated cardiac
disease and infection rates. Replacement therapy is another option, however
there is a serious shortage of donors. The importance of this project is that it
will enable the design of more functional kidney tissue constructs for renal
diseases.

The goals of the project are: to use an artificial intelligence-driven approach
to design and fabricate 3-D hydrogel scaffolds that mimic the architecture,
composition, and functionality of the kidney; and to understand the effect of
scaffold characteristics such as porosity, stiffness, and surface properties, on
adhesion, morphology, and differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells into
renal tissue. The project also seeks to provide interdisciplinary education and
training opportunities to graduate students in the new PhD program in
Integrative Engineering and Biosciences. This will help improve the research
quality of the institution and can contribute to increased diversity in the STEM
workforce. Professional development workshops and community outreach activities
planned in the project could have significant impact on improving the quality of
the graduate education offered at Alabama State University and it can also
contribute to increased scientific awareness and curiosity in the local
community. Findings will be disseminated through publications, conference
presentations and a website for the project. The Centers of Research Excellence
in Science and Technology HBCU Research Infrastructure for Science and
Engineering (CREST HBCU-RISE) program supports the expansion of institutional
research capacity as well as the successful training of doctoral students,
especially those from groups underrepresented in STEM at HBCUs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.