* 2332028
* Planning: Energy-harvesting Concrete Batteries for Smart Buildings and Cities
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kejun Wen, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,183.00

As the worldâ€™s population continues to urbanize, metropolitan areas with
intensive buildings will increasingly be the focal point of environmental
protection, energy conservation, and greenhouse gas reduction policies.
Buildings consume around 49% of the total energy and contribute around 47% of
the greenhouse gas emissions in the United States. Smart buildings and cities
not only need to power traditional heating, ventilation, and HVAC systems, but
also require energy to power sensor networks and connected digital technology
for real-time data collection, communication, and control to improve efficiency
and enhance reliability and safety. The energy supply has become a prominent
issue that hinders the development and implementation of smart buildings and
cities. There is plenty of energy around and inside a building in different
forms, such as kinetic energy from human walking, wind, and thermal. Harvesting
this energy can be a sustainable alternative power source to batteries, enabling
continuous and maintenance-free Internet of Things operations without
environmental impact. Therefore, this planning project will explore a new
sustainable energy generation and storage solution for intelligent building
structures. This proposed collaborative effort will provide abundant topics and
learning opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students in HBCUs,
especially for the underrepresented and minorities. The implementation of this
project will enhance Science and Engineering education at HBCUs and broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups. The National Summer Transportation
Institute (NSTI) for K-12 students will also involve these concepts in their
activities to help young people realize the importance and benefits of smart
buildings and cities at an early age.

The objective of this planning project is to establish a convergent research
team and leverage the complementary expertise of faculty members for addressing
energy challenges in smart buildings and cities by exploring the energy
harvesting and rechargeable concrete batteries. Various planning activities are
proposed, including 1) group meetings; 2) workshops: A two-day workshop will be
held to identify the knowledge gap and research questions in energy harvesting
and rechargeable concrete batteries for smart buildings and cities; 3) NSF-
funded smart building project visit: Team members and selected students from
TSU, JSU and PSB will travel to the Sustainable Smart Cities Research Center
(SSCRC) in the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). The team members and
students cannot only fill the gaps in the knowledge of smart cities from the
visit, but also help the team members to learn the successful experience of
research on zero-energy smart cities; and 4) outreach activities: A course
module will be provided to educate the general public through the NSTI summer
camp and project website. The development of this collaborative work will
advance the state-of-the-art in the research of energy harvesting and storage
technology, advanced construction materials, and energy solutions for smart
buildings and cities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.