* 2332263
* CLIMA/Collaborative Research: Equitable Adaptive Strategies for Flood Protection Infrastructure under Current and Future Compound Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 325,267.00

Over two-thirds of the American population lives in counties protected against
flooding by the levee system. Historically underserved and socially vulnerable
communities (HUSVCs) are particularly at risk due to their high exposure and
barriers to mitigation. This award supports a transdisciplinary research project
to explore climate-informed strategies for equitable adaptation of levees under
compound hazards to address these challenges. The research project aims to
ensure the resilience of the nation's aging levees while meeting the needs of
HUSVCs. The findings will contribute to levee safety and durability subject to
the current and future climate conditions. The project translates advances in
climate science and modeling into easily understandable information for
engineers and decision-makers.

The project has three main objectives: identifying vulnerabilities and
disparities within leveed communities; developing theoretical frameworks
integrating compound hazards into engineering design and risk assessment, and
determining equitable climate adaptation strategies based on technical,
socioeconomic, and policy factors. The researchers hypothesize that neglecting
the compounding effects of multiple hazards in a changing climate underestimates
the risk of levee failure and its disproportionate effect on HUSVCs. The goal is
to inform both soft and hard levee adaptation measures that are technically
sound, socially just, and economically feasible. The team engages local HUSVCs
to understand their needs, priorities, and perceived risks, while also promoting
flood risk awareness and preparation. In the pilot communities, stakeholders and
community leaders provide important feedback to refine these measures.

This project is supported by the Humans, Disasters, and the Built Environment
(HDBE) Program and the Engineering for Civil Infrastructure (ECI) Program of the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) of the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.