* 2332068
* CLIMA/Collaborative Research: Landslide Triggering of Thermally Sensitive Slopes due to Climate Change
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Srikanth Madabhushi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2026
* USD 460,515.00

This CiviL Infrastructure research for climate change Mitigation and Adaptation
(CLIMA) award supports research focused on understanding the risk of increased
catastrophic landslides of historically stable or slowly creeping natural soil
slopes due to the presence of soil materials that are thermally sensitive, i.e.,
they exhibit significant changes of strength and stiffness in response to a
change of temperature. This is important in view of current and increased
greenhouse gas emissions and the link to increases of the average planet
temperature. Explaining, and hence predicting, the initiation, progression and
size of landslides remains challenging for physicists, geologists and engineers.
This project advances the science of when and how temperature changes could
trigger these catastrophic, and potentially deadly, events. This research
specifically targets the link between the observed behavior of small volumes of
natural material at different temperatures and the stability of large natural
soil slopes experiencing a temperature change. Building on this link, the scope
to improve the resiliency of natural soil slopes to warming climates by reducing
their thermal sensitivity using carbon nano fibers will be explored. Finally,
the research will be further leveraged to produce undergraduate teaching
materials to demonstrate how Civil Engineering research and practice can adapt
to climatic changes.

The research explores the multi-physics thermal soil response and link to
catastrophic slope failures, distinguishing between the role of the soil’s micro
and macroscopic properties versus a change to its state. The central hypothesis
is that at higher temperatures thermomechanical softening is the dominant
mechanism that triggers deep-seated slope movements in thermally sensitive
slopes. A suite of thermal triaxial tests and centrifuge experiments on reduced
scale slopes of thermally sensitive materials will bridge the existing gap
between experimental observations of the thermomechanical behavior of soils at
the element level and the observations of slope failures in the field. A
specialized climate chamber within a geotechnical centrifuge will enable
isothermal tests and controlled temperature increments to model climatic warming
on a reduced scale model capturing the non-linear and stress dependent behavior
of the full-scale slope. The results will enrich and validate predictive,
thermally sensitive visco-plastic constitutive models. The combined datasets
will ultimately allow the assessment of the relative importance of different
deformation and failure mechanisms induced in a thermally sensitive soil slope.
These will be further used to inform and test the effectiveness of targeting the
material’s fabric at the microscale to increase the resiliency of thermally
sensitive slopes to warming climates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.