* 2332050
* Planning: Enabling a Future in Chemistry at a Historically Black University
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Yalan Ning, Huston-Tillotson University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,200.00

Nontechnical: Huston-Tillotson University (HT) is a small historically black
university (HBCU) in Austin, Texas with 148 years history. Compared to other
Texas-based universities, HT has considerable room for growth in their research
capacity. During the past two years supported by Research Initiation Award
(RIA), preliminary research data has been obtained by PI and her
underrepresented undergraduate researchers. In the future, professional
collaboration must be developed in order to achieve scientific publication,
considering the lack of advanced equipment or facilities at a small HBCU like
HT. This step is also of importance to collect research data for PI’s future
application for the Excellence in Research (EIR) award. Thus, various activities
have been proposed such as training undergraduate researchers, conducting a
small workshop with collaborators, visiting collaborators’ labs, participating
in professional workshops, and conferences. These efforts will contribute
significantly to our final goal of enhancing the future for underrepresented
students at HBCUs. Additionally, this EIR-planning award will help our chemistry
program to grow. With the hiring and retention of experienced adjunct faculty,
both the chemistry curriculum quality and diversity will be improved. A
professional chemistry workshop will be set up and the resulting collaboration
will grow in visibility and stature as the event develops. Professional articles
in chemistry will be published with HT as the first organization. Most
importantly, new students will be attracted to the chemistry department and the
detailed training that we provide will lead them to either a professional job in
Industry or a postsecondary degree after their graduation from HT.

Technical: MOFs (metal organic frameworks) as porous crystalline materials have
proven especially useful as nano platforms for catalytic reactions.
Metalloporphyrin-based (cyclic structures consisting of four pyrrole rings
joined together by four methine groups) catalysts can be incorporated in MOFs
for polymerization of petrochemical monomers as well as non-petrochemical
monomers. The chemical environment within a MOF not only initiates the
polymerization, but also enables the tuning the microstructure of the resulting
polymer. After the modification on the inorganic nodes and organic ligands, the
MOFs may be used as a stereo and chemical selective catalytic reactor,
converting a specific monomer out of a mixture of monomers, and into highly
tactic polymer. Our Research objective is to develop an inexpensive recyclable
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) catalysts with collaboration with other labs.
This will also support PI’s coming EIR application in polymerization by
porphyrin MOFs catalysts, in which effort will focus on the adjustment of groups
on Porphyrin as well as kinetic and mechanism studies. Utilizing collaboration
with other labs in these areas, PI would be able to characterize her
heterogenous MOFs catalysts. Planning and collaboration activities will not only
help to obtain access to modern equipment in chemistry, it will also foment new
plans in related research areas. Lastly, various workshops, conferences, and
trainings will help both faculty and students to improve our abilities to
further advance in academia.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.