* 2332592
* Conference: Gender Equity in the Mathematical Study (GEMS) of Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Christine Berkesch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 08/31/2025
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports participation in a workshop “Gender Equity in the
Mathematical Study (GEMS) of Commutative Algebra” that will take place at the
University of Minnesota, November 10-12, 2023. It will focus on forming a
community of women and non-binary mathematicians interested in commutative
algebra but will be open to people of all genders. The workshop is primarily
aimed at graduate students in their first through third years of a Ph.D.
program. It will include presentations from a diverse group of prominent
researchers, active group work, opportunities for participants to present their
own research, and community building activities. The goals of the workshop are
to (a) introduce participants to cutting edge research topics in commutative
algebra and surrounding fields, (b) facilitate the formation of mentoring
relationships, (c) strengthen the network of women and non-binary mathematicians
in commutative algebra and surrounding fields, and (d) develop collaborative
relationships that cut across subdisciplines and involve diverse groups of
researchers. This meeting will give young women and non-binary commutative
algebraists access to the mentoring it is well understood is essential for
retention in STEM fields. It will also provide them with role models to help
them see themselves as professional mathematicians and build their sense of
belonging to the mathematical community.

This workshop will introduce graduate student participants to contemporary and
exciting research in commutative algebra. The workshop will have three 50-minute
plenary lectures given by faculty, three 20-minute talks given by senior
graduate students, and a poster session for all participants to share their own
research. The talks will highlight not only pure commutative algebra but will
also highlight interactions between commutative algebra and adjacent fields,
such as algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and even neural network modeling. In
order to help participants better understand the techniques and methods
presented in the plenary talks, there will be problem sessions for active work.
These activities will promote the growth of mathematically collaborative
relationships among participants and will build their mathematical skills. More
information about this conference can be found at
https://sites.google.com/tamu.edu/gems-of-ca-2023/home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.