* 2332074
* Planning: Excellence in Research: Extending the impact of research using Social Cognitive Career Theory through meta-analysis and systematic review
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Marie Hammond, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,999.00

Meta-analysis is a more recent research technique that allows the researcher to
bring together and analyze multiple, smaller studies in a valid and reliable
manner. This enables researchers to increase reliability of the conclusions and
recommendations on a research topic. The results of a meta-analysis depend upon
the quality of the data gathered about the studies, the effective selection and
use among the various techniques and procedures, as well as the attention to
potential limitations in the data. In addition, since effective data gathering
is the core of a useful meta-analysis, it is important to have an organized and
effective research team. This suggests that effective planning and research team
development are critical components in preparing to conduct a meta-analytic
research project. This project proposes to engage in a strategic process of
research team-building and in-depth planning for the future submission of a
proposal to support a meta-analytic review of the SCCT literature that focuses
on previously unexamined aspects of the theory and its use in the field.

This planning project will involve working with the Advisory Board in their
capacity as experts in various aspects of conducting meta-analyses to ensure
that 1) this research team develops the synergy necessary to successfully
propose the project, and 2) the PI develops advanced skills in leading this type
of research/team and builds institutional capacity/commitment for this type of
project. The project will utilize standard strategic planning processes,
consultation, and collaborative efforts to ensure a high-quality proposal to be
submitted by the close of the planning grant period. The intellectual merit of
this project rests in its reliance on experts with significant training and
experience in using meta-analytic techniques to ground proposal revision
efforts. The broader impact of this project rests in the future outcomes of a
successful proposal submission, that is based on a more thorough understanding
of the SCCT theory that will move theory development forward.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.