* 2332452
* Workshop: Foundation for Unmanned Technological Utilization, Research, and Exploration (FUTURE) Labs
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Milad Abolhasani, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The demands of global challenges impacting society in areas such as energy,
sustainability, and healthcare require an accelerated pace of discovery,
especially in discovery of new molecules and materials and the translation of
these into green energy and sustainable growth applications. This pressing
demand has sparked remarkable innovation in the area of Self-Driving
Laboratories, with rapid growth in automated experimentation techniques and data
science and AI methods to efficiently explore the vast space of possible
experiments and speed up laboratory science. The Foundation for Unmanned
Technological Utilization, Research, and Exploration (FUTURE) Labs workshop to
be held at North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina will explore
the emergence of self-driving labs (SDLs)—which is already revolutionizing
experimental science using robotics, lab automation, and AI. This two-day
workshop will focus on charting a future path for self-driving labs and explore
a vision for establishing 'Universal SDL Testbeds' as the cornerstone of next-
generation research and educational infrastructure. The workshop will bring
together a diverse, multidisciplinary group of academic and industrial
researchers, including those from chemical and biomolecular engineering,
materials science, computer science, biochemistry, robotics, sustainability
science, education, ethics, and data science, to explore how SDLs can help
accelerate materials and molecular discovery in the physical and life sciences
by 100 to 1000 times.

The workshop will emphasize participation by early-career faculty who will have
an opportunity to showcase their work in SDLs, and SDL-related areas, via a
poster session. Information about the meeting will be broadly disseminated to
ensure participation by a a wide and diverse scientific and industry audience.
The project/workshop steering committee will include researchers from academia
as well as industry. A key objective of the workshop is to explore use and
adoption of the SDL approach in industry, where it can have enormous impact on
industrial productivity. The workshop will ensure participation by
developers/builders of SDL’s as well as by users of SDLs. Pre-workshop meetings
among participants will lay the groundwork for the vision, roadmap, and topics
to be discussed at the workshop. The first day of the workshop will feature
lightning talks, discussions related to the various technical areas that are
critical to SDLs, and the poster session. The second day will focus on how the
ideas and insights from the previous day can be translated into specific
actionable items for impact on foundational as well as translational research
using SDLs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.