* 2332226
* Collaborative Research: Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Wildland Fire Science and Management in Semi-Arid Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Holly Hapke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2025
* USD 192,869.00

In recent decades, semi-arid regions around the globe have been increasingly
beset by wildland fires that have grown dramatically in their size, frequency,
and severity. A combination of climate change, growth in human population
density, and years of ecological management emphasizing fire suppression, have
resulted in increasingly intensive wildfires whose risks of catastrophic change
to the safety and wellbeing of nearby human, animal and other ecologies now
reach unprecedented levels. In an effort to address these issues, wildland fire
science has taken a renewed interest in exploring novel approaches to fire
management, including approaches that consider multi-agency, private and public,
and even state, federal and tribal partnerships to address how best to live with
wildfire. This project develops plans to advance wildland fire research science
and management in the Payahuunad√º / Owens Valley & Eastern Sierra region of
California. Activities bring together regional stakeholders, scholars, and
practitioners to collaborate on an action framework combining Indigenous
knowledge systems, natural sciences, and the social sciences, to assess wildfire
causes, effects, and management techniques. The team draws on past work building
relationships across multiple constituencies to address community- and nature-
based fire research aims and management measures.

The awarded research project develops a different approach to planning wildfire
science research and management across diverse stakeholder communities working
and living in regions at risk for catastrophic wildfire. In workshops,
collective drafting exercises, and site visits to related fire management
programs, the project brings together a diverse team of tribal leaders,
Indigenous knowledge keepers, fire science ecologists, government agents and
social scientists on plans of action built through and for collaborative
partnerships that integrate Indigenous fire science and management practices
with natural science wildfire research modeling and data analysis. The project
tests the efficacy of co-management plans for addressing wildfire risks faced by
diverse stakeholders with interests in the ecosystems, populations, and
industries they share. Additionally, it offers a model of best practices for
collaboration, consultation, and cooperation relevant to Tribal, State and
Federal government-to-government partnerships more generally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.