* 2332774
* Planning: Machine Learning in Transportation: Enhancing STEM Education and Research Capacity at The University of Texas at El Paso
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Johannes Strobel, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Planning project aims to foster cross-
disciplinary education in transportation engineering, leveraging the potential
of machine learning. This problem is important because machine learning has the
potential to revolutionize transportation planning and operations, but there is
a lack of cross-disciplinary education that can fully leverage its potential.
This project seeks to address this gap by developing an interdisciplinary course
that emphasizes project-based learning and student feedback, with a focus on the
application of machine learning in transportation. The course will be enriched
with real-world projects and a campus-wide machine learning challenge, with the
goal of generating a culture of research and learning that extends beyond the
classroom. The project plan includes eight tasks designed to attain the proposed
research and education objectives, with a focus on measuring performance through
an integrated retrospective evaluation and research element. This project's
broader impact is to transform the transportation field and contribute to
greater diversity in STEM. It aims to produce a skilled cohort of students who
can effectively apply machine learning to transportation problems, ultimately
contributing to the efficiency, safety, and sustainability of transportation
systems. The project also expects to enhance the visibility and understanding of
machine learning and its applications in the broader community.

The specific aim of the project is to bridge the gap in current engineering
education by integrating machine learning into transportation education and
research at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP). The primary research
question is: How can integrate machine learning techniques be integrated
effectively into transportation engineering education to enhance students'
capabilities in solving complex real-world problems? The hypothesis is that a
comprehensive, project-based approach combining theoretical instruction and
practical application can significantly enhance students' learning outcomes in
this interdisciplinary area. The research methods center around the development
and delivery of a new cross-listed course. The course will be supplemented by a
monthly seminar series and a "Machine Learning in Transportation Challenge" at
UTEP to foster hands-on learning and interdisciplinary collaboration. The
expected results include improved student self-efficacy, interdisciplinary
mindset development, and conceptual development in the intersection of
transportation and machine learning. These results will be evaluated through a
retrospective study focusing on these key areas. The results of this work will
be disseminated, allowing educators and institutions beyond UTEP to benefit from
the findings and methodologies. Through these initiatives, younger students
might be inspired to pursue STEM studies and careers, and encourage public
engagement with the important intersections of technology, transportation, and
societal needs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.