* 2332097
* Planning: Exploration of a Collaborative University-Non-Profit Relationship to Enhance Solar Energy Research
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jamal Uddin, COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,725.00

Solar cells are a very important class of renewable energy due to their cost-
effectiveness, flexibility, and potential for integration into various
applications. This planning grant seeks to establish and strengthen a
collaborative partnership with Maryland Justice, Incorporated and develop
strategies to engage black youth in the greater Baltimore area in hands-on
training in renewable energy. This project, led by Coppin State University --- a
historically black university, has potential to increase these students’
appreciation of, participation in, and, consequently, representation in science-
related careers. Nationally, Blacks are underrepresented in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project seeks to
have a profound impact on solar-based renewable energy technologies and its
acceptance in communities underrepresented in STEM. The project will support the
planning and initial development of innovative approaches that will ensure that
the outcome of research in solar energy is effectively communicated to diverse
groups of people. Project outcomes have potential to serve as a model for using
social science and community involvement to promote research in technical
science. The project’s university-nonprofit collaboration will amplify its
research findings. Maryland Justice Inc is an organization focused on promoting
justice, equity, and social change among Black Americans, especially the
families of those who have been incarcerated.

This planning grant will enhance the broader impacts of the planned research on
improving the efficiency solar cells. The planning grant will offer the
opportunity to develop research capacity, good grant writing skills, and
strategies that can effectively disseminate products of the research to a wider
audience and consequently generate a broader societal impact. Maryland Justice,
Incorporated has a network of youth in high schools that will greatly benefit
from the outcome of the research on the fabrication of solar cells. Dye-
sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted significant attention in recent
years due to their lower cost, flexibility, and ease of fabrication. However,
DSSC has a lower energy conversion efficiency compared to conventional silicon
solar cells due to the recombination of the generated photoexcited electron and
other electron processes. Intended project outcomes include future preparation a
full HBCU-EiR proposal and enhancement of the understanding of the interfacial
transfer dynamics of electron transfer through Terahertz spectroscopy and
Terahertz reflectometry imaging. The project's collaboration with Maryland
Justice Inc will ensure a broader impact beyond the walls of the academic world,
as challenges associated with the adoption of renewable energy will be addressed
in a significant way.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.