* 2332407
* Equipment: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Laser for Research and Education at North Carolina Central University
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Marvin Wu, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 09/30/2024
* USD 77,500.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. This Equipment Proposal from North Carolina Central University (NCCU)
seeks the establishment of an ultrafast fiber laser system to support materials
research and education across STEM disciplines. The system will enable
enhancement of existing ultrafast microscopy capabilities and development of
additional far- and near-field optical and THz spectroscopy facilities.

This fiber-based laser is a robust turnkey system that is resistant to changes
in ambient laboratory conditions, minimizing the time and expertise needed for
optimization and enabling experiments performed over longer durations and has
sufficient power to enable simultaneous performance of several ultrafast
spectroscopy experiments. These capabilities will be used to build time resolved
transient absorption microscopy, photoluminescence microscopy, far- and near-
field terahertz spectroscopy and two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy
experiments to study carrier dynamics and charge transfer with ultrafast (~ 100
femtosecond) time resolution. The instrument will thus enable a diverse group of
faculty and students drawn from the Chemistry and Physics programs at North
Carolina Central University to investigate mechanisms underlying a wide range of
ultrafast phenomena in advanced materials, including charge transport in
heterogeneous organic-inorganic metal halide perovskites, charge transfer in
mixed-dimensional 0D/2D heterostructures and the relationship between nanoscale
structure and charge transfer in bulk polymer heterojunctions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.