* 2332556
* RAISE: On D'Alembert's Paradox: Can airplanes fly in superfluid?
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Haithem Taha, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 451,438.00

During the first half of the 20th century, there was a serious debate between
the Cambridge and Gottingen schools about the role of viscosity/friction in
generating lift over a wing; the former school asserts that viscosity is
necessary, and the latter does not see any contradiction in generating lift by
an ideal (non-viscous) fluid. This debate is deeply rooted in the 300-year-old
paradox in fluid physics: d’Alembert paradox, which asserts that ideal fluids
are forceless; they cannot lift an airplane. This century-old debate is
rejuvenated due to a recent result which asserts that the flow field evolves to
minimize total curvature; and a minimum-curvature flow over a wing is lifting
even if the fluid is non-viscous. This principle of least curvature, which dates
back to Hertz in the 19th century, is quite generic; it is applicable to fluids
as well as other mechanical systems. For example, according to general
relativity, a planet orbits the sun in the least curvature way over the space-
time world. The goal of this Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and
Engineering (RAISE) cross-disciplinary grant between engineering and physics is
to test the following hypothesis: Can an ideal flow generate lift? Since a
superfluid (e.g., Helium II below 2K) behaves like an ideal fluid below a
critical velocity, the following testable hypothesis will be investigated
instead: Can airplanes ﬂy in superﬂuid? The above hypothesis will be tested by
creating a superfluid wind tunnel allowing a superfluid to flow over small wings
of different shapes and measuring the resulting lift force and its time
evolution. This research will lead to a new theory of lift from first principles
in physics in contrast to the classical theory. Moreover, this research will
correct the accepted wisdom that prevailed over a century about the viscous
nature of lift generation. Hence, this study will resolve the 300-year-old
d’Alembert paradox by showing that d’Alembert’s zero-force solution was only one
of many possible solutions of Euler’s equation. And in numerous cases, Nature
selects a lifting solution. This research will show the physics of the unsteady
lifting mechanism, which is currently solely attributed to viscous effects.
Ultimately, this research will lead to a new understanding of the role of
viscosity in fluid mechanics.

This project was funded by the NSF ENG/CBET Fluid Dynamics, ENG/CMMI Dynamics,
Control and Systems Diagnostics, and MPS/DMR Condensed Matter Physics programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.