* 2332377
* Planning: HBCU-UP: OPEN: Development of blockchain-based supply chain simulation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Maxim Bushuev, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 09/30/2024
* USD 48,471.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. To enhance its research capacity, Morgan State University will conduct
planning activities to develop PI expertise in blockchain-based supply chain
simulations and make improvements to the supply chain coordination mechanism.
The research approach is based on mathematical programming in which costs are
modeled and tested in a simulated environment. This planning project aligns with
the goals of the HBCU-UP program in its efforts to bolster institutional
capacity building for the purpose of enhancing STEM Undergraduate education and
research endeavors.

The objective of this project is to develop a blockchain-based supply chain
simulation environment. During the project, a blockchain will be designed, set
up, and deployed. Afterwards, a set of blockchain smart contracts that simulate
delivery processes in a blockchain-based supply chain environment will be
developed. The created blockchain-based supply chain simulation environment will
mimic processes within a supply chain and, therefore, can be used for research
and educational purposes. In research, the simulation environment will be a tool
that can be used to test different blockchain-based models and concepts in
supply chain management and other disciplines. In the classroom, the blockchain-
based supply chain simulation environment can be used to explain to students
blockchain technology and its applications in supply chain management and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.