* 2332723
* Conference: Workshop on Policy-Relevant Internet Measurements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Cecilia Testart, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,996.00

As society increasingly relies on the Internet as critical infrastructure, there
are numerous opportunities for policymakers to ensure safe, reliable, and
equitable access to this resource. However, policymakers today generally lack
the required information needed to make good policy decisions---often due to an
absence of policy-relevant Internet measurements. There is an urgent need for
investment in the study and deployment of measurements for telecommunications
and Internet policy that bridge the gap between the various stakeholders, e.g.,
lawmakers, regulators, operators, and Internet measurement communities. 

To make further progress toward closing the gap between Internet measurements
and policy, there is a need to focus on building an interdisciplinary community
that incorporates myriad stakeholders in each domain, instead of one-off and
unilateral efforts by each domain. This workshop continues the effort of trying
to build this community to address this gap. It will bring together and engage
the policy, industry and research community to brainstorm and discuss how these
communities can work together to address the Internet data needs of current
policies and to work together toward co-design of future evidence-based
policies. A summary of lessons learned after the event will be published.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.