* 2332246
* CLIMA: A Digital Twin Modeling Framework for Climate Adaptive Vertical Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* John Brigham, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2026
* USD 735,872.00

This award supports research focusing on developing a novel Digital Twin
framework for the quantification of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions associated
with the operation of vertical infrastructure, and minimizing such environmental
footprint by designing and deploying environmentally responsive building
envelopes. Digital twin modeling refers to the creation of a high-fidelity
three-dimensional representation of a physical asset, which is augmented by live
data streaming from sensors, which is then fed into real-time predictive models.
By adopting this paradigm, the physical and digital assets are continuously
linked to each other (i.e., they age together, hence the term "twin"). This
research project will leverage such capabilities to devise new strategies to
design and operate buildings equipped with façades capable of modifying their
geometry and behavior to maximize lighting and ventilation, while minimizing
energy requirements and associated GHG emissions. Core to this effort is a
heavily instrumented building within the University of Pittsburgh that will
serve as the test bed to create and validate this new toolset. The research will
also be complemented by delivering educational and outreach activities for
graduate and undergraduate students, summer research internships, as well as
middle schools and underrepresented minority outreach programs.

The specific goal of the research is to create digital tools to allow for a
holistic assessment of the short- and long-term performance of the building, by
analyzing all the structural and non-structural components at the level of the
constituent materials and assessing how environmentally adaptive façade
components can be leveraged to optimize such performance over time. The
nonlinear, time-dependent nature of the response of the system in combination
with its environment is, in fact, of crucial importance in view of the large
degree of uncertainty on the demand resulting from climate change. General
circulation models based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s
Sixth Assessment Report will be downscaled for regional consideration and will
be leveraged in the Digital Twin framework, in which mechanistic predictive
models and Machine Learning algorithms will be embedded, with the ultimate goal
of guiding the design and operation of climate-adaptive buildings to minimize
life cycle GHG emissions. This project brings the potential to define a new
generation of Digital Twin tools to perform comprehensive assessment of the
performance of vertical infrastructure, paving the way for real-time
quantification and visualization of GHG emissions associated with the
construction and operation of complex civil systems, while at the same time
shedding light on how climate adaptivity can be leveraged to minimize their
carbon footprint.

This project is supported by the Engineering for Civil Infrastructure (ECI)
Program and the Engineering Design and Systems Engineering (EDSE) Program of the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) of the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.