* 2332024
* Collaborative Research: EPIIC: HBCU Alliance for Strategic Partnerships for Innovation and Research Enhancement (HBCU-ASPIRE)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rekha Meyer, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This is a collaborative project including the following institutions: Coppin
State University, Florida Memorial University, Kentucky State University, and
Harris-Stowe State University. The Historically Black College & University
Alliance for Strategic Partnerships for Innovation and Research Enhancement
(HBCU-ASPIRE) initiative is poised to address and overcome existing
infrastructural impediments that hinder research and innovation within
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). Acknowledging the pivotal
role of HBCUs in nurturing the growth of underrepresented professionals in STEM
disciplines, this endeavor seeks to enhance faculty research capacity and
infrastructural support. Despite the National Science Foundation (NSF) data
showing HBCUs as the source of over 18% of all bachelor's degrees in STEM fields
earned by African American students, these institutions often grapple with the
constraints of infrastructural deficiencies and inequitable funding. Through
this pilot, the HBCU-ASPIRE project aims to substantially fortify the research
and innovation proficiencies of ASPIRE institutions, thereby fostering a more
inclusive and dynamic U.S. and global economy.

The HBCU-ASPIRE initiative will perform a methodical analysis of the prevailing
challenges impeding research and innovation within each HBCU in the cohort.
Utilizing proven practices from the Research Development Enterprise (RDE), the
project is designed to bolster the research infrastructure, fostering robust
partnerships. The initiative is committed to fortifying various dimensions such
as the Office of Sponsored Research, faculty support and training, pre- and
post-research award management systems, to foster a collaborative, efficient,
and innovative research milieu. With an objective to compete for research
funding at the national level, this project encompasses the institutionalization
of best practices in research and innovation. Furthermore, the initiative is
designed to generate empirically grounded insights to guide other institutions
in their quest for robust research and innovation infrastructures. HBCU-ASPIRE's
commitment to broadening the impact of HBCUs on STEM research, training and
workforce development has the potential to foster a more inclusive and
innovative global economy.

This project is supported via co-funding from the NSF HBCU-Excellence in
Research Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.