* 2332095
* Planning: Research in Generative Artificial Intelligence for Enhanced Analysis in the US Intelligence Community
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Sambit Bhattacharya, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,955.00

Non-technical: In recent years Artificial Intelligence (AI) has become an
increasingly important area of research for academia, industry, and government
because it has the potential to solve many important problems and thus benefit
society. The goal of AI research is to create human-like abilities which can be
grouped under the term “intelligence”, in computing machines. With these
abilities, machines may be able to help create better conditions for humans and
may accelerate scientific discovery. Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) is
one of the categories of AI research which is seeing intense activity, and this
is because it provides anyone with an internet connection the ability to hold
conversations with a GAI through web interfaces like ChatGPT. These
conversations can be about almost anything. By learning from large scale
interactions, the GAIs are becoming better at providing good answers to
challenging questions raised by the humans interacting with them. GAI technology
such as Stable Diffusion, can render high-quality images based on written
descriptions. According to experts GAI applications will see very high levels of
adoption and will impact on many areas of work and productivity. The potential
of GAI is high, but experts caution that it can produce inaccurate or harmful
outputs. This is a planning project between Fayetteville State University (FSU)
and the Laboratory of Analytic Sciences (LAS), with FSU as the lead institution.
The project aims to work on planning to establish a research program focusing on
use-inspired AI, specifically GAI, with a focus on enhancing analysis in the US
Intelligence Community (IC). The project intends to bring together academia, the
IC, and industry to define research thrusts, identify gaps, and develop a design
and logic model which will create the foundations of a research program in this
area, and will also generate at least one research proposal that will be
submitted to NSF for funding.

Technical: The current state of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) and its
usability in holding conversations through web interfaces like ChatGPT is
rapidly changing the adoption of AI in society. The use of multi-modal
generative AI, such as Stable Diffusion, to render high-quality images based on
written descriptions will impact many areas of work and productivity. The
potential of GAI is high, but experts caution that it can produce inaccurate or
harmful outputs. This project applications requests funding for a planning
project between Fayetteville State University (FSU) and the Laboratory of
Analytic Sciences (LAS), with FSU as the lead institution. The exploratory
meetings of this planning project will be in-depth conversations, presentations
and will create documentation describing the research needs, research problems,
intellectual merit and broader impacts in the use of GAI to support the IC. The
Intellectual Merit of the proposed planning grant is that it will create the
roadmap for research and the network for creating an innovation ecosystem that
can sustain progress in this important area. The Broader Impacts of this project
will create a plan for developing basic and applied research opportunities. As
an HBCU, FSU will be able to lead and generate interest in the application of
advanced research to solve problems facing the IC, in many urgent matters
related to national security. The service area of FSU includes Fort Liberty,
which is the largest US Army base in the country. FSU was recently awarded the
Purple Heart status in the UNC System. The broader impacts of this award will be
amplified by FSU’s deep connections to the military community where this project
will create plans for further development of research opportunities related to
the IC which has a significant presence in the Fort Bragg community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.