* 2332998
* CAREER: The genomics of urbanization in house mice
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Megan Phifer-Rixey, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 512,573.00

Wildlife is everywhere, even in cities. As urban ecosystems grow, it is
important to understand how cities affect wildlife. For example, animals that
live in urban areas may have different diets, experience different types of
stress, and move around in different ways than animals in rural areas. Over
time, those differences can shape how populations evolve and adapt. This project
will survey house mouse populations in three urban-rural pairs and use genomic
data to investigate the evolutionary impacts of urban environments. House mice
are widespread, found in both cities and rural areas, and they are a genetic
model system, making them well-suited for the proposed research. Understanding
how cities impact house mice may help us better manage them, anticipate effects
in other organisms, and understand more about evolutionary processes. The
project also aims to support the education of future scientists through engaging
students and teachers in research and by generating scientific and educational
resources for use by the broader community.

This project will integrate organismal and genomic approaches to investigate how
house mice evolve in urban environments. First, genomic analyses will be used to
compare patterns of neutral genetic variation in urban and rural environments
and to detect selection. Second, analyses of trait variation, patterns of gene
expression, and functional data will be used to identify differences among urban
and rural mice and connect genomic variation to potentially adaptive changes in
traits. The proposed research will address questions about genetic structure in
urban and rural populations, the genetic basis of urban adaptation, and the role
of regulatory evolution in adaptation. Undergraduates will participate directly
in the proposed research, developing them as field, laboratory, and
computational scientists. In addition, the impact of the project will be
broadened by including high school teachers, incorporating multiple
undergraduate courses, creating natural history and genomic resources, and
developing educational activities and materials that can be used in K-16
settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.