* 2333166
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Roles of Electric Fields Within Mixed Ionic and Electronic Conducting Oxides Under Electrochemical Reducing Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Eranda Nikolla, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,797.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: High temperature electrochemical devices are critical
elements needed for new high efficiency energy conversion systems. For example,
a solid oxide electrolysis cell can provide hydrogen via steam electrolysis.
Alternatively, as envisioned in this work, such a system can also provide syngas
(carbon monoxide and hydrogen) from steam and carbon dioxide. Such complex
systems operate with high efficiency and can use electricity obtained from
intermittent power sources. However, their performance requires proper
optimization to avoid degradation. Recent work has shown that mixed ionic-
electronic conducting oxide-based cathodes exhibit promising activity and
stability, which facilitates the use of pure carbon dioxide in the feed.
However, a fundamental understanding of how these oxides work for processing of
carbon dioxide is still limited. In this project, PIs Nikolla and McEwen
integrate experiments and theory to determine how a mixed ionic-electronic
conducting ceramic material interacts with carbon dioxide to facilitate its
processing. Design criteria for identification of robust (active and stable)
oxide cathodes in a solid oxide electrolysis cell environment are being
developed. PIs Nikolla and McEwen are also actively engaged in outreach
activities through training graduate and undergraduate students, who typically
find employment in industry or academia. The research team also partners with
industry by interacting with the Toyota Research Center. As such, this research
exposes students to an industrial research environment and enables them to see
the link between fundamental work in academia and application in industry.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: Experimental and theoretical techniques are combined to
develop a fundamental understanding of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on
mixed ionic-electronic conducting (MIEC) oxides. This fundamental understanding
then enables design criteria for identification of robust (active and stable)
oxides as solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) cathodes to be defined. SOECs are
high temperature, solid-state electrolyzers characterized by high efficiencies
and unique scalability. In this project, the heterogeneities in an oxide layer,
which alter the local electric field at its surface and correlate to the
performance of a SOEC, are examined and the effect of the composition on the
reducibility of MIEC oxides is elucidated. This knowledge is used to define the
design criteria for robust MIEC-cathode SOECs. Activities that enhance the
education of the next generation of students, including a summer research
exchange program among the two groups for students, and partnerships with the
Toyota Research Center that expose students to an industrial research
environment and provide a link between the fundamental work in academia and
application in industry, ensure the broad impacts of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.