* 2333099
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Integrating Culturally Relevant Project-based AI Learning into High School STEM Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Woei Hung, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 48,589.00

The exponential expansion of artificial intelligence (AI) has created a
significant demand on future AI workforce development. Several key challenges
exist hindering the widespread incorporation of AI into K-12 curricula,
including the lack of teacher development in AI and a comprehensive pedagogical
framework for K-12 AI education. This project aims to engage high-school
students from North Dakota and southern Alabama, two geographical areas with
large populations from historically marginalized groups, in the learning of AI
by implementing and examining a culturally relevant project-based AI-integrated
learning framework. The framework connects AI learning with students' learning
experiences in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) classes,
fostering the growth of their interdisciplinary problem-solving skills. To
develop students' individual interest in AI, their learning is situated within
the context of personal experiences. This proposal was received in response to
the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial
Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097) and
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

The project includes two components: (1) training of high-school teachers, and
(2) teachers' classroom implementation. Seventeen teachers will participate in
small group and individual hands-on practices, immersive workshops, reflection
and discussion, and presentations. Researchers will carry out mixed-method
design research examining teacher training outcome. With scaffolding and support
from researchers, teachers will develop and teach AI-STEM integrated lessons in
biology and pre-calculus at their own high schools in North Dakota and southern
Alabama. Multimodal data collection and analysis will be used for researching
the perceptual, cognitive, and kinesthetic processes about students' problem-
solving skills, interdisciplinary knowledge use, and classroom participation, as
well as how these processes affect students' STEM and AI learning and interest
development. This research has significant potential to contribute to our
knowledge on how to effectively support historically marginalized students'
interest in and learning of AI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.