* 2333885
* CAREER: Leveraging Everyday Usage of Programs to Eliminate Bugs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Baris Kasikci, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2025
* USD 278,671.00

Building good quality software is crucial for achieving a high degree of
security, availability, and efficiency. Therefore, software developers spend
more than half of their time testing and debugging software to remove errors in
programs. As a result, the cost of software quality assurance is exorbitant.
Despite these efforts, modern software used in real-world systems is full of
bugs. The goal of this project is to help developers find, reproduce, and fix
bugs. To achieve this goal, this project will develop techniques that
systematically use the massive amount of information generated by software every
day.

Much like software is built to carry out specific tasks, the process that
monitors information for debugging and testing purposes also needs to be adapted
to achieve specific objectives. Current approaches that mainly collect generic
information from all programs have significant limitations. Therefore, this
research will introduce new approaches to monitor information in program-
specific ways. This information will be adaptively adjusted to automatically
reproduce complex bugs. Once bugs are reproduced, they are much easier to fix. A
key contribution of this research will be to use both successful and
unsuccessful program executions to help reproduce bugs.

This work will solve long-standing open problems that make it very hard to
reproduce bugs in real-world systems. The developed techniques will benefit
other research areas such as software testing and program repair. Broadly, this
research will reduce the costs of software bugs and result in higher quality
software, ultimately benefiting society. The tools and datasets created by this
research will be openly released to promote reproducibility, further studies,
and adoption by academia and industry. Another key focus of this project is an
educational plan that is closely integrated with the research plan via academic
and industrial collaborations. This project will develop and launch an openly-
available online programming course centered around debugging. This course will
be initially piloted locally to engage underrepresented and under-served K-8
students. Towards a unified education and research vision, the results of this
project will inform ongoing outreach activities to promote understanding and
broaden participation in computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.