* 2333532
* Proto-OKN Theme 3: An Education Gateway for the Proto-OKN
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Pascal Hitzler, Wright State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,518.00

This Prototype-Open Knowledge Network (OKN) project seeks to ensuring the growth
of a community of learning and practice centered on the OKN and its use in
solving critical, real-world problems. This Proto-OKN Education Gateway,
EduGate, effort will provide a comprehensive education platform that would also
facilitate close collaborations and convergence among current OKN projects, as
well as future entrants to the network.As the entry-point to the Proto-OKN
environment and community, EduGate can have widespread impact and can contribute
directly to the overall success of the Proto-OKN effort. While some of the OKN
projects will be deploying newer technologies, including distributed ledgers,
blockchain technology, and large language models (LLMs), many of the underlying
technologies and standards that power OKN are well-established and have been
around for some time. There is a plethora of extant educational material,
tutorials, reference texts, and technical papers describing the state of the art
of these technologies. The Education Gateway will bring together and link these
different materials via the OKN Curriculum Knowledge Graph (CurrKG), which will
be purpose-built for educating learners of all backgrounds.

The Education Gateway provides a unified, foundational learning platform, with
customized pathways for users and other stakeholder from various sectors
including government, industry, non-profit and other sectors. The project
encompasses four major initiatives: (1) Community Development, Outreach, and
Engagement (2) Industry Connection, Outreach, and Engagement (3) Education and
Support activities among the cohort of OKN projects, and (4) Development of an
OKN Curriculum Knowledge Graph (CurrKG) to assist with navigation through these
materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.