* 2333173
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Characterizing the Water Isotope Signature of an El Nino Event for Paleoclimate and Hydroclimate Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Daniel Ibarra, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 28,589.00

This project secures funds under the auspices of the Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) program to take advantage of the strong-to-very strong El Ni√±o/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) forecast for the water year 2023-2024 to establish a
longitudinal array of precipitation and stream sampling stations to constrain
the meteoric water delta oxygen-18, deuterium-excess, and delta oxygen-17 signal
of a strong ENSO event. The researchers will sample precipitation and stream
water monthly over the course of a year and analyze these samples for oxygen and
hydrogen isotopes. They will also collect spot samples of small-stream waters
across this same longitudinal transect during Fall 2023 and Spring 2024 and
simulate the source and pathways of precipitation using the Hybrid Single-
Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) model while using spatial
statistics to produce isoscapes of our stable isotope result across the
southwestern United States (U.S.).

This research is premised on the idea that substantial uncertainty remains
regarding how hydroclimate (including precipitation, evapotranspiration and
runoff) in the arid and semi-arid southwestern U.S. will respond to rising
carbon dioxide and warmer temperatures considering that ENSO plays an outsize
role in modifying wintertime southwestern U.S. hydroclimate.

There is a large body of data from research that examines how ENSO will change
in response to warming, utilizing both Global Climate Model (GCM) projections of
future climate and paleoclimate records but these data are poorly constrained.
Much of the paleoclimate evidence of southwestern U.S. hydroclimate and its
links to the ENSO comes from proxy records of past meteoric water oxygen
isotopes, with the typical assumption that lower proxy delta oxygen-18
corresponds with greater wintertime moisture and a shift towards ENSO
conditions.

Consequently, the ability to test the sensitivity of western U.S. hydroclimate
to warming and its links with ENSO relies upon constraining the relationship
between the ENSO and meteoric water delta oxygen-18 across the western U.S. This
causal link, however, is not well-established for strong ENSO events that may
dominate climate in the future. Furthermore, there is currently no data to
understand how ENSO modifies delta oxygen-17 values, which is emerging as a
promising analytical isotopic tool to constrain the role of moisture source
dynamics and evaporative effects in carbonate and clay isotope archives of
paleoclimate.

The potential broader impacts include supporting two graduate students and
providing a long-term monitoring dataset for improving reconstructions of the
strength and frequency of ENSO events in the past which will help constrain the
range of variability observed in the region necessary for future forecasts.

The research fits well into the potentially transformative, high risk, and
quick-response research imperative of the RAPID program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.