* 2333389
* Conference: Interdisciplinary and International Perspectives for Research in Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Angela Gutchess, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 49,994.00

It has long been recognized that culture can influence cognitive processes such
as memory, perception, and decision making. However, a consideration of culture
has not been prominent in cognitive psychology. As research becomes more global
and collaborative, with calls for greater diversity and inclusion across sub-
disciplines, there is an opportunity to uncover ways in which cognitive
processes can differ across individuals in diverse populations. This award seeks
to gather momentum for cognitive scientists to consider cultural influences and
to advance the diversity of researchers, populations, and topics under study.

A series of three Culture and Cognition conferences will be organized over the
next two years. The aims are to 1) advance research on cognition across
cultures; 2) build a community of researchers; and 3) provide networking and
support for trainees. Two of these meetings will operate as pre-conferences of
the annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, with its core audience of
cognitive psychologists. A third, standalone meeting will facilitate connections
among culture and cognition researchers worldwide. Meetings will include a
mixture of formats, including research presentations, panel discussions,
roundtables, posters, and networking receptions. The emphasis will be on
interaction and active participation of attendees from all career stages,
including trainees. The meetings will explore interdisciplinary perspectives on
defining culture in the study of cognition, with invited speakers representing a
range of disciplines that includes cognitive, social, and developmental
psychology, as well as anthropology. The program will also include scientists
who are themselves from culturally diverse origins working in geographically
diverse locations. To build infrastructure, a website and mailing list will be
created, which will support the development of the community of researchers and
trainees, the dissemination of information, and provide a foundation for
building on the momentum created.

Support is provided by the Perception, Action, and Cognition Program and the
Cultural Anthropology Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.