* 2333795
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: Exploiting Federal Data and Beyond: A Multi-modal Knowledge Network for Comprehensive Wildlife Management under Climate Change
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jason Rohr, University of Notre Dame
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

This Prototype-Open Knowledge Network project seeks to create a comprehensive,
integrative knowledge network for the management of wildlife in the context of
climate change, called KN-Wildlife. Effective wildlife management is essential
for safeguarding biodiversity, ecosystem health, and economic stability of any
region. The looming threat of climate change can disrupt the distribution,
behavior, and population dynamics of many species, particularly those that are
invasive or threatened or economically important. While Species Distribution
Models (SDMs) have been used to predict species responses to climate change,
their predictive capability can be hampered by the omission of several
influencing factors like interspecies competition, changes in land use, or the
migration ability of various species. A number of data sources are available
that are relevant to these considerations including the United States Geological
Survey (USGS), the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, and the IUCN Red
List of Threatened Species. However, the effective use of these data is
currently impeded by factors associated with the heterogeneity, spatial and
temporal discrepancies, and varying quality and completeness of the data. KN-
Wildlife will address this problem by providing an open-access platform that
couples data with visualization tools and predictive models to distill complex
multimodal data into an intuitive, unified representation of managed species.
KN-Wildlife would help inform decision-making processes and while providing
stakeholders with actionable insights.

The project will begin by providing comprehensive knowledge and predictive
models for species of concern to stakeholders in these two US states, viz.,
Indiana and Florida. Project collaborators include stakeholders from the Fish
and Wildlife Commissions (FWC) and Departments of Health (DoH) from both of
these states. KN-Wildlife will initially focus on around 3,000 managed species
of interest to the stakeholders, encompassing a broad taxonomy from fungi and
bacteria to fish and mammals. Working in collaboration with the Lucy Family
Institute at the University of Notre Dame, the project will integrate use of KN-
Wildlife into the NSF-funded Interdisciplinary Traineeship for Socially
Responsible and Engaged Data Scientists (iTREDS) program and the Summer
Education and Engagement for Data Science (SEEDS) Program. These initiatives are
specifically designed to provide undergraduate data science training centered on
societal challenges, and also provide K-12 training opportunities for those from
under-resourced schools and communities. All KN-Wildlife resources will be
publicly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.