* 2333366
* Conference: Renormalization and Visualization for packings, billiards and surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jayadev Athreya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides partial support for U.S. based participants of the summer
school "Renormalization and Visualization for packing, billiards and surfaces",
to take place from 10 - 14 July 2023 at the Centre International de Rencontres
Mathématiques, in Luminy, France. The goal of this summer school is to develop a
diverse generation of researchers who can take this circle of results further,
and to extend them to new domains. In particular, by bringing together
researchers in multiple fields, the organizers expect to see new and interesting
impacts at the intersection of mathematics, computation, and visualization.

The summer school will be centered on three minicourses, on the theme of
renormalization in geometry, number theory, and dynamics respectively.
Renormalization involves rescaling dynamical, geometric, or number theoretic
phenomenon to observe behaviors at multiple scales, and renormalization ideas
have led to striking visual and computational phenomena and uncovered new
connections between seemingly disparate areas of mathematics. The circle of
ideas being explored in this research school includes problems motivated by
physics, for example, the classical Newtonian mechanics of billiards in two and
three dimensions, as well as the geometry and number theory of circle packings.
The interactions between mathematics, computation, and visualization are
expected to produce interesting pieces of open-source software and striking
visuals which can be shared amongst the mathematics community for both research
and educational purposes. The conference website is https://conferences.cirm-
math.fr/2794.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.