* 2333782
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: Safe Agricultural Products and Water Graph (SAWGraph): An OKN to Monitor and Trace PFAS and Other Contaminants in the Nation's Food and Water Systems
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Ganga Hettiarachchi, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,735.00

The Safe Agricultural Products and Water Graph (SAWGraph) project aims to build
and test a knowledge graph as a novel tool for (1) monitoring and tracing Per-
and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in our environment, food and water
supplies, and for (2) assessing how different communities are exposed to
different levels of PFAS-related health risks. PFAS, commonly referred to as
"forever chemicals" due to their resistance to degradation, pose significant
health risks and have become pervasive in our environment, water supplies, and
food chain. Progress on addressing PFAS contamination is hampered by the
fragmented nature of relevant data and knowledge. SAWGraph will bring together
diverse datasets that span: (1) sites of concerns with known or suspected PFAS
contamination, (2) samples of PFAS levels in water, soil, plant and animal
tissue, feed, and agricultural food products, and (3) sites and communities that
may be at highest risk of exposure. This will be integrated with knowledge from
EPA’s CompTox Chemical Dashboard on chemical composition, known toxicity,
regulatory status, and properties relevant to transport and fate analysis. To
evaluate and facilitate dialogue about SAWGraph, it will be equipped with
prototype user interfaces that support query and faceted search, along with
offering interactive geo-visualizations and spatial analysis functions.

SAWGraph will incorporate data considering social aspects, including PFAS
exposure risks in disadvantaged communities, and seek expert input to balance
health and economic implications of PFAS contamination, particularly regarding
the potential impact on agriculture. In response to the evolving PFAS monitoring
and safety regulations, SAWGraph will align its efforts with governmental
stakeholders to ensure it remains supportive of the decision-making processes
concerning PFAS regulations. To ensure success of the work, the team will
partner with federal agency and state-level stakeholders who are key producers,
maintainers, and users of PFAS data. Partnerships with stakeholders will enhance
the efficacy of tools like SAWGraph in informing PFAS-related decisions, with
the aid of stakeholder expertise for data access, processing, and
interpretation. Through continuous interaction and collaboration with these
partners and additional stakeholders, the project seeks to secure widespread
buy-in and support, ensuring the graph's long-term success and sustainability
beyond the project's duration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.