* 2333980
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Sensor Attack Detection and Recovery in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Fanxin Kong, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 449,189.00

New vulnerabilities arise in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) as new technologies
are integrated to interact and control physical systems. In addition to software
and network attacks, sensor attacks are a crucial security risk in CPS, where an
attacker alters sensing information to negatively interfere with the physical
system. Acting on malicious sensor information can cause serious consequences.
While many research efforts have been devoted to protecting CPS from sensor
attacks, several critical problems remain unresolved. First, existing attack
detection works tend to minimize the detection delay and false alarms at the
same time; this goal, however, is not always achievable due to the inherent
trade-off between the two metrics. Second, there has been much work on attack
detection, yet a key question remains concerning what to do after detecting an
attack. Importantly, a CPS should detect an attack and recover from the attack
before irreparable consequences occur. Third, the interrelation between
detection and recovery has met with insufficient attention: Integrating
detection and recovery techniques would result in more effective defenses
against sensor attacks.

This project aims to address these key problems and develop novel detection and
recovery techniques. The project aims to achieve timely and safe defense against
sensor attacks by addressing real-time adaptive-attack detection and recovery in
CPS. First, this project explores new attack detection techniques that can
dynamically balance the trade-off between the detection delay and the false-
alarm rate in a data-driven fashion. In this way, the detector will deliver
attack detection with predictable delay and maintain the usability of the
detection approach. Second, this project pursues new recovery techniques that
bring the system back to a safe state before a recovery deadline while
minimizing the degradation to the mission being executed by the system. Third,
this project investigates efficient techniques that address the attack detection
and recovery in a coordinated fashion to significantly improve response to
attacks. Specific research tasks include the development of real-time adaptive
sensor attack detection techniques, real-time attack recovery techniques, and
attack detection and recovery coordination techniques. The developed techniques
will be implemented and evaluated on multiple CPS simulators and an autonomous
vehicle testbed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.