* 2333834
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: Digging in to Soil Carbon with USDA: A Knowledge Graph Informing Soil Carbon Modeling
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Jianzhong Su, University of Texas at Arlington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,375.00

This project aims to construct a Soil Organic Carbon Knowledge Graph (SOCKG) to
address the demand for accurate soil carbon data. Accurate soil carbon data is
essential for quantifying carbon credits and encouraging sustainable farming
practices that mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. The developed knowledge graph
will support better policy decisions, enhanced carbon valuation accuracy, risk
reduction, and increased financial gains from soil carbon management and
participation in carbon markets. The collaboration between the University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA) and the USDA Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
include the UTA leading technical development with their expertise in data
management, data science, and semantic technologies, while the USDA-ARS
providing domain knowledge and strategic guidance to ensure real-world
applicability and policy impact. SOCKG equips policymakers, land administrators,
environmental NGOs, advocacy groups, educators, and realtors with precise data
and insights on soil carbon stocks, fluxes, and dynamics, enabling them to make
informed decisions regarding climate change mitigation, policy formulation, land
use planning, educational teaching, and real estate development.

Carbon sequestration in agricultural soils is an essential strategy in combating
global climate change and an important component of the growing voluntary carbon
markets. It offers incentives to farmers to adopt sustainable practices that
increase soil carbon levels, thus providing environmental, economic benefits and
diversifying their farming ventures. However, the complexity and diversity of
soil carbon data, combined with environmental factors and land use, make
accurate modeling a challenge. The SOCKG addresses this challenge by
amalgamating and aligning different data sources, facilitating wider-scale
research and more effective carbon sequestration strategies. By using advanced
querying techniques and machine learning models, SOCKG significantly benefits
soil carbon researchers, aiding them in predicting soil carbon stocks and
addressing the uncertainty in soil organic carbon-related studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.