* 2333609
* National Data Platform Pilot: Services for Equitable Open Access to Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Melissa Floca, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 5,999,187.00

The scientific community generates vast amounts of data through research,
experiments, and observations. Effective management of this data to support
equitable discovery, access, analysis, communication, and sharing is critical
for research, innovation, and science-driven decision making. Furthermore, broad
and equitable access to diverse artificial intelligence (AI)-ready data
repositories is crucial to realize the full potential of AI in responsibly
advancing solutions to important scientific and societal problems at national
and global scale. In response to these immediate needs, the National Data
Platform (NDP) serves as a federated and extensible data ecosystem that fosters
collaboration, innovation, and equitable data use, leveraging existing national
Cyberinfrastructure capabilities.

Connecting distributed computing and data CI systems to provide open access to
data from disparate, often siloed repositories and other data sources
necessitates a standardized process and services for ingestion, indexing,
curation and data analysis. Through a “removing-the-barriers”' approach to
democratizing data, NDP combines needs assessment, co-design, and diversity-
aware capacity building with ready-for-scale data CI capabilities, offering data
and knowledge management services across the national CI ecosystem. As a
national hub of interconnected data hubs, NDP facilitates data discovery and
usage, drives responsible AI research and development, fosters scientific
understanding, and supports decision-making, policy formation and societal
impact. NDP focuses on several case studies in climate and related research
areas to evolve data-centric workflows, including wildland fire, and natural and
real-time hazards detection and decision making

This effort is also supported by National Discovery Cloud for Climate (NDC-C)
resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.