* 2333083
* Fostering Inclusion, Innovation and Creativity: A National Design Competition in Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Anita Singh, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 04/30/2024
* USD 36,976.00

The objective of this project is to provide a unique opportunity for
undergraduate engineering design teams and trainees with a disability, including
those from Historically Black Colleges and Universities and primarily
undergraduate institutions, to showcase their product innovations in
rehabilitation and assistive devices. This objective will be accomplished
through a two-year commitment to support a national design competition to be
hosted at an established venue such as the Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and
Bioengineering Conference (SB3C) where undergraduate teams from across the
country can submit their designs. The abstracts will be reviewed by faculty
experts and the top six teams will be invited to attend the venue and present
their work in a special podium session. Each of the finalists will receive $3000
for travel and prototype development. An innovative element of this year’s
podium session is the inclusion of an invited motivational with a disability. As
a role model, this speaker will kick off the session while presenting their
scholarly contribution in areas that promote device design in rehabilitation
engineering or assistive technologies. The stability of the competition for the
next two years allows the organizer to recruit earlier and be able to confirm
with teams that funds will be available for travel and prototyping in advance of
the submission deadlines. This competition will provide an opportunity for
faculty across the country to use it as a motivational component in the process
of fostering creativity. Undergraduate students attending the conference through
their involvement in the competition will learn about bio-solid mechanics, bio-
fluid mechanics, device design, rehabilitation, cellular and molecular
mechanics, functional tissue engineering, bio-heat and mass transfer, and
bioengineering education. Numerous podium sessions, poster sessions, workshops
and plenary talks are designed to engage and excite the attendees including the
session for the undergraduate design competition.

The undergraduate design competition will broaden the benefits of the component
of motivation to other undergraduate students and their faculty mentors across
the country. Further, the materials developed as part of this project will be
shared with all faculty mentors involved in prior and future competitions. This
competition provides a national venue (with many international attendees) for
teams to showcase their innovations in the areas of rehabilitation and assistive
devices and compete with their peers. Undergraduate students attending the
conference will participate in a research-driven event with technical sessions,
workshops and presentations by faculty, clinicians, and industrial
representatives who have expertise in device design, rehabilitation,
disabilities, and numerous other areas. Also, funding will make travel possible
for students who otherwise might not attend an academic conference. Attendance
at the conference provides valuable networking opportunities for the students,
including contacts for graduate school and employment. The inclusion of the
competition at the conference also exposes attendees to innovative solutions for
the needs of individuals with disabilities, or those undergoing rehabilitation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.