* 2333695
* Travel: Support for Conference Participation at the ACM Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 2024
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Yong Zheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support student attendance at the 2024 version of the
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI) conference to be held in Greenville, South
Carolina. IUI is the main international conference where researchers in human
computer interaction (HCI) and artificial intelligence (AI) present work on
systems that use AI to help people be more effective in interacting with
computers. IUI research spans a wide range of socially important topics and
domains, including recommender systems, adaptive educational systems,
accessibility, autonomous systems, creativity, virtual agents, and many others.
Providing travel funding that allows junior researchers to present their own
work and be enriched by others' work will strengthen the IUI community and
provide valuable benefits for the students involved.

The funding will support around 14 students to attend the conference. Most of
these students will also attend a Doctoral Consortium at which later-stage PhD
students will present and get feedback on their dissertation research from both
senior researchers and other PhD students in the IUI community. The availability
of travel funding will be widely announced in the relevant communities, with
students being invited to submit applications describing their doctoral work.
These applications will be reviewed by a program committee that gives
substantive feedback for every application, whether accepted or not. Acceptance
decisions will be made with an eye toward topical, institutional, and
demographic diversity of participants, while also considering financial need.
Chosen students will attend a day-long doctoral consortium, have additional
opportunities to meet with individual mentors, and be invited to present in a
poster session for the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.