* 2333810
* Proto-OKN Theme 2 Fabric: FabRic Integrating Networked Knowledge (FRINK)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Christopher Bizon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,380,843.00

Knowledge graphs have emerged in many domains of science and technology as a
powerful means of integrating, structuring, and mining information to extract
new knowledge. To fully realize the promise of these knowledge graphs, a
concerted effort is needed to synthesize many independently modeled and
developed graphs that overlap partially with each other, in terms of their
content. The Fabric Integrating Networked Knowledge, FRINK, is a project that
meets this challenge by creating capabilities that allow for the uniform
deployment, integration, and harmonization of knowledge graphs created under the
Proto-OKN program into a unified Open Knowledge Network for query and analysis.
Using FRINK to create the Proto-OKN will itself foster in the creation of an
Open Knowledge Network (OKN) Community—a social fabric comprising intentional
structures that support interpersonal interactions and collective decision
making. With FRINK serving as a sociotechnical infrastructure, the OKN community
would be able to develop a shared vision for the Proto-OKN and create the social
sustainer of the NSF Open Knowledge Network. The Proto-OKN deployed using FRINK
is designed to be an open, queryable system. All of the associated software is
open source and will be freely available in GitHub, including demonstration
workflows that provide key examples and functionality for downstream users.

FRINK connects discipline-specific individual knowledge graphs into a
transdisciplinary knowledge network. Not only does this enable individual graphs
created by Proto-OKN Theme 1 projects to be available to the research and tool-
building communities through a common interface, it also conceptually integrates
all of that information allowing the formation of unanticipated connections and
creative knowledge mining. The FRIK platform will be an open research tool to
enable sophisticated queries across an ever-increasing set of domains in support
of convergent research. FRINK utilizes Wikidata as a common and diverse
knowledge base to help federate knowledge graphs, in the process helping to
enrich Wikidata and enhance its utility for scholars worldwide. FRINK combines
best-practices in cyberinfrastructure engineering, deep understanding of data
modeling and knowledge integration, purposeful user engagement, capable project
management and proven team science experience to work with other Proto-OKN
components. FRINK will be organized around three objectives, detailing three
types of fabric that will bind together the initially disparate graphs developed
by Theme 1 teams: (1) Knowledge Fabric: Tools for knowledge graph integration
and interoperability. In order to connect together two graphs that may not
overlap on their respective content, an innovative strategy is employed using
Wikidata as a “knowledge backbone” through which diverse graphs could be linked,
cross-queried and analyzed. (2) Technical Fabric: Common knowledge graph
deployment strategies and technology based on robust, scalable, cloud-based
technical infrastructure and best-practice cloud engineering, A set of query and
analytic tools will be deployed for efficiently tapping into a federated
knowledge system. (3) Social Fabric: Engagement with Themes 1 and 3 projects to
create a common vision, standard semantics, and shared protocol for OKN, along
with the enthusiasm to work together to create a unified product with shared
values addressing highly diverse use cases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.