* 2333932
* Conference: 2024 CPS PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Frankie King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 381,175.00

The purpose of this project is to plan and organize the 2024 National Science
Foundation (NSF) Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Principal Investigator (PI)
Meeting that is scheduled for the Spring of 2024 in Nashville, Tennessee. This
meeting convenes PIs with active CPS Program awards for the 14th time since the
program began. PI Meetings are primarily annual opportunities for CPS
stakeholders comprising NSF-sponsored CPS researchers, industry representatives,
and Federal agency representatives to gather and review new CPS developments,
identify new and emerging applications, and to discuss technology gaps and
barriers. The 2024 program agenda is community-driven comprising oral PI project
presentations via panels, talks, poster presentations and demos of new CPS
innovations and results, and networking sessions for PIs to interact. Federal
agency program officers will provide status reports of the CPS program
solicitation and address questions about preparing successful grant proposals.
The meeting also will keynote presentations from invited leaders in the research
community.

PI Meetings serves as the only opportunity where all of the NSF-funded CPS
Principal Investigators meet to share their research, discuss new research
opportunities and challenges, and explore new ideas and partnerships for future
work, and to network over two meeting days. Specific to networking, PIs will
have the opportunity to interact with industry representatives, government
agency program officers, and non-governmental organizations with vested interest
in CPS research and development at networking sessions scheduled for the arrival
night, throughout the two full meeting days, and post-meeting after the meeting
adjourns. PI Meeting are forums for sharing ideas across the CPS community and
play a significant role in growing the community across a broad range of sectors
and technologies, and performing outreach to others who have interest in
learning about the program and participating as future proposers, transition
partners, or sponsors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.