* 2333129
* The 2023 Online Undergraduate Resource Fair for the Advancement and Alliance of Marginalized Mathematicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kiera Edwards, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,736.00

This project serves the national interest by providing undergraduate and
graduate students in the mathematical sciences with "insider" knowledge that
will allow them to make informed decisions about their educational and career
choices. Specifically, this project will support the fourth offering of the
Online Undergraduate Resource Fair for the Advancement and Alliance of
Marginalized Mathematicians, a two-day online conference organized by current
students. Building from three prior offerings from 2020 to 2022, the 2023
conference will include six main activities for participating students: (1) Our
Stories talks, where recent PhD recipients will share their experiences; (2)
crash courses that provide brief overviews of fields of mathematics common in
undergraduate research; (3) a summer opportunities panel; (4) a student
experiences panel; (5) two plenary presentations; and (6) two virtual networking
lunches. Each activity is designed to shine a light on aspects of graduate
education and career opportunities that can be complex for participants to
explore on their own.

Too often, students can be excluded from educational and career opportunities
simply because they are not "in the know." This may be due to insufficient
mentorship, underdeveloped institutional advising systems, or other
circumstances. This is a particularly common challenge for individuals from low-
income backgrounds, first-generation students, and students from populations
that have historically been underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. This
conference looks to provide mentoring and networking opportunities to promote
access to opportunities for all students. The conference builds upon three
pillars: (1) sharing information about resources and opportunities through
conference presentations and panel discussions; (2) providing access to role
models and representation through a careful selection of speakers with diverse
identities and experiences and a history of supporting students; and (3)
providing access to networking opportunities. A participant overview will be
disseminated and an assessment of the conference's effectiveness will be
conducted using data from a Zoom meeting report, a survey immediately after the
conference, and a second survey four months after the conference. The NSF IUSE:
EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.