* 2333991
* Conference: 2023 NSF CyberTraining Principal Investigator (PI) Meeting
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Geoffrey Fox, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 98,268.00

This project supports a two-day meeting of principal investigators and leaders
of awards made under the National Science Foundation (NSF) CyberTraining
program. This meeting will provide a forum for participants to share information
about their projects' goals, implementations, and results with other attendees,
including interested NSF program directors. The meeting will be co-located with
the principal investigator meeting for the NSF Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained
Scientific Innovation program. This meeting includes joint sessions that will
allow discussion of topics of common interest and exploration of collaborative
opportunities between the two NSF programs. The meeting will consist of talks,
panels, and discussions in breakout sessions with report-outs. Furthermore, all
projects will prepare summaries of their work in posters and a short document in
a prescribed format. These will be hosted on an open website. The activities in
the meeting will be presented in a report delivered to NSF soon after the event.
This report will include lessons from the current program and future
implications identified at the meeting. It will also include a discussion of
sustainability, best practices in cybertraining, approaches to broader
impact/participation, metrics, and outcomes, identifying what succeeded and what
was less successful. The meeting agenda will include identifying the community’s
needs to enable research workforce development and the gaps in coverage for
future projects. It will also identify possible future collaborations,
especially those with members of the Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained
Scientific Innovation program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.