* 2333132
* Conference: Eliminating the Mathematics Barrier for All Students: Bringing Innovation to Scale in Higher Education Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Chris Rasmussen, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,957.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing ways that
undergraduate instructional reform in introductory mathematics courses could be
scaled to expand efforts aimed at student success in undergraduate mathematics
and increase STEM participation for students that represent the full spectrum of
diverse talent at US institutions. Over the past decade, several significant
innovations have emerged to address particular challenges in undergraduate
mathematics, which contribute to helping students develop the basic mathematics
proficiency they need to be successful in STEM. Concurrently, there has been a
rise of teaching-focused faculty at research-intensive institutions who are
uniquely positioned to influence introductory mathematics coursework. With a
goal to help the nation meet its STEM workforce needs, this convening will
explore how these teaching-focused faculty can leverage effective innovations to
create a nationally scalable structure for improving student experiences and
success in introductory mathematics courses.

Reforms in undergraduate mathematics education that address college completion
and equity in higher education are essential to meeting the nationâ€™s STEM
workforce and national security needs. There are many innovative efforts
addressing the improvement of entry-level mathematics courses, and numerous
projects and institutions have created, piloted, and occasionally replicated
effective reform efforts that overcame particular challenges, like the need to
reform pedagogy or attend to gender equity. This convening aims to address
structural barriers to systemic reform that prevent implementation of many of
these research-backed innovations at scale. The project aspires to leverage
current practices, that distribute much of the entry-level mathematics course
teaching and coordination to teaching-focused faculty, as an opportunity for new
pathways to reform. As such, the convening will bring together more than 40
stakeholders, including teaching-focused faculty, to produce a concept paper
articulating the needs of the community to develop new solutions to recognized
obstacles for student success in introductory mathematics courses and to
understand ways in which to scale research-based efforts and innovations that
have shown promise in increasing student success in these courses. In addition,
the convening will draft structures for change and will lay the groundwork,
centered on building networked communities of teaching-focused mathematics
faculty at research-intensive universities, for future efforts that could
accelerate the uptake of research-based solutions to meet the challenges of
introductory mathematics courses. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.