* 2333740
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: A Dynamically-Updated Open Knowledge Network for Health: Integrating Biomedical Insights with Social Determinants of Health
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Rahmatollah Beheshti, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project aims to expand current biomedical knowledge graphs by incorporating
Social Determinants of Health (SDoH) data, which are typically underutilized
despite their proven connection to health outcomes. The goal is to create a
comprehensive health knowledge graph that combines biomedical facts and SDoH
data from scientific literature and Electronic Health Records. Crucially, this
model will allow for continuous updates from ongoing streams of biomedical and
clinical text data, promoting swift distribution of new research findings and
fostering collaboration in the ever-evolving biomedical and public health
fields. Biomedical knowledge graphs (KGs), which organize, analyze, and apply
biomedical information, rarely incorporate data related to non-clinical factors
like socioeconomic status, education, and employment, that have proven
correlations with several health outcomes. It is crucial to integrate SDoH into
open knowledge repositories to enhance health improvement efforts and to reduce
persistent disparities in healthcare resource accessibility. One outcome of this
integration would be a comprehensive knowledge network for health that merges
biomedical facts with SDoH data. This network could continually update itself
with new data. Challenges to this endeavor include data integration, the dynamic
nature of data streams, and the need to combine biomedical knowledge with SDoH
data in an equitable and ethical manner. To address these challenges, the
project will create a multi-dimensional knowledge network capable of supporting
complex queries across various applications and automatically verifying
information quality. The project will also link the KGs with electronic health
records to uncover associations between social determinants and health outcomes,
thereby improving healthcare outcomes and promoting health equity.

This project innovates by advancing semantic interoperability, improving
knowledge representation, enabling adaptive knowledge acquisition, ensuring
knowledge graph trustworthiness, and promoting ethical awareness. It aims to
yield a comprehensive knowledge network, open-source algorithms, models, and
tools that integrate SDoH facts and data. The accessibility of the tools created
in this project will accelerate knowledge discovery, improving the understanding
of human health and the wellbeing of vulnerable populations. Additionally, this
project will significantly contribute to the education of students, particularly
those from underrepresented groups, through special seminar courses and ongoing
diversity initiatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.