* 2333207
* CAREER: Safety by Design: Protecting Adolescents from Online Risks
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Pamela Wisniewski, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2024
* USD 487,508.00

This project will investigate the mechanisms by which a critical gap in
adolescent online safety technologies can be closed by leveraging interaction
design as a means to minimize online risks, and thus to optimize the benefits
internet-enabled technologies provide to youth. To do this, the work will: (1)
develop novel insights as to how teens experience online risks, (2) identify the
mechanisms by which teens seek support to cope with these experiences, (3)
translate these insights into reusable design patterns for sociotechnical
interventions for online safety, (4) work directly with teens to co-design
solutions that promote self-regulation and leverage their support networks, (5)
instantiate these designs into high-fidelity prototypes and real-world
applications, (6) evaluate whether these solutions are developmentally
appropriate in helping adolescents manage online risks more effectively, and (7)
disseminate these evidence-based sociotechnical interventions for protecting
adolescents from online risks to designers and developers of online platforms
that cater to teens. This work serves to protect particularly vulnerable youth
populations that are at highest risk of severe harm because they lack active
online parental mediation.

The research integrates adolescent developmental psychology with interaction
design and computer science to create new knowledge, theoretical frameworks,
reusable design patterns, and technologies. It uses a social ecological
framework of adolescent resilience to design technologies that help teens self-
regulate and leverage their existing support networks in a way that teaches them
how to manage online risks more effectively. By doing so, this project makes
fundamental contributions to the adolescent online safety literature by: (1)
closing the sociotechnical gap between the unique developmental needs of
adolescents and the systems designed to keep teens safe from online risks, and
(2) building on the risk and protective factors that have been identified in the
literature to design effective and novel sociotechnical interventions to more
effectively protect teens from online risks. Further, this novel "Safety by
Design" approach will empirically contribute to a body of useful knowledge that
improves the lives of young people by designing, developing, evaluating, and
disseminating evidence-based sociotechnical interventions for adolescent online
safety that can be easily translated to practice. This research seeks to achieve
a significant paradigm shift towards building more teen-centric sociotechnical
solutions that empower teens by treating them as key stakeholders and agents of
their own online safety. The work examines, designs, develops, and evaluates
innovative sociotechnical design interventions that empower teens to self-
regulate their online risk experiences with the help of their support networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.