* 2333404
* Using Cross Language Analysis to Investigate Factors for Differential Marking
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Shobhana Chelliah, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 162,106.00

This project uses cross language analysis to investigate factors for
'differential marking.' In linguistics, 'differential marking' refers to
morphological patterning where a nominal, such as a subject, occurs with special
encoding. With this encoding, a speaker can communicate non-grammatical
information about that nominal, such as surprise, unpredictability, or
unexpectedness of the involvement of an entity in an event. Speakers do not
consciously use differential marking to package information. Rather, there
appear to be a complex combination of grammatical, discourse, semantic, and
pragmatic factors that predict differential marking, including inherent
properties of the noun (e.g., person, animacy, or count versus mass), properties
of the predicate (transitivity, completed action), or the position of a nominal
in longer connected speech (e.g., mentioned for the first time in a conversation
or story). The project will include the training of students in coding and
grammatical analysis. Language data, the coding protocol, and Python-based tools
will be archived and freely accessible at University of North Texas Digital
Library and/or through a GitHub repository.

This project uses an innovative documentary method to gather information on
factors determining differential marking. First, native speaking linguists of
the investigated languages will code nominals in connected discourse for factors
associated with differential marking. When non-speakers analyze data for
differential marking, nuanced meanings can be lost in translation. Coding by
trained native speakers will more accurately capture the meanings intended by
the speaker. The project will develop a coding manual to standardize coding.
Second, discussions about the data with groups of non-linguist speakers will be
used to refine coding. Group discussions on grammar tend to evoke scenarios of
usage and interpretation that are not recalled by investigators working on data
on their own. Third, the project will develop Python-based tools to compare
factors for differential marking across various data sets, both within one
language and across different languages, to find statistically salient
correspondences between factors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.