* 2333384
* AMS Community Synthesis for Geo-Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Accelerating Geoscience Impact to Society and the Economy
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Paul Higgins, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,941.00

Extreme weather events, changing patterns of precipitation, stronger and more
frequent tornados and hurricanes/typhoons, global warming due to increased
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and many other phenomena provide fertile
ground for entrepreneurial activities and the generation of startups in the
arena of atmospheric and meteorological science. However, there are very few
atmospheric scientists becoming entrepreneurs and creating novel new products
and services that both benefit society and help drive the economy forward. To
identify the reason for this paucity of participation in innovation ecosystems,
the American Meteorological Society (AMS) will hold a series of virtual events
to survey its broad membership. The conversations will illuminate the factors
that prevent them from initiating commercial ventures and becoming
entrepreneurs. Broader Impacts of the work include uncovering the incentives,
training, opportunities, and educational vehicles most likely to create a cadre
of atmospheric science and meteorological entrepreneurs and startup founders,
including robust representation from early career scientists and member of
underrepresented groups. The AMS will made public the report of their findings
by posting it on the AMS website.

To solicit ideas on developing entrepreneurial talent and speed the pace of
innovation in the atmospheric sciences, the 12,000+ member strong American
Meteorological Society, the largest professional society of weather and climate
scientists in the US, will run a series of broad, inclusive, and results-driven
virtual activities. These are focused on engaging all segments of the
atmospheric and space science and meteorological communities, with a specific
focus on those who are early career and from groups traditionally
underrepresented in science. Information will be obtained via online surveys,
virtual convenings of members, crowdsourcing events, one-on-one conversations,
and panels of experts. The goal is to collect and synthesize ideas from AMS
constituents on what incentives, training, or gap filling needs to take place to
increase and accelerate more involvement of atmospheric scientists in the
entrepreneurial process, as well as increase the number of atmospheric and
meteorologically relevant enterprises led by founders and CEOs coming from these
fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.