* 2333074
* Collaborative Research: Education Landscape  for Quantum Information Science and Engineering: Guiding Education Innovation to Support Quantum Career Paths
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Zwickl, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 338,083.00

Over the past five years, Quantum Information Science and Engineering (QISE) has
emerged as a national priority with the passage of the 2018 National Quantum
Initiative Act and the 2023 CHIPS and Science Act, both of which call for
significant investments in QISE research, industrial innovation, education, and
workforce development. Quantum systems and their unique behaviors will lead to
significant improvements in computing, communication, and sensing, but the
technologies cannot advance without skilled and knowledgeable people. To support
QISE education, it is critical to understand the jobs within the QISE industry
and their associated requisite skills and knowledge. Because of the rapid
expansion of the industry, existing workforce data is already out of date. There
is a need for more current, detailed, and comprehensive quantum workforce
analysis, and a need to disseminate this knowledge to current and future QISE
educators and program developers. Similar to the QISE industry, higher education
has seen a rapid growth in courses and programs related to QISE. However, prior
research indicates these opportunities tend to occur in research universities
and are less prevalent in other institutions. The community needs a more
comprehensive picture of the QISE education landscape to identify what is being
taught, where it is being taught, and which students are benefitting from
existing QISE courses and programs. Developing a clearer understanding of the
quantum workforce will make the path into QISE more transparent for students
from diverse backgrounds and diverse institution types, such as Minority Serving
Institutions, two-year colleges, and regional four-year colleges. An
understanding of which populations have less access to QISE education may also
guide future investments into new QIS courses and programs.

This project consists of three major activities: (1) a study characterizing the
QISE workforce through an analysis of the knowledge, skills, and abilities for
QISE jobs, (2) disseminating workforce data to improve QISE education, and (3) a
large-scale study characterizing QISE education across the United States.
Activity one (1) will use semi-structured interviews with approximately 40
employees in the quantum industry discussing the occupations, typical tasks, and
the skills, knowledge, abilities, and education background required to carry out
those tasks. The interviews will align with the O*NET Content Model to describe
the QISE specific features that are particular to engineers, software
developers, technicians, and scientists working in the QISE industry. The
detailed information is critical for developing learning goals and curricula
that reflect the most broadly applicable and important QISE knowledge and
skills. Activity two (2) is focused on disseminating workforce findings to
instructors. To maximize the impact of the data, QISE instructors and program
directors will be interviewed to discuss their views on the QISE workforce and
what insights would be most helpful for guiding their course development.
Additionally, the team will present seminars through multiple QISE conferences
to disseminate findings. Activity three (3) is a comprehensive examination of
QISE instruction in higher education within the United States. The data will
include the geographic distribution, institution types, levels of instruction,
and number of students and majors being impacted. Through follow-up surveys with
QISE instructors, the team will also develop a more fine-grained analysis of the
QISE topics being covered, pedagogical approaches, industrial connections,
efforts at broadening participation, and challenges faced by instructors. The
hope is to reduce barriers to developing QISE educational opportunities,
particularly for institutions who serve diverse populations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.