* 2333270
* Workshop on Engineering Innovation for Health; Houston, Texas; 2024
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Gang Bao, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This grant will support early-career investigator participation at a workshop on
Engineering Innovation for Health in Houston, Texas, in 2024. With recent
development of new technologies including molecular imaging, genome editing and
artificial intelligence, the field of medicine is on the verge of a paradigm
shift to have unprecedented engineering-driven precision in disease diagnosis
treatment. To further develop engineering innovation for health, and better
train the next-generation of leaders in this field, this workshop will bring
together national and international academic experts, industry practitioners,
and clinicians to discuss the cutting-edge research in developing
biotechnologies and the unprecedented opportunities to revolutionize medicine
and healthcare, elucidate major issues and challenges in this interdisciplinary
field, and identify future research directions that will significantly benefit
our society. It is expected that this workshop will help develop novel ideas and
transformative research projects that integrate engineering and life sciences,
address fundamental biological issues, and solve biomedical problems that
significantly improve human health.

The specific objective of this grant is to support the travel of 20 junior
investigators, especially females and underrepresented minorities, to attend the
Engineering Innovation for Health Workshop, to be held in 2024 in Houston,
Texas. This 2-day workshop will cover a broad range of topics, with a strong
focus on revolutionary technologies for better disease diagnosis and therapies.
The presentations and discussions at this Workshop will advance our
understanding of the underlying scientific and technological issues and
challenges in further developing innovative technologies for health, and
facilitating interdisciplinary studies that may lead to a broader range of
applications of engineering innovation to medicine, from revolutionary
technologies for disease therapies, to advanced molecular imaging methods, to
new computational and AI based approaches, to new devices for biosensing and
disease diagnostics, to new methods using synthetic biology and mechanobiology.
The results of the workshop will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific
and technological understanding and impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.