* 2333902
* I-Corps:  Interactive digital book series to provide world history for middle school to college students
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Spencer Striker, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an interactive digital book series focused on history education.
The proposed technology is aimed at middle and high school students, as well as
first-year college students, preparing them for the AP World History: Modern
exam covering 1200 CE to present, and for success across a broad swathe of
standards-aligned history assessments. Informed by research on digital youth
culture, such as the work of Mizuko Ito, the proposed series recognizes the
importance of informal, interest-driven learning and the role of technology in
shaping modern education. Thomas and Brown's "A New Culture of Learning"
highlights the significance of play, innovation, and imagination, all of which
are embodied in the proposed series. By immersing and engaging students through
meaningful choice, multimodal interaction design, and systems-based
interpretations, the series emphasizes complexity, interdependencies, and causal
connections in historical events. This interactive approach encourages students
to perceive connections between past and present, making history more tangible
and real. Ultimately, this approach takes history out of the textbook, placing
students into the world of history itself, igniting their enthusiasm for
learning about the past. The project has the potential to improve historical
literacy and critical thinking skills, fostering cultural awareness, empathy,
and global citizenship.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an educational technology
that combines digital technology, multimedia, and game-based learning
principles. It employs the "Psychosocial Moratorium," "Identity," and
"Multimodal" principles, which allow learners to take risks in a low-stakes
environment, explore different identities, and engage with multiple modalities
for a deeper understanding of history. The technology used involves mobile
media, narrative design, and interaction design, providing a unique and
immersive learning experience. The research informing this project comes from
applied educational research and digital youth culture studies, underpinning the
interactive and engaging nature of the technology. The technical results include
a digital learning series that brings history alive, making it tangible,
memorable, and enriching for students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.