* 2333393
* RAPID: Artificial Intelligence Curriculum and K-12 Teacher Agency: Barriers and Opportunities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Paul Jensen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,557.00

AI-powered tools have the potential to transform education, both in formal and
informal settings. The immense potential for AI to address challenges in
education has created an urgent need to characterize how K-12 education may
leverage these powerful tools safely, ethically, and equitably. While the AI in
education landscape is changing drastically and rapidly, little is known about
K-12 educators' engagement with AI and how newly developed tools and curriculum
will be received and integrated into classrooms. K-12 teachers are critical
stakeholders whose understanding, opinions, and willingness to engage with AI
tools will be important factors in the success of AI in K-12 education. Without
fundamentally understanding K-12 teacher opinions and agency related to AI in
education, there is risk of making investments in tools, training, and curricula
that simply do not meet the needs or address the concerns of the teachers who
will implement them. This project addresses this knowledge gap by collecting
survey data from a national sample of K-12 teachers to guide the development of
AI tools and curriculum. This proposal was received in response to the Dear
Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial Intelligence
in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097), and funded by
the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and
interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

Researchers will develop and refine a survey to be distributed to approximately
1,000 K-12 teachers nationally. The project investigates the overall research
question: How do K-12 teachers perceive AI education and its impacts on the
workforce? The project leverages an ecological agency model to develop the
survey about AI tool and curriculum adoption. The survey will include both
quantitative measures and open-response questions and will be refined through
cognitive interviews and reviewed by an expert panel to ensure clarity and
completeness. Research results will be disseminated in scholarly publications,
as well as through venues that will reach educational practitioners and the
public at large. The project results will have the potential to directly impact
AI curriculum and tool development for K-12 education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.