* 2333324
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Automating CI Configuration Troubleshooting with Bayesian Group Testing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Xiaoyi Lu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Configuration troubleshooting in large-scale cyberinfrastructure (CI) software
systems is a complex and costly task due to numerous configurable parameters.
Existing methods like log mining and machine learning analysis face challenges
in such environments. To address this, we present BGT4AutoCI (Automating CI
Configuration Troubleshooting with Bayesian Group Testing), a groundbreaking
solution that leverages Bayesian Group Testing, ensuring accurate results even
with minimal prior knowledge and testing errors. Experienced CI operators can
expedite the process with approximated prior knowledge. This research aims to
revolutionize CI configuration troubleshooting, introducing a highly precise and
efficient approach that will optimize the utilization of current and future
large-scale CI systems.

The primary focus of this research is to address critical challenges in
automated configuration troubleshooting within large-scale CI systems. The
proposed three-fold approach encompasses: (1) Formulating Bayesian Group Testing
for CI configuration troubleshooting, which employs lattice models to accurately
identify risks at the individual configuration parameter level, taking
uncertainty into account during troubleshooting. (2) A multinomial paradigm for
Bayesian Group Testing, which introduces multinomial responses to simultaneously
observe multiple aspects of CI systems, enabling efficient test selection
algorithms for jointly testing configuration parameters that impact various
aspects of CIs. (3) Automated configuration troubleshooting, which involves the
designs of several key components to establish BGT4AutoCI as an automated
configuration troubleshooting framework that minimizes the need for human
intervention. The outcomes of this project hold the potential to significantly
enhance the efficiency and accuracy of CI configuration troubleshooting,
benefiting current and future large-scale CI systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.