* 2333138
* MRI: Track 1 Acquisition of Spray Particle &amp; Spray Droplet Size Analyzer for Precision Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alex Povitsky, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 126,162.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
spray particle and spray droplet size analyzer for precision manufacturing
technology and semiconductor technology. Grinding operations in manufacturing
produce substantial heat which can cause damage to the component being made.
Coolant must be delivered to the grinding surface, but this coolant can be
easily mixed with air causing is to be less effective. The spray particle and
spray droplet size analyzer will provide measurements of the break-up of a
coolant jet during grinding and will enable improved coolant nozzle design and
coolant delivery modeling. This instrument will enable research on variety of
materials, including those that are hard-to-grind and hard to dissipate heat,
and coolant properties. Improvements in cooling will reduce heat pollution in
the environment, which is substantial in the grinding industry. The instrument
will also enable evaluation and mitigation of the spread of oil-based coolant
and formation of oil mist that represents a fire hazard and safety hazard when
inhaled. The instrument will enhance research and training in the Center for
Precision Manufacturing at the University of Akron and benefit the Northeastern
Ohio region which is home to over 30% of the State of Ohio’s manufacturing
workers. The students who will benefit from the instrument, including those from
communities under-represented in engineering, will gain hands-on training and
knowledge spanning fundamentals of fluid dynamics and heat transfer to the needs
of the manufacturing and semiconductor industries.

If the heat produced during grinding is not managed properly it can lead to
thermal damage such as tensile residual stresses, discoloration, softening, re-
hardening, and cracks. Coherent (laminar) jets provide coolant fluid delivery
for maximized lubrication at the contact zone critical to defect-free grinding
at high material remove rates. Turbulent jet spread does not allow the coolant
jet to effectively breach the high-speed air boundary layer - created by
entrainment of air along the surface of rapidly rotating grinding wheel - and
gain access to the hot wheel-to-workpiece interface. It is unknown to what
degree sprayed coolant is delivered to the grinding zone. The spray particle and
spray droplet size analyzer will enable improved understanding of the laminar to
turbulent transition of a fluid jet under various working conditions. Numerical
modeling of the disintegration and transition to turbulence of coherent coolant
jets represents challenges that will be overcome using the instrument to verify
numerical model of jet break-up. The ability to accurately model coolant jet
coherence is a potential game changer in the field of metalworking. To validate
the numerical model, the performance of manufactured nozzles will be studied
experimentally using the instrument. Also, the presence of particles in the
coolant causes contamination of the nozzle that affects the jet disintegration.
The evaluation of jet coherence together with quantification of particles in the
jet will assist in prediction of need for replacement of the nozzle. Selection
of cooling jet parameters to ensure that the jet is coherent will be achieved by
studying jet break-up using the acquired instrument.

This project is jointly funded by the Major Instrumentation Research Program
(MRI) and the Advanced Manufacturing Program (AM) in the division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.