* 2333916
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 5th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy, and Security in Intelligent Systems and Applications (IEEE TPS 2023)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Amirreza Masoumzadeh, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

The 5th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in
Intelligent Systems, and Applications (IEEE TPS 2023) is an international
multidisciplinary forum for presentation of state-of-the art innovations, and
discussion among academic/industry researchers, policy makers, and practitioners
on issues related to trust, privacy, and security in emerging smart and
intelligent systems and applications. It will be held in Atlanta, on November
1-3, 2023 and is co-located with the 9th IEEE Conference on Collaboration and
Internet Computing (IEEE CIC 2023), and the 5th International Conference on
Cognitive Machine Intelligence (IEEE CogMI 2023).

This award supports students to attend IEEE TPS 2023 (and also have access to
co-located conferences, IEEE CogMI 2023 and IEEE CIC 2023). The travel awards
benefit primarily students from underrepresented groups and those who are in
early stages of their research. Participating students are (1) exposed to
research problems discussed by established researchers, (2) have the opportunity
to interact and network with other researchers, and 3) benefit from a special
student mentoring session where highly successful researchers, or role models in
the field, will provide mentoring guidance to the supported students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.