* 2333919
* Conference: Special Session on Language Technology at the 2024 Algonquian Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Douglas Whalen, Endangered Language Fund, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 40,467.00

This award supports a special session on language technology in conjunction with
the 56th Algonquian Conference. The session features speakers on using
information technology to advance the study of endangered languages, providing
insight into how technology, especially concerning archives, is making the
analysis of language faster and more complete, especially for under-resourced
languages. The session is important to fostering scientific collaboration
between academic linguists and tribes that are in need of understanding the
inner workings of their heritage languages. The ability to make better use of
archives enhances the ability of Indigenous and non-Indigenous scholars alike to
gain more insights about Native American languages and to advance language
revitalization.

There were more than 300 languages spoken in North America at the time of
European contact. There are perhaps 50 language families that can be recognized
for those languages, including the Algonquian family. All the families have
different traits, but one consistent feature is the use of complex morphology
and a greater importance of verbs than nouns compared to many other languages.
These typological characteristics are very different from English and other
languages that have been the subject of most work on language technology. Many
recent advances in speech technology are therefore ill-equipped to address
Native American languages. In addition, the amount of language material
available in Native American languages is usually too restricted for the most
common language tools. This session addresses these problems by presenting tools
and techniques that scientists and community members can use to get access to
archival material and to optimize how it is used. Although the Algonquian
Conference is naturally centered on languages from that family, the tools and
techniques presented at this special session are general to any language. This
award is made as part of a funding partnership between the National Science
Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities for the NSF Dynamic
Language Infrastructure – NEH Documenting Endangered Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.