* 2333726
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: The Water-Energy Nexus Open Knowledge Network (WEN-OKN)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Eric Welch, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,472,016.00

The overarching aim of this NSF Proto-Open Knowledge Network (Proto-OKN) Theme 1
OKN Use Case project is to develop a Water-Energy Nexus Open Knowledge Network
(WEN-OKN) that will achieve two primary tasks: firstly, it will interconnect
currently siloed water-energy data by creating a densely interconnected
knowledge graph (KG); secondly, it will aid in recognizing and dealing with the
complex interconnections within the water-energy nexus, particularly those
currently unexplored, which can potentially trigger cascading failures. WEN-OKN
will pave the way to an integrated, systems-based approach to manage the water-
energy nexus nationally. WEN-OKN will connect datasets sourced from a host of
federal agencies, such as the United States Geological Survey (USGS), National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Department of Energy (DOE),
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), Department of Transportation (DOT), National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE). Simultaneously, it will encourage connectivity both
internally and externally, through the facilitation of data sharing across and
within agencies. Once successful, WEN-OKN will become a vital part of the
National data infrastructure, laying a strong foundation for analytical studies
and sustainable management of U.S. water and energy resources and
infrastructure. It will play a crucial role in both immediate disaster response
and mitigation, and future planning scenarios. By granting open access to high-
quality, integrated data, WEN-OKN will facilitate decisive actions at the water-
energy nexus and enable targeted responses to climate threats. WEN-OKN fosters a
collaborative environment for various stakeholders to co-create a public
solutions-oriented tool, paving the way for an ethically driven socio-technical
approach to decision-making at the water-energy nexus.

This project's intellectual merit lies in its capacity to meaningfully connect
water and energy data across multiple non-interoperable sectors through WEN-OKN,
facilitating inquiries at the water-energy nexus. With diverse input from
federal and state governments, industry professionals, experts and specialists,
the WEN-OKN addresses the convergent, big data challenge of managing the water-
energy nexus, offering flexibility and extensibility over time. This open
knowledge network ensures data and knowledge are Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR), enabling stakeholders from various domains
to contribute, share, and access information. The project is expected to enhance
water and energy resilience, reduce future climate and land use threats, and
promote inter- and intra-agency collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.