* 2333370
* EAGER: Ocean Circulation in the Amundsen Sea Embayment over the 20th Century
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 30,000.00

The glaciers in the Amundsen Sea Embayment of West Antarctica, such as Thwaites
and Pine Island Glaciers, are rapidly retreating and contributing to sea level
rise. There is evidence that the current stage of retreat began in the mid-20th
century before the start of the observational record, making it difficult to
understand the cause of glacier change. While modeling studies suggest that
anthropogenic forcing starting in the early 1900s causing a trend toward
stronger westerly conditions and consequently warmer ocean conditions near
glaciers, new proxy-based reconstructions of winds since the early 1900s provide
robust evidence that wind trends in this region were likely easterly instead of
westerly. This project will leverage ocean models to address whether a 20th
century easterly wind trend could lead to warmer ocean conditions near glaciers
in the Amundsen Sea, improving our understanding of projections of sea level
rise due to Antarctic ice mass loss.

This project will generate the first data-constrained hindcast simulation of
20th century ocean conditions in the Amundsen Sea Embayment, using proxy-based
atmospheric reconstructions and a high-resolution ocean model which has been
validated against past observations. The project will downscale annual mean
surface temperature, sea level pressure, and surface zonal wind anomalies to
produce daily resolved datasets, simulating realistic ocean states by adding
sub-annual variability from reanalyses to each of the reconstructed states.
These downscaled paleoclimate reconstructions will provide forcing for ensembles
of ocean simulations using a regional domain of the MITgcm that includes dynamic
sea ice and thermodynamic ice shelf representation. Four sets of simulations are
targeted, first to verify the efficacy of using downscaled proxy-reconstructed
atmospheric fields as model forcing, then to investigate the causes of the
anomalous westerly wind event of the 1940s, and finally to explore the impact of
20th century atmospheric trends on ocean conditions. This project will provide
key new insight into the varied pathways that link rising greenhouse gas
concentrations to glacier retreat in West Antarctica.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.