* 2333728
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: BioBricks-OKG An Open Knowledge Graph For Cheminformatics And Chemical Safety
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Thomas Luechtefeld, INSILICA, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,454,200.00

This NSF Proto-Open Knowledge Network Theme 1 project aims to enhance the open-
source BioBricks system, transforming it into an effective knowledge graph
backend to facilitate access to crucial chemical health and safety data,
enabling the use of AI in developing new chemical testing and regulation
approaches. Currently, the data ecosystem that spans health informatics,
toxicology, and cheminformatics comprises numerous disjointed databases with
inconsistent availability. It is challenging to access, process, and integrate
data from various sources for robust model construction. The BioBricks Open
Knowledge Graph (BioBricks-OKG) is designed to address this issue by semi-
automating the harmonization of tabular data into a unified knowledge graph.
This will enhance data sharing between databases through ontology alignment
methodologies. Furthermore, BioBricks-OKG aims to scale these techniques to over
60 public health and cheminformatics databases, significantly improving data
harmonization and accessibility. The BioBricks-OKG will greatly benefit the
public health, medical, and life science fields by fostering the integration of
data science and machine learning. Once operational, clinics, pharmaceutical
companies, regulatory agencies, and bioinformatics Contract Research
Organizations (CROs) can utilize the BioBricks-OKG knowledge graph for
intelligent data queries, obviating the need for complex data repository
navigation or redundant data extraction pipelines.

The project leverages the BioBricks-AI framework and the project team's
experience in building toxicology-focused knowledge graphs. The BioBricks-AI
framework offers open-source repositories that transform health informatics
databases into a distributable, serialized format for scalable data analysis.
The work involves streamlining BioBricks-AI repositories and public health
databases into a vast graph database. This database will link chemicals, their
genetic, molecular, and cellular disruptions, health hazards, adverse outcome
pathways, testing methods, and other entities relevant to chemical safety and
regulation. The National Toxicology Program's Interagency Center for the
Evaluation of Alternative Toxicological Methods (NICEATM) will use the resulting
BioBricks-OKG for designing, collecting information, and evaluating "New
Approach Methodology" (NAM) test guidelines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.