* 2333144
* Participant Support for the 23rd American Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy (ACCGE-23); Tucson, Arizona; 13-18 August 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 7,000.00

This grant provides participant support for attendees of the 23rd American
Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy (ACCGE-23) to be held in Tucson,
Arizona, 13-18 August 2023. The conference focuses on new research and
development activities in bulk single crystal and epitaxial thin film growth.
Students and faculty present their latest research results on crystal growth and
epitaxy through oral and poster sessions. The conference impacts the advanced
manufacturing and broader engineering communities. Priority is given to student
and young faculty participants who are women or who come from underrepresented
minority groups. This approach promotes diverse participation at the conference,
in the short term, and in STEM fields, in the long term. This award benefits the
nation through the education of a skilled and diverse manufacturing workforce,
which is better prepared to provide transformative solutions to the challenges
in their chosen fields. The conference plays an important role in supporting and
sustaining the important field of crystal growth and epitaxy, which is an
important component of semiconductor and microelectronics research. This
conference is timely because of renewed interest in the revitalization of
microelectronics and semiconductor manufacturing in the US.

This participant support is expected to benefit the students' professional,
scientific, and technical development. Attendance at the conference gives the
students and faculty a broader view of crystal growth and thin film epitaxy, its
fundamentals, advanced manufacturing, advanced characterization, and
applications. Symposium topics include fundamentals of materials synthesis,
crystal structure analysis, crystal growth techniques and methods, high
throughput manufacturing, process modeling, monitoring and control, and
specialized topics, such as 2D nanomaterials, ceramics, ferroelectrics, and
microfluidic processing. The conference is an opportunity for participants to
showcase their scientific accomplishments, interact with peers and colleagues in
academia, government labs and industry and extend their network within the broad
materials processing and advanced manufacturing communities. Attendees will
learn about state-of-the-art research in their technical areas via access to
several technical and professional development talks by leading domestic and
international speakers. Students and young faculty enhance their communication
skills through oral and poster presentations and in-depth discussions of their
work with peers in their technical areas. This interactive experience
significantly broadens student education, increases their enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaints them with expectations for scientific careers, and
exposes them to new approaches for innovative research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.