* 2333603
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: The next crisis for coral reefs is how to study vanishing coral species; AUVs equipped with AI may be the only tool for the job
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 12/31/2025
* USD 99,992.00

The coral reef crisis is characterized by global declines in the abundance of
corals and fishes, and a rise in the abundance of macroalgae. This project
assesses the abundance and extinction risk of two rare coral species using
artificial intelligence (AI)-powered underwater robots in autonomous
deployments. This novel technology allows quantification of corals that occur at
such low population densities that human divers cannot spend long enough
underwater to find them, and is applicable to other fields of research,
transforming the study of rare animals. The project also builds an academic
bridge between a Hispanic Serving 4-year university and a marine research
institution, provides cross-training for two graduate students and an early-
career research engineer in coral ecology and underwater robotics, and supports
robotics-themed training for local high school students.

Coral reefs have become depleted of corals, and many species are entering a
period of rarity that might be a prelude to extinction. Traditional ecological
tools are inadequate to enumerate these corals, which is the first step in
quantifying the risk of extinction and the prospects for recovery. This project
trains an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) with artificial intelligence (AI)
to search for rare corals and challenges it in a test bed created by 37 y of
data from coral reefs where iconic pillar and brain corals are being pushed to
extinction. The project team is testing two hypotheses: (1) recent events have
catalyzed a new decline in abundance of corals, and (2) demographic trajectories
of rare corals will end in extinction. This novel technology is applicable to
other ecosystems, transforming the study of rare organisms.

This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML
advancement in the geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.