* 2333959
* CAREER: Equity Focused Elementary Mathematics:  Creating Virtual Mathematics Communities in Rural Georgia
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Susan Cannon, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2028
* USD 346,897.00

Access to high quality STEM education is highly variable depending on where one
lives. In addition, early career teachers need support during their first years
of teaching to be successful and help them stay in the profession. This project
aims to provide in-service and beginning elementary school teachers increased
opportunities to refine their mathematics teaching to support minoritized youth
in racially diverse rural communities in Georgia that have less access to
elementary mathematics specialists. This project follows and supports both
beginning teachers (BTs) and elementary mathematics coaches (EMCs) over 5 years
to develop and refine their mathematics teaching and coaching, respectively,
using equity-based tools to guide reflection and conversations about both the
BTs’ instructional practices and the EMCs’ coaching practices. The tools provide
data to uncover biases and aspirational pedagogical targets for equitable
discourse and task design. The goals of the project include: a) establishing a
virtual distance learning community to support equity focused elementary
mathematics coaches across rural counties in Georgia, b) developing and refining
a fully online elementary mathematics and coaching graduate coursework sequence
to prepare EMCs, and c) implementing an innovative model of university
supervision and induction for BTs.

Over the 5-year period, ten EMCs will engage in coursework, and be supported
through a virtual community to develop elementary mathematics teaching and
learning in their schools and districts. The coaches will support at least ten
beginning teachers to develop equitable mathematics learning communities as they
enter the field during their first years of teaching. This approach is important
because formalized induction support is rare in most districts in Georgia, and
teachers are leaving the field in record numbers because they feel unprepared.
Data sources will include videos of teaching episodes, teacher reflections,
narrative interviews, and document analysis. The study will employ case study
and narrative methodologies in analyzing the varied and rich data collected with
BTs and EMCs. The project’s goal of preparing and supporting EMCs has potential
to dramatically shift the professional development of BTs, and to re-
professionalize teacher education and provide more equitable mathematics
education for all students. This proposed study could serve as a model to build
additional networks of STEM coaches across rural areas.

The award is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.