* 2333334
* mCDR 2023: Multiscale observing system simulation experiments for iron fertilization in the Southern Ocean, Equatorial Pacific, and Northeast Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dennis McGillicuddy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2026
* USD 482,474.00

In order to combat the expected impacts of climate change, active removal of
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is needed in addition to emissions
reductions. There is a growing consensus that at least some of society’s needs
for carbon dioxide removal (CDR) will have to come from the ocean. Iron
fertilization of natural phytoplankton populations is among the more promising
means for ocean-based CDR, yet key questions remain, including: How effective is
it? How long will the carbon be sequestered? How can we measure it? What are the
intended and unintended consequences to marine ecosystems? Past ocean iron
fertilization experiments have provided important information about short-term
responses, but most studies were not long or large enough to measure an increase
in carbon flux to the deep sea. To address the questions needed to design larger
and longer field trials, this project will use ocean models to run Observing
System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs) in three key regions of the ocean that are
seen as likely targets for iron fertilization: the Southern Ocean, the
Equatorial Pacific, and the Subarctic Pacific. Broader impacts include benefits
to society via improved understanding of key physical and biological processes
relevant to earth’s climate, and support of students in the research. This
project is being jointly supported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, through the National Oceanographic Partnership Program.

The OSSEs will be based on two state-of-the-art global ocean biogeochemical
models with eddying (0.1-0.125°) resolution: the NCAR Community Earth System
Model with the Marine Biogeochemistry Library (CESM-MARBL) and the GFDL Modular
Ocean Model 6 with the Carbon, Ocean Biogeochemistry and Lower Trophics model
(MOM6-COBALT). High resolution nested Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS)
models will be embedded within both global models to provide realistic
representation of the energetic eddies and fronts characteristic of the three
regions of interest. This “ensemble” of two parent models will allow the team to
assess the sensitivity of the results to the underlying biogeochemical
formulation. Far-field effects of the limited-area iron fertilization
experiments will be assessed with analogous limited-area fertilization
experiments in the global models. Additional runs of the global models with
fertilization over large areas of the target HNLC regions will address the
efficacy of iron enrichment at scale, facilitating OSSEs for a global observing
network. These global ocean-only simulations run for as long as practical (30
years). To address the long-term efficacy and effects of regional iron
fertilization at the scale of gigatons of carbon per year, fully coupled earth
system models (ESM4 at GFDL and CESM2 at NCAR) will be run for 100 years at
coarse resolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.