* 2333103
* Research Infrastructure: RCN: A Comprehensive Toolkit for Interdisciplinary Team Science,  &amp; its Context-Dependent Application
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Ruth Varner, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,199,957.00

Interdisciplinary Team Science is needed to address numerous challenges facing
humanity, from pandemics, to the transformation of the energy sector, to the
largest challenge our species has ever faced, that of climate change. Since
2020, the National Science Foundation has invested in a collection of large-team
Biology Integration Institutes to advance innovation in priority areas across
the biological sciences, with 13 currently funded Institutes. This collection of
teams presents a powerful opportunity for advancement, in addition to that from
their science: the collection and organization of the Interdisciplinary Team
Science tools they have developed or applied, and an evaluation for the context-
dependency of their application - i.e. how host organization (e.g. university
size, Carnegie Classification System, populations served) and team
characteristics (e.g. size, governance structures, career stage, demography)
influence teams’ prioritized needs for different kinds of tools. In this
Research Coordination Network, the Biology Integration Institutes will work
together to pool resources, evaluate the context-dependency of use, and
disseminate the collected Toolkit for Interdisciplinary Team Science. This will
promote scientific progress across a range of areas where large-team integration
is essential.

Technical Description: This Research Coordination Network (RCN) unites the
Biology Integration Institute (BII) program members to share knowledge, tools
and perspectives around interdisciplinary teaming, in a single organized
Toolkit, spanning elements from Governance Plans to Social Media Best Practices.
It also evaluates how the value to teams of these tools varies based on
organizational and team context, across a range of axes (e.g. type of
university). Lastly, it disseminates the Toolkit and results of the context-
dependency analysis, through a broad network of scientific teams and
communities. The Merit of the proposed RCN project is in leveraging the
opportunity of the NSF BII Program to harvest the Interdisciplinary Team
resources that hundreds of scientists across these organizations have developed
or assembled, and ‘field tested’. By then evaluating the relative usefulness and
importance of tools across teams, and expanding the evaluation to other large
teams that the RCN’s Team Scientists have worked with, the RCN will provide
qualitative insights into context-dependency of tool usage, which is a key
knowledge gap among team science practitioners. The impacts of the proposed work
are to advance teaming across a range of communities and democratize the
knowledge of teaming resources, which can present a significant impediment to
broadened participation in proposing and leading large science teams. A range of
early-career researchers will also be directly involved in implementation of
this RCN, and associated training.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.