* 2333819
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: Connecting Biomedical information on Earth and in Space via the SPOKE knowledge graph
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sergio Baranzini, University of California-San Francisco
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,168.00

This project aims to link the Scalable Precision Medicine Open Knowledge Engine
(SPOKE) knowledge graph with NASA’s GeneLab platform and incorporate social
determinants of health (SDOH) data into SPOKE. SPOKE includes 35 million nodes
and 70 million edges gathered from 43 databases and structured on 11 ontologies.
SPOKE will expand to include the fields of space biology and medicine,
facilitating a two-way translation of knowledge and the identification of
valuable analogues to support the advancement of human multiplanetary
colonization. SPOKE's integration with GeneLab and SDOH data provides
comprehensive analysis of extensive datasets, offering researchers unparalleled
access to multispecies biological information. This approach allows
identification of common patterns, exploration of new gene-drug interactions,
and study of space-related stress effects on gene expression and molecular
pathways. It will advance our understanding of space biology and enrich genetics
and genomics research more broadly.

The integration of GeneLab experimental data involves creating a computational
model to understand challenges astronauts face in space. This involves using
GeneLab's omics data and SPOKE's ability to connect data across space and time
to develop effective countermeasures. The project also involves understanding
and addressing SDOH in managing medical conditions. By analyzing de-identified
Electronic Health Record data, researchers can design interventions to promote
crew well-being during long space travel and develop equitable healthcare
systems for space missions. The project will enhance our understanding of health
inequalities, promote diversity, equity, and inclusion within the scientific
community, and provide educational opportunities, encouraging STEM careers. The
project will also emphasize ethical considerations and privacy protection, while
promoting collaboration and accelerating scientific progress for a larger
societal impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.