* 2333039
* Increasing Community College Participation in the Marine Advanced Technology Education's Remotely Operated Vehicle Competition
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Jill Zande, MARINE TECHNOLOGY SOCIETY, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 751,180.00

The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center created a global remotely
operated vehicle (ROV) competition in partnership with the Marine Technology.
This competition challenges students to build underwater robots to tackle tasks
based on the real world situations. Through this work, students develop and
apply a range of technical, scientific, and workplace skills. These skills among
the most in demand by employers today, and include creativity, adaptability,
teamwork, and communication. Community college students are currently
underrepresented in MATE ROV Competitions. This project at Monterey Peninsula
College in Monterey California, aims to increase the number of community college
students who participate in the MATE ROV competition. It is expected that this
participation will increase the number of community college students who have
the scientific and workplace skills needed to enter and thrive in the STEM
technician workforce, a critical sector for the nation’s economy and security.

The overarching goal of the project is to increase the number of community
colleges that participate in the MATE ROV Competition. To accomplish this goal,
the project will: 1) identify and recruit community colleges to participate in
the competition; 2) use experienced community college faculty ROV team advisors
to serve as mentors; 3) provide resources and other support to community college
faculty preparing for the competition; 4) use MATE’s Evaluate-Compete
methodology as a mentoring and feedback vehicle for competition teams and as a
tool to recruit new community colleges; 5) enhance the resources in the MATE
Regional Coordinators’ Toolkit to assist coordinators in recruiting and
supporting participation in competitions; and 6) identify and disseminate
examples for sustaining long-term participation in the competition that could be
applicable to other undergraduate research experiences. This project leverages
the experiences and best practices from other successful NSF-funded projects
including the MATE Center and ITEST Scale-Up. In addition, the project will use
an online undergraduate research evaluation instrument also supported by NSF,
EvaluateUR, to measure the efficacy and impact of the project activities. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.