* 2333987
* EAGER: Edible Mechanical Metamaterials via 3D Printing for Enhanced Food Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Daniel Preston, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 75,000.00

Printing of food has the potential to revolutionize how food is processed and
experienced, offering reduced environmental impact and improved health benefits.
Despite promising future advances and consumer demand, however, existing food
3D-printing research is often limited to empirical testing of materials and
printing techniques without an underlying understanding of food mechanics. This
EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) research project aims to
determine the role of structure on the mechanical properties of food, ultimately
leading to edible mechanical metamaterials with enhanced and tunable food
properties not achievable via conventional methods. The success of this project
will create opportunities to explore healthier, more sustainable, and lower-cost
food products. Exacerbated by the growing climate crisis and increasing global
population, food insecurity and hunger are on the rise, with 3.1 billion people
- 40 percent of the world’s population - unable to afford a healthy diet. An
understanding of food mechanics will allow feasible scale-up and democratization
of innovative food solutions for global and societal health challenges,
including obesity, malnutrition, and diabetes, by tailoring for texture, taste,
and nutrition. This work will also promote manufacturing methods that reduce
food waste; ultimately, efficient processing and design of food will play a
significant role in mitigating the effects of the climate crisis, with
implications for human health. In terms of educational broader impacts, the
funding will contribute to training of students at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels.

The objective of this research is to develop structure-property correlations for
printable, edible food (technically mechanical metamaterials) with tailored
structural properties that are not achievable via conventional methods. Because
mastication involves different mechanical processes such as biting, chewing, and
swallowing, the characterization and quantification of the relation between food
and its structure at the micro- and macroscale will advance the field’s
understanding of food quality and perception. A computational modeling framework
accounting for these relationships would allow for a systematic approach in
designing and validating 3D-printed food structures. This research will be
executed in three concurrent thrusts. First, the microstructural mechanics of
3D-printed food structures will be characterized. Second, the resulting
macrostructural mechanics will be evaluated. Finally, mechanics-based models for
design and optimization of 3D-printed “meta-foods” will be developed. The
multiscale modeling and understanding of food’s intricate, multicomponent nature
would be translatable to other complex materials and applications, especially in
the fields of computational biology and biomechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.