* 2333230
* CAREER: Understanding and Harnessing Host-derived Small RNAs Against Opportunistic Pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jiahe Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2028
* USD 499,872.00

Complex communities of microbes colonize all living creatures. These communities
comprise a microbiome. Communication between the host and various microbiomes
help to maintain human health. Disrupting this communication can lead to
infection and disease. Recently, studies have implicated small RNA molecules
(sRNA) as key communication molecules. Understanding how different types of
sRNAs regulate pathogens in oral and respiratory systems is the focus of this
project. The research program will be integrated with an education and outreach
plan. These efforts will prepare under-represented high-school students and
undergraduates to pursue careers in STEM. They will also integrate authentic
hands-on experiments into undergraduate courses and develop low-cost biology
kits and virtual teaching methods to reach students in remote areas.

This project will address the knowledge gap in understanding the roles played by
host-derived extracellular sRNAs in host-microbiota interactions. There is a
lack of enabling methodologies to unlock the functions of host sRNAs largely due
to three limitations. First, native sRNAs are highly susceptible to degradation.
Second, it is difficult to distinguish the origins of short sRNA fragments
between host and bacteria. Third, host sRNAs are present inside bacteria at very
low levels. The long-term project goal is to achieve in-depth understanding of
host-derived sRNAs as a new class of defense molecules targeting opportunistic
pathogens, and, furthermore, to repurpose host sRNAs as potential antimicrobial
agents. To achieve this goal, this project will (1) optimize sRNA stability and
functions by incorporating chemically modified nucleotides and define structure-
function relationships, (2) employ structural modeling, bacterial genetics, and
biochemical assays to dissect how host sRNAs are internalized by oral and airway
opportunistic bacteria, and (3) develop a powerful methodology to uncover
hitherto unknown host sRNAs with antimicrobial activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.