* 2333675
* RAPID: Empowering Future Teachers with Generative AI Education: Understanding Applications, Risks, and Limits
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Aman Yadav, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,996.00

Generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools have the potential to reshape
education and may change teaching practices in K-12. As such, teachers must
prepare students to have the necessary skills that will allow them to learn
about these tools and use them productively for their lives and education. This
project will pilot a curriculum with new educational methods in preparing pre-
service teachers in understanding the fundamentals of generative AI and its
potential teaching applications. This includes helping them develop the critical
thinking skills to effectively judge generative AI's limitations and affordances
in relation to classroom implementation. This proposal was received in response
to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial
Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097), and
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

The project will examine the impact of the piloting curriculum on developing
pre-service teachers' competencies including knowledge, skills, and attitudes in
using generative AI. The research will be guided by two research questions: 1)
How does the implementation of the curriculum impact pre-service teachers'
knowledge and attitudes to use generative AI tools to support classroom
instruction?; 2) What role do pre-service teachers see for generative AI tools
in supporting teaching and learning, including its limitations and risks? Using
a mixed-methods approach, researchers will investigate whether and how pre-
service teachers leverage generative AI tools in their own learning and
preparation for future teaching. At the conclusion of the project, research
findings and open-source curriculum materials will be widely disseminated for
other teacher education faculty to adapt for their own coursework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.