* 2333611
* EAGER: Nonintrusive Engagement and Posture Detection in Virtual Classroom Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Virtual classes and other online engagements continue to remain popular in the
post-pandemic world because of their convenience and time-saving potential.
Unfortunately, a major drawback of virtual attendance is the difficulty in
assessing participant engagement, and hence, difficulty in tailoring content
delivery and addressing specific participant issues. The purpose of this EAGER
project is to explore whether nonintrusive imaging and audio-based monitoring
can reliably gauge physical and physiological parameters relevant to engagement
assessment. Such an assessment can be done privately for each participant and
can form the basis for discreet feedback, both to the participant and the
teacher/leader. This involves challenges associated with the accurate, online
analysis of various measures, such as facial expressions, eye gaze, posture,
body movements, and physiological attributes (e.g., heart rate, breathing rate).
Further challenges include addressing individual variabilities and inherent
“noise” (i.e., changes in physical and physiological measures unrelated to the
online participation). Thus, the key intellectual merit of the project is in
exploring novel combinations of deep learning and logic reasoning-based methods
for estimating and combining (fusing) these measures to establish how accurately
and consistently remote monitoring can be used to assess engagement and help
improve virtual learning environments.

The key broader impact of the project lies in its potential to make online
learning environments richer and more productive, perhaps even exceeding the
limits of direct human perception in nonvirtual settings, while preserving the
inherent advantages of virtual participation. If successful, the explored
methods have the potential to transform the dynamics of teacher-student/leader-
participant interactions in virtual learning/meeting environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.