* 2333563
* EAGER: Toward a Network-Based Framework for Analysis and Control of Inverter-Dominated Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Di Wu, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 249,980.00

The growing integration of renewable energy into the power grid via power
electronic inverters has fundamentally changed grid dynamics, and caused
emerging issues of sub-synchronous oscillations. This NSF EAGER project aims to
understand how interconnected inverters collectively cause these oscillations,
and how to design control strategies to mitigate them. The project will bring
transformative changes to oscillation analyses and control by leveraging the
structural properties of the underlying power network, which are radically
different from the existing traditional methods. This will be achieved by
developing a novel network-based framework for analysis and control of sub-
synchronous oscillations. The intellectual merits of the project include new
insights that will complement those obtained from current studies to provide a
deeper understanding and a more complete picture of the sub-synchronous
oscillation mechanism, as well as novel network-based control strategies that
will help grid planners and operators in addressing this problem. The broader
impacts of the project include contributing to the increasing adoption of
renewable energy, which is essential for evolving towards a sustainable economy
and society, and fostering multidisciplinary education and dissemination of
results to academia and industry.

The increasing penetration of inverter-based resources (IBRs) has resulted in
sub-synchronous oscillation (SSO) events in electric power systems, jeopardizing
grid stability and reliability. The SSO is driven by the fast and complex
control dynamics of inverters. It is challenging to understand the SSO mechanism
and develop mitigation solutions in a large-scale power grid with many
heterogenous IBRs due to the complex interaction between these IBRs. This NSF
project will design a network-based framework for SSO analysis and control. This
framework will transform a large-scale power system with many heterogenous IBRs
into a set of simple subsystems for interpreting SSO mechanism and developing
mitigation strategies from the perspective of power network structure. This
project will advance the state of fundamental knowledge on understanding the SSO
mechanism and designing mitigation strategies to support the reliable
integration of large-scale renewable resources in the national grid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.