* 2333500
* I-Corps: Cyber Tactile Perception Platform for Manufacturing Robotics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Wojciech Matusik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of tactile sensing technologies for commercial applications in
healthcare, workplace safety, and manufacturing. The proposed technology is
designed to enable remote capture of information concerning activity and health
risks of the wearer, e.g., remote screening of neuromuscular disorders leading
to falls among older adults. Addressing this issue is vital as falls result in
severe injuries, impacting independence and incurring substantial medical costs
for insurers. In addition, the proposed technology may be used as a system
facilitating remote monitoring and reporting of workplace injuries. Such a
system may enhance workplace safety measures, reduce hazards, and improve
insurance coverage pricing accuracy. There also is a potential need in
manufacturing, where tactile sensing technology may impact the production
process. By integrating tactile sensors into manufacturing systems,
manufacturers gain precise, real-time feedback on product quality and assembly
tasks. This advancement enables automation enhancement, defect detection, and
optimization of product design and assembly processes, leading to reduced
manufacturing costs and supply chain uncertainties.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of smart sensing systems used
in automatic manufacturing-compatible prototypes for high-resolution, conformal
tactile sensor arrays. These arrays employ a piezoresistive sensing mechanism to
measure forces across surfaces and seamlessly integrate them into wearable
devices and robotic skins. Additionally, deep-learning techniques capable of
extracting information from the sensor readouts have been devised. By analyzing
the data captured by the sensing array, it is possible to determine user
activity, state, and interactions with the environment. Notably, utilizing
prototype tactile gloves and deep learning, successful identification and
distinction of distinct patterns associated with human grasping have been
achieved. This tactile sensing technology also has been incorporated into
insoles, enabling the collection of data on the wearer's pose, activity, and
environmental interactions. Furthermore, tactile sensing systems have been
integrated into robot end-effectors and robotic skins that enable robots to
perceive touch and perform complex manipulation tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.