* 2333297
* Workshop on Effective Practices to Support Open Educational Documents, Technologies, and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Robin Lasey, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2024
* USD 49,833.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by convening a conference aimed
at supporting the development and maintenance of open-source educational
documents and technologies. Open-source materials are not only made freely
available to any potential user, but can also be modified to fit new users'
needs. Even when creators share open-source content, new users can encounter
unintended challenges associated with hosting technologies for materials,
unclear or incomplete documentation, or other factors. This project will bring
together 24 professionals for a hybrid conference centered on the effective
development and sharing of open materials and outcomes created through STEM
education research and development efforts. Over three days, content creators
and technology experts will undergo training on open source platforms, discuss
effective practices for managing user communities, and explore technologies for
authoring open source products. STEM education researchers will participate in
those discussions and will also explore how to best conduct learning experiments
and other studies using open educational resources, such as digital textbooks.

Professional development opportunities are relatively rare for scholars engaged
in the development of novel open educational technologies that support STEM
education research. This project speaks directly to that need. The conference
will be designed to engage three groups of participants: document authors,
technology developers, and researchers. Members of each group will work together
on questions and challenges, and ample opportunities for discussion between
participant groups will be provided to strengthen ongoing projects and seed
future collaborations. Participants will be recruited through professional
societies, conferences, and existing open-source ecosystems with an emphasis on
identifying a breadth of attendees representing diverse experiences and
expertise. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.