* 2333452
* EAGER: Low-Temperature Plasmas for Synthesis of Diamond Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2024,07/31/2026
* Rebecca Anthony, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 200,000.00

While diamonds are prized as gemstones, few realize the immense technological
potential that diamond offers for optoelectronic devices. Diamond is a wide-
bandgap semiconductor with extraordinarily high thermal conductivity, making it
a material of choice for a range of applications including quantum computing,
implantable biomedical devices, and high-voltage electronics – applications
beyond the traditional cutting bit uses of industrial diamonds. When diamond is
made in nanoparticle form, its capabilities increase because of size-induced
changes to properties and the ease of incorporating nanoparticles into thin film
applications. The challenge is that synthesizing diamond nanoparticles with high
quality and in a scalable manner is difficult, and there are many scientific
knowledge gaps on how diamond nanoparticles are created. Carbon-carbon bonds can
form either graphite or diamond, and control over which bond is generated in
reactive processes remains an open problem. This research plan intends to expand
on exciting early results indicating that diamond nanoparticles can be formed in
low-temperature plasma (LTP) reactors, in an approach that promises new
understanding of how diamond can be generated with high quality and high yield.
The expected results of this research are the discovery of new reaction pathways
to control diamond growth in flow-through LTPs with the capability to select
bond formation during the reaction. If successful, this work will enable the
creation of diamond nanoparticles for a variety of critical applications, as
well as generate new knowledge around bond formation in LTPs for other
semiconductor nanomaterials. The proposed research will also be used in
conjunction with outreach events to encourage participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering.

Low-temperature plasma (LTP) synthesis of nanoparticles has gained growing
attention for the ability of these reactors to produce high-quality and tunable-
property nanoparticles in a scalable manner. The fundamental challenge in LTP
synthesis of nanoparticles is a gap in knowledge about how reactor parameters
directly influence nanoparticle growth. This challenge is amplified in the
context of the carbon system, which features both sp2 and sp3 hybridization that
result in dramatically different carbon-based materials – namely,
graphene/graphite and diamond. In this work, based on promising preliminary
results, selective bond hybridization in radiofrequency and microwave LTP
reactors via control over plasma and reactor parameters will be investigated for
synthesis of diamond nanoparticles. Focusing on synthesis of nanoparticles
allows for added functional tunability because of size-dependent properties. LTP
reactors are unique in that they offer control over a variety of nanocrystal
properties, including size, surface functionality, and doping together with
controlled deposition using inertial impaction, diffusion, or even direct-write
deposition into patterns. This research will produce a map between reactor
operating parameters and resulting nanoparticle properties, including
discovering the conditions that are required for selected bond hybridization
during the reaction. The proposed work will build a fundamental picture of how
nanocrystal nucleation and growth occur, filling a critical gap in understanding
about the exact energetic and growth condition requirements for diamond
synthesis, as compared to graphite synthesis, in LTP reactors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.