* 2333163
* Conference: GEOSCOPR Workshop - Geospace Exploration and Observation with Scientific COllaboration in Polar Regions, towards IPY 2032
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Zhonghua Xu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports a community workshop on the Geospace Exploration and
Observation with Scientific Collaboration in Polar Regions, which will be
preparing the community to participate in the proposed International Polar Year
2032 research program. The overarching theme of the workshop is to address the
status and prospects of Geospace sciences in both the Arctic and Antarctic
regions by using these geographical areas for specific aeronomy and geospace
research projects. As observing platforms, the value of polar regions is
critical to future progress in these fields. While fundamental aspects of the
solar wind-magnetosphere coupling will be fully addressed, the workshop will
focus specifically on making progress in the field of space weather research and
hold discussions related to the solar forcing on climate change. The expanse of
the Antarctic continent provides access to some geospace regions that cannot be
reached in the Northern Hemisphere because of the Arctic Ocean presence.

This workshop will focus on the following four overarching (and international by
nature) goals: (1) Identify high level geospace/space weather research
objectives in each country’s polar program towards IPY-2032 and respective SCAR
activities; (2) Address coordination issues for available scientific resources
and respective logistics by learning what near-term plans are for each country’s
polar program (flights, traverses, ships, new deep-field instruments, observing
infrastructure, etc.); (3) Define the areas of mutual interest and new
international collaborations; and (4) Advocate for polar measurements in each
polar program and develop respective research programs/campaigns that span
multiple countries/programs. The broader impacts of this workshop provide better
perspectives for the U.S. scientists to participate in the polar observing
systems, promote international collaboration, and provide an opportunity for the
next generation of geospace scientists to interact with leaders in the field.
The workshop will provide a forum to develop a blueprint for a unified
scientific enterprise in space weather research and space climate understanding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.