* 2333469
* RAPID: Engaging High School Youth in Algorithmic Justice Through Audits of Designed and Everyday Machine Learning Applications
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Rapid developments in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
applications have led to nation-wide calls for supporting youth in the
development of artificial intelligence literacy, competencies needed to
effectively interact with and critically evaluate artificial intelligence. Most
importantly, a broader range of youths must be equipped to understand how these
technologies work, their personal and social impacts, and how they may increase
or undermine equity. There is an urgent need for research on youth's
understanding of AI in everyday contexts that permeate their daily lives, such
as interaction with voice assistants or social media applications. In this
project high school-aged youth will learn artificial intelligence and machine
learning with a focus on the concept of algorithm auditing, a method for
understanding an AI algorithm's opaque inner workings by repeatedly querying the
AI system in order to interpret its external effects and impacts. This proposal
was received in response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): "Rapidly
Accelerating Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and
Informal Settings (NSF 23-097)" and funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

Researchers will carry out a one-year study involving high school youth
designing everyday machine learning applications for their peers, and
collaboratively conducting algorithm audits with a focus on algorithm fairness,
accountability, and justice. The following research questions will be examined:
(1) What are high school youths' current experiences and understandings of
everyday machine learning applications? (2) How do high school youth design and
conduct collaborative audits of machine learning applications? And (3) How can
high school youth apply algorithm auditing approaches to applications they
encounter in their everyday lives? To answer these research questions, groups of
diverse high school youth from Philadelphia, including Black, Hispanics and
Latinos young people, will work in teams and participate in extended workshops
to design and collaboratively audit a variety of machine learning applications
with text, sound, and images. Using a combination of co-design, interviews, and
observational methods, researchers will gain insights into the feasibility of
algorithm audits by youth who are some of these systems' most common users; the
dynamics of collaborative interactions for productive end-user algorithm audits;
and youth understandings of algorithmic justice through auditing. Previous end-
user algorithm auditing research has focused only on non-expert adults. The
insights gained about youth's approaches to algorithm audits will generate new
knowledge, and also have the potential to inform other artificial intelligence
and machine learning literacy efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.