* 2333435
* RAPID: Real-time Forecasting Models for Hospitalizations of Infectious Disease in the USA
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Lauren Gardner, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

COVID-19 brought to light the extent to which infectious disease outbreaks can
result in a significant burden on the healthcare system and societies in
general. In order to support planning and decision-making efforts during periods
of high disease transmission, expected disease burden and transmission patterns
must be understood. This project will develop hospitalization forecasting models
for the United States that exploit novel, high resolution publicly available
data sets, namely waste water and genomic surveillance data, alongside more
traditional epidemiological, mobility, demographic, socioeconomic, and
behavioral data. These models will be designed to accurately assess the expected
burden on local healthcare systems for cities in the United States,
complementing the state and national level modeling frameworks that currently
exist. A diverse group of students will lead the model development and
dissemination of the results to the CDC through the COVID-19 Forecast Hub for
COVID-19 and FluSight for Influenza, further expanding upon the established
academic-government partnership. The publicly accessible submissions and
ensemble forecast produced will serve to both enhance societies general
understanding of infectious disease risk, and help improve science translation
and literacy among the general public.

The hospitalization forecasting models will utilize both mechanistic modeling
and statistical data-driven approaches that combine disparate data inputs into
meaningful predictive frameworks. This work will include the development of
novel modeling techniques to further improve predictive capabilities. The high
resolution, i.e., community and city-level, nature of the models will fill a gap
in both the literature and practice, which to-date is dominate by state and
national level forecasts. The highly local, more actionable spatial scales will
both increase the utility of our models in practice, and provide a mechanism for
local officials to distinguish harm across population groups, enabling more fair
and equitable policy guidance for decision makers. The development of novel
evaluation metrics that explicitly consider problem context will further
increase the utility of our models, and offer a new set of performance tools to
the broader modeling community. In the long term, our systems engineering
approach to this research effort will contribute to the establishment of a
robust, vetted set of tools that can be used for forecasting across a range of
variables, during both seasonal cycles of respiratory viral disease and pandemic
periods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.