* 2333180
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: A novel magnetometer network to capture the ongoing inflationary episode at Askja volcano, Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Joseph Biasi, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,632.00

Millions of people in the United States and around the world live in areas with
high volcanic risk. These risks can be better understood and also lessened with
continuous, high-quality monitoring of volcanoes for any changes in activity or
signs of imminent eruption. But these tools are logistically difficult to put in
place and are expensive to maintain. This team will test if magnetic
measurements can provide useful information about volcanic activity before
eruption. They will also test whether the instruments needed can be built with
inexpensive components. If magnetic measurements prove to be a reasonable
alternative to more expensive techniques, then the capacity of civil defense
authorities to prepare for volcanic eruptions will be greatly improved. The data
can also be used to inform where other instruments should be placed, increasing
the effectiveness of existing instrument networks. In addition to benefiting the
United States, the low-cost nature of this technique could benefit other nations
with high volcanic risk (Philippines, Mexico, etc.). The success of this project
could bring high-quality volcanic risk-mitigation to all. All data collected as
part of this project will be made publicly available as soon as possible.

Askja volcano—situated in Iceland’s Northern Volcanic Zone—last erupted in 1961,
with a 0.7 km-long fissure opening and releasing 500 m-high lava fountains. In
the intervening decades, the caldera-forming volcano has continued to deflate at
a decaying rate. In August 2021, this trend rapidly reversed and Askja began to
reinflate, with over 0.5 m of uplift observed at the center of inflation.
Geodetic modeling of the available InSAR and GNSS positioning data has revealed
a shallow sill-like magmatic source can explain the observed deformation, but
the exact origin of the magma remains unclear. Modeling of a number of recent
eruptions has shown that changes in the subsurface distribution of magma can
produce a measurable change in the local magnetic field at the surface, but
there are few to no datasets that capture such events in-situ making the
modeling approach difficult to validate. In this project, a campaign network of
passive magnetometers will be installed in and around Askja to capture the
changes in the local magnetic field due to the continued influx of magma into
the shallow crust. With these data reearchers will establish the value of such
networks in volcanic systems, while also providing additional constraints for
models that combine concurrent gravity surveys and continuous GNSS positioning
observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.