* 2333764
* RAPID: Understanding and Supporting K-12 School Leaders' AI-related Decision-making
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Sharon Mason, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 189,990.00

The 2022 launch of ChatGPT has accelerated the need for school leaders (at both
the district and building level) to make important and time-sensitive decisions
related to the use of artificial intelligence in their schools. Given the rapid
development of artificial intelligence, there are few established practices or
guidelines for school leaders to rely on, and school leaders' current knowledge
of artificial intelligence may be too limited to inform these decisions. Yet
these decisions will have a great impact on future uses of artificial
intelligence in K-12 education, as they will empower or constrain teachers'
instructional decisions as well as the overall environment where learning takes
place, ultimately affecting the realization of the potential of artificial
intelligence to promote greater equity and inclusion in schools. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to provide support to school leaders to inform policies
and decisions related to the use of artificial intelligence in their schools.
This RAPID project will contribute online resources for school leaders as well
as new knowledge about the following questions: (1) What kinds of decisions have
school leaders already made and expect to make about artificial intelligence?
(2) What is school leaders' current knowledge of artificial intelligence and its
applications in K-12 education, and what key questions do they have about
artificial intelligence? (3) What are school leaders' attitudes towards
artificial intelligence, and what risks and opportunities do they perceive about
its applications to educational settings? (4) What resources could help inform
school leaders' decisions about artificial intelligence, and how could these
resources be effectively delivered? and (5) How do responses to the previous
questions vary depending on the role/function of the school leader and/or
characteristics of their school district?

Data to address these questions will be gathered through a combination of
interviews and a survey with superintendents, directors of technology, assistant
superintendents for instruction and principals across all Western New York
public school districts. The insights will be shared with the field to inform
future research and interventions for school leaders to help them capitalize on
artificial intelligence with the ultimate goal of achieving a more equitable,
inclusive and effective K-12 education. Findings from the interviews and survey
will also be used to inform the creation of publicly available online resources
for school leaders to help address their most immediate needs. This proposal was
received in response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating
Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal
Settings (NSF 23-097) and funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.