* 2333849
* Proto-OKN Theme 2: SPIDER: Scalable Public Infrastructure for Distributed Entity Relationships
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ashish Goel, Onai Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,499,999.00

The Scalable Public Infrastructure for Distributed Entity Relationships, SPIDER,
is an NSF Proto-Open Knowledge Network (Proto-OKN) Fabric project that is
developing processes and a technical solution for interconnecting distributed
information represented in the form of knowledge graphs. By enabling automated
interconnection among such graphs from different sources and fields, new
insights can be rapidly obtained that would be impossible within the silo of a
single domain or dataset. SPIDER will benefit society by facilitating greater
access to reliable knowledge for the public and empowering researchers to
discover new knowledge and obtain new insights from information across many
different disciplines. SPIDER also accelerates the development of data-driven
artificial intelligence (AI) models in the quest to address complex societal
challenges. The data-driven analysis processes and overall technical solution
provided by SPIDER are designed to leverage vast and rich existing data sources
in the quest for solutions to some of societyâ€™s most pressing and complex
challenges. By providing access to AI methods and deploying state-of-the-art
interfaces for extensive querying of data, SPIDER facilitates integrated use of
vast amounts of available data.

SPIDER employs a scalable federated infrastructure for distributed knowledge
graphs, enabling powerful queries, automated interconnection among data
elements, training of artificial intelligence models, tracking of provenance,
and computation of confidence scores. The SPIDER processes and architecture
incorporate the capabilities needed by other Proto-OKN projects. The distributed
knowledge graph fabric implemented by SPIDER is agnostic to graph formats,
provides robust automated entity resolution and interconnection, allows
subgraphs to be stored and processed in distributed fashion, presents powerful
provenance tracking, enables GPU-accelerated queries to handle large subgraphs,
and supports AI model training at scale. The solution also incorporates methods
for utilizing trust networks to yield confidence scores on results, enabling
participants to join the network with minimal barrier without the risk of
polluting results with misinformation and without requiring a central oracle of
truth. Furthermore, the solution allows for private data to be utilized in
responding to queries while provably not leaking data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.