* 2333454
* I-Corps: Personalized device to improve respiratory health
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Tanya Hutter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a personal device that aims to improve respiratory health and
promote nasal breathing. Currently, devices with analytical capabilities to
accurately measure breathing patterns and CO2 levels are expensive and are only
available in healthcare settings while personalized devices to improve
respiratory are simple mechanical devices that do not monitor or track progress
over time, nor provide training guidance with immediate feedback. The proposed
technology integrates advanced sensing technologies and smart algorithms for
personalized training programs with immediate feedback. This device may improve
respiratory health and reduce the risk of cardiovascular diseases, respiratory
disorders, and systemic infections. The technology may have applications in
areas such as sports performance, pulmonary rehabilitation, stress management,
and general wellness, benefiting individuals of all age groups and lifestyles.
In addition, this may empower users to monitor and track their progress over
time, fostering a proactive approach to respiratory health management.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a respiratory device capable
of measuring key respiratory and physiological parameters. Current devices lack
comprehensive monitoring capabilities and are limited to oral breathing,
disregarding the advantages of nasal breathing. The proposed technology
addresses these limitations as it allows monitoring of both nasal and oral
breathing. The proposed device consists of a face mask integrated with sensors
and a smartphone app. It integrates a flow sensor, a miniature infrared CO2
sensor, and electrodes for heart rate monitoring. Smart processing algorithms
incorporating multiple breathing programs and recommendations will educate the
user in how to improve their respiratory health, relax and improve overall well-
being. The research behind this project builds upon the established correlation
between respiratory health and various health outcomes, such as life expectancy,
sleep quality, and immune system strength. The technical results obtained from
prototype testing demonstrate the feasibility and potential application in
multiple domains, including disease prevention, fitness enhancement, stress
management, and pulmonary illness recovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.