* 2333524
* Conference: CIRC Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Eric Eide, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 54,120.00

The purpose of this project is to organize and host the 2023 National Science
Foundation (NSF) CIRC Community Principal Investigators Meeting. The meeting
will take place in fall 2023 on the campus of the University of Utah in Salt
Lake City, Utah. The meeting will convene the principal investigators (PIs) of
active awards within the Community Infrastructure for Research in CISE (CIRC)
program, formerly known as the CISE Community Research Infrastructure (CCRI)
program. It will be a venue where PIs, local government and community
organization representatives, and Federal agency representatives meet to present
and review CIRC progress and developments, identify new and emerging areas for
research infrastructure, and discuss research infrastructure gaps and barriers.
The meeting agenda includes plenary presentations of showcase CIRC projects,
poster presentations by all PIs, reports of recent program activities, a keynote
address, a panel discussion, and breakout discussions on topics to be determined
by the community.

The annual PI Meeting is the primary opportunity for NSF-funded CIRC/CCRI PIs to
meet as a group to share their progress, discuss research infrastructure
opportunities and challenges, and explore new ideas and partnerships for future
work. It is a forum for sharing ideas across the CIRC community. It is also an
opportunity for the academic community to interact with government agencies with
interest in CIRC developments and advancements. The CIRC/CCRI PI Meeting series
has played a major role in growing the community across a broad range of sectors
and technologies, and in performing outreach to parties who have interest in
learning about the program and participating as future proposers, transition
partners, or sponsors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.