* 2333294
* Center: IUCRC Site Addition WPI: Wildfire Interdisciplinary Research Center (WIRC)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* James Urban, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

In the United States, the adjusted impacts of wildfires exceeded $100 B over the
past 22 years. A community resilient to wildland fires can prepare for
anticipated scenarios, take mitigating actions, adapt to changing conditions,
minimize losses during the response to an event, and rapidly recover. Scientists
with San José State University Wildfire Interdisciplinary Center (WIRC), an
Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC), are working together
with Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI) researchers to holistically
investigate wildfires. Broader impacts include improved response to wildfires,
especially in the areas of decision making; determining risk; ensuring reliable
electrical grid operations and informing decisions on grid cutoff; minimizing
loss of life and property; and providing more effective warnings and
prognostication to populations living in areas susceptible to wildfire. The
Center is training the STEM workforce to become fire managers, city planners,
fire analysts, and fire meteorologists. The collaboration will increase the
numbers of students trained in wildfire research, diversify the types of
training students receive, and increase student’s potential for internships from
a broader group of companies. Both institutions will conduct active outreach
using their campus programs to increase the diversity of trained students.
Finally, the partnership extends the reach of WIRC to the east coast where fire
frequency and extreme fires are also increasing. Collectively, the Center is
conducting high-impact wildfire research to provide new predictive tools and
strategies to communities and industry stakeholders, including first responders,
risk analysts, policymakers, companies, and utilities.

By partnering with WPI, a new IUCRC Partner Site to WIRC, the collective team
will address several key topics synergistic with the Center’s ongoing wildfire
prediction, preparation, and prevention efforts. For example, WPI adds critical
research depth to address human safety and community resilience to wildfire,
including fire safety at the wildland-urban interface; small-scale fire
behavior; fire impact at the fire-front level; fire protection systems, and
firefighter safety. Improvements in understanding of fire spread through
different layers of vegetation, the characterization of firebrands produced by a
fire-burning vegetation or structure, the generation of reliable fire behavior
data used to train AI models, and the study of the fundamental fire-front level
processes to drive extreme fire behavior are critically needed to improve our
ability to understand and model wildfire. Because of its emphasis on fire
protection, WPI will study new fire detection methods, robotics solutions to
enhance first responders’ safety, and fire suppression systems for wildfires.
Its state-of-the-art Fire Protection Lab provides equipment to conduct
experiments, enabling researchers to extract fundamental measurements of fire
ignition and conflagration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.