* 2333703
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: DREAM-KG: Develop Dynamic, REsponsive, Adaptive, and Multifaceted Knowledge Graphs to address homelessness with Explainable AI
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Huanmei Wu, Temple University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,496,897.00

This project aims to create a knowledge graph that will provide a comprehensive
understanding of the social, economic, and political factors that contribute to
homelessness while triaging existing services and resources to support people
experiencing homelessness. The primary users of the system will be people
experiencing homelessness, front-line case workers, law enforcement agents, non-
profit organizations, and federal agencies. The knowledge graph will equip users
with essential insights to address the homelessness problem more effectively.
This includes understanding core structural factors, effective intervention
methods, community resources, cultural nuances across diverse backgrounds, and
policy knowledge from local to federal levels.

The project will utilize emerging topological data analysis tools, artificial
intelligence (AI) models, and innovative approaches for data acquisition and
analysis related to homelessness. The resulting knowledge graph will feature
user-friendly user interfaces, offering easy access to data and insights,
enhancing service delivery to homeless populations. By harnessing geometric
theory, explainable AI, and ontology techniques, the project aims to advance
understanding in AI applications, bridge the gap between AI and homelessness
research, and offer novel solutions for homelessness prevention. The educational
component of the project includes mentoring underrepresented groups and
incorporating project outcomes into various courses, such as Topological Data
Analysis, Data Semantics, and Social Work education. The project outcomes will
be shared broadly, engaging multiple stakeholders including the affected
communities, clinicians, policymakers, and researchers, aiming to address the
national homelessness crisis and improve resource allocation and housing
policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.