* 2333706
* RAPID: Rare Opportunity to Study Ancient Crocodylian Social Dynamics in Extinct Ecosystem (18 mya) from At-Risk Fossil Site (Rusinga, Kenya)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Alexander Hastings, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 01/31/2024
* USD 37,205.00

Crocodilian social dynamics is a new area of study within modern ecosystems, and
has not been studied in depth in the fossil record. An ideal site to test for
differences in social aggression and cannibalistic consumption exists at a
crocodilian-dominated fossil assemblage in Kenya. The site is currently at high
risk of destruction due to an increased need for residential housing. Moreover,
no one in the region (or in Kenya broadly), has the expertise, financial means,
or availability to conduct this work. The team will carefully excavate and
document these fossils, record and measure signs of interspecies aggression, and
transport them to the National Museums of Kenya where they will be available to
the global scientific community. The on-site team will include two specialists
from the United States as well as workers from the local community. During the
excavation, the team will also provide educational outreach to the community to
help raise awareness of the value of these fossils to scientific learning.

The goals of the project are to recover fossil specimens from the site, with all
necessary stratigraphic and positional context. As each fossil is removed, the
team will take photos that will be later used to make a 3D photogrammetric
model. The project will also evaluate each bone for traces of interspecies
aggression, recording size, depth and position. Gathering these data will
improve our understanding of the pervasiveness of social aggression in this
ancient community, the extent to which cannibalism played a role and how this
may have affected the other members of the ecosystem. This study will be
published in peer-reviewed literature and presented at scientific conferences in
addition to being shared through outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.