* 2333048
* I-Corps: 3D Bioprinted Cardiac Tissue Patch for Heart Repair
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Lijie Grace Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an implantable 3D bioprinted patch device that can regenerate
damaged cardiac muscle tissues. The proposed technology is for the restoration
of necrotic myocardial tissues resulting from a severe form of heart attack
known as ST-elevated Myocardial Infarction (STEMI). Current approaches to STEMI
and heart failure treatment focus primarily on restoring blood flow to the
cardiac muscle, but do little to regenerate the myocardium once damaged. During
a STEMI event, decreased blood flow to cardiac muscle tissue (myocardium) leads
to the death of heart muscle cells known as cardiomyocytes and permanent
restructuring of the heartâ€™s microstructure. As a function of the poor inherent
regenerative capacity of the myocardium, an estimated 20% of patients who suffer
an initial STEMI will go on to have a second within 5 years, and up to 30% of
primary-STEMI patients will develop heart failure within 1 year. The proposed
technology may be a first-in-class interventionary method for the regeneration
of myocardial tissues and may improve the quality of life for STEMI patients by
lowering their risk of subsequent heart attacks and progression to heart
failure. Moreover, the technology may spur the development of other patch-based
technologies for the treatment of other debilitating fibrotic diseases.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a 3D bioprinted tissue patch
technology that promotes the regeneration of cardiac muscle tissue through the
delivery of patient-specific cardiac cells. This proposed technology is aimed
treating necrotic myocardial tissues resulting from a severe form of heart
attack known as ST-elevated Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) and employs a tri-
cultured, cellularized patch system to induce myocardial tissue regeneration
developed using a murine chronic myocardial infarction (MI) model. Initial
results using the proposed technology demonstrated that its structural design
and cellular components promoted enhanced cellular engraftment, vascularization,
and increased left ventricular ejection fraction of the chronic MI model 4
months post-implantation. Upon clinical testing and approval, the proposed
technology may be implanted as an adjunct material onto the infarcted myocardium
of individuals undergoing a standard coronary artery bypass graft procedure to
promote myocardial tissue regeneration and the restoration of cardiac output.
Additionally, as a function of the versatility of the proposed technology, the
3D printed patches also may be adapted for the regeneration of other fibrotic
tissues of the body, as well as function as scaffold materials for the study of
various diseases and testing of pharmaceuticals in both academic and commercial
settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.