* 2333654
* Conference: Integrating Large Language Models into Solid State Materials Curriculum: Enhancing Laboratory Skills through AI
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2024
* USD 35,091.00

Non-Technical Summary

When used effectively, artificial intelligence (AI) platforms have the potential
to facilitate personalized, self-paced learning and real-time feedback, making
education more equitable and catering to diverse learning styles and needs. This
2-day workshop, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
NSF’s Division of Materials Research, encourages participants to develop
innovative approaches and best practices to incorporating widely-available large
language models – such as ChatGPT and Bard – into solid state materials
chemistry education at both undergraduate and graduate levels. This workshop at
Colorado School of Mines fosters interactions and collaborations among a diverse
group of scientists and educators, including graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, and faculty. Participants work collaboratively to (1) develop
innovative approaches to using AI-powered tools in the classroom, and (2)
identify potential limitations and discuss ethical considerations for the use of
these tools in an educational setting. NSF funding supports travel and
accommodations for workshop participants to ensure a diverse cohort of
attendees.

Technical Summary

The growing accessibility of artificial intelligence (AI)-powered tools, such as
ChatGPT and Bard, to both students and educators requires evolution of
educational practices. This workshop, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, brings together
faculty, postdoctoral researchers and students to discuss possibilities to
incorporate AI-powered Large Language Models (LLMs) into solid state materials
chemistry laboratory courses, with the potential to significantly enhance
student learning and engagement. Participants share and collaboratively develop
innovative ways of using LLMs in laboratory settings, including designing pre-
lab activities, assessing student preparedness, facilitating full virtual lab
experiences, and aiding in post-lab analysis and reflection. The workshop also
emphasizes the importance of understanding the limitations and potential
pitfalls of AI, particularly in the context of laboratory safety, technical
veracity, and ethical use. Participants work together to develop innovative
demonstrations and applications of LLMs in solid-state materials chemistry labs,
identify safety and effectiveness considerations, and foster new partnerships.
The discussions and collaborative projects initiated during the workshop are
expected to contribute to the evolution of pedagogical practices and deepen our
understanding of the effective, safe, and responsible integration of AI tools in
educational settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.