* 2333956
* Conference: 2023 International Conference on CRISPR Technologies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Evan Flach, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,325.00

The 2023 International Conference on CRISPR Technologies (ICCT) will focus on
the latest advances in CRISPR technologies and applications, bringing together
key stakeholders from academia and industry who have aligned interests. The
conference program features talks on a variety CRISPR-related subjects,
including CRISPR’s applications in synthetic biology, genome editing
technologies, and epigenetic and RNA editing. The conference covers a broad
range of research areas and applications of CRISPR technology, which creates a
unique environment for people with diverse expertise to gather and exchange
information. Additionally, the conference aims to give students and early career
professionals opportunities to share their work, to network with the foremost
leaders in the field, and to develop their careers.

The field of genome editing with CRISPR technologies is one of the fastest
growing and highest impact areas of modern research, with applications in
agriculture, ecology and medicine. The 2023 International Conference on CRISPR
Technologies (ICCT) will bring together biologists, chemists, and engineers to
discuss CRISPR’s ability to address fundamental and applied problems. The
sessions feature a broad range of emerging technologies and a diverse set of
topics that will impact the next decade of research. ICCT is designed to bring
together researchers and experts from academia, government and industry in a
highly interactive and engaging meeting. Early career and established
researchers will have opportunities to interact during organized talks, poster
sessions, panels, and many informal gatherings. This platform will allow
established and early career scientists to discuss challenges in the field and
to establish collaborations to address these challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.