* 2333608
* mCDR 2023: Data requirements for quantifying natural variability and the background ocean carbon sink in marine carbon dioxide removal (mCDR) models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Thea Heimdal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2026
* USD 517,526.00

In order to combat the expected impacts of climate change, active removal of
carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere and oceans will likely be needed in
addition to emissions reductions. There is a growing consensus that at least
some of society’s needs for carbon dioxide removal (CDR) will have to come from
the ocean. An important requirement of any ocean CDR strategy is the ability to
demonstrate that it has “worked,” i.e., that it has resulted in the uptake of
additional CO2 from the atmosphere beyond what is already naturally occurring
due to rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations, termed here the “background” ocean
carbon sink. Ocean models are expected to play a key role in this effort. In the
interest of validating these models, this project will determine the natural
background carbon uptake, its variability, and the degree of certainty with
which it is known, in areas of the ocean where CDR deployments are likely to
take place. Requirements for additional sampling needed to improve understanding
of the background ocean carbon sink and to confidently measure the additional
signal from CDR will be determined. This work will support future observing
system development, and ultimately the future development of observation-based
benchmarks against which proposed marine CDR models can be evaluated. The
project will provide salary support to an early career researcher to become an
expert in ocean carbon cycling and machine learning, skills critical to ocean
science and the marine CDR (mCDR) workforce. This project is being jointly
supported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, through the
National Oceanographic Partnership Program.

The objectives of this project are to 1) quantify uncertainties in air-sea CO2
flux variability and the integrated background ocean carbon sink on regional
scales, and 2) set requirements for additional data collection that will reduce
these uncertainties. Following successful prior work at the global scale, these
objectives will be achieved by developing and applying a ‘testbed’. This testbed
will be a high-resolution (1/10°) ocean model that will be sampled with the
spatio-temporal pattern of existing surface pCO2 observations in regions on the
West and East US Coast, Hawaii and the Bering Sea. Machine learning
reconstructions will be performed based on these samples to reconstruct full
field, time-varying pCO2. The unique advantage of a testbed is that the fidelity
of the reconstructions can be evaluated based on comparison to the original full
model fields. This approach allows for assessment of how well sparse data and
state-of-the-art machine learning techniques can be combined to constrain
surface ocean carbon fluxes. In a second phase, observing system simulation
experiments (OSSEs) will establish optimal observing designs that can further
reduce reconstruction uncertainties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.