* 2333789
* Proto-OKN Theme 1: Knowledge Graph to Support Evaluation and Development of Climate Models
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chaitanya Baru
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,498,564.00

This Prototype-Open Knowledge Network project on Knowledge Graph to Support
Evaluation and Development of Climate Models, aims to create a large multimodal
knowledge graph of the most salient aspects of climate modeling, including data,
climate models, and tasks. The climate models covered include both classical
fluid dynamics models as well as AI-based models. The knowledge graph that is
developed will take a holistic view of climate modeling while addressing one of
the three key problems identified in the Report of the Office of Science
Roundtable on Data for AI, viz., addressing “open questions in AI with
frameworks for relating data, models, and tasks.” The climate model knowledge
graph will ensure that existing models and datasets are leveraged in new climate
modeling undertakings, thereby ensuring that past research investments are
reused and fully leveraged in future work. The automated methods developed in
this project will help infer paper-data-model-tasks relations, providing the
ability to suggest useful, related artifacts to new undertakings thus shortening
the time for relevant artifact searches. Successful creation of paper-model-tool
relations and embedding of those into a knowledge graph will help provide a
structured representation of climate models, making them more easily accessible.

The project contributes significantly to the field of information retrieval,
with a particular focus on named entity recognition and the creation of a
comprehensive knowledge graph. Research papers provide the necessary context for
reusing research artifacts, by linking together data, models, and analyses,
describing the role of a dataset (e.g., training or testing) and indicating
whether a model is original or used as a baseline. Incorporating these insights
into a knowledge graph provides researchers an intuitive and structured means
for navigating the complex relationships among datasets, models, tools, and
methods. This not only facilitates the discovery and reuse of existing research
artifacts but also fosters collaboration and innovation in the field research,
in this case climate research. Novel deep learning techniques will be developed
for automatic entity and relation extraction, entity linking, and construction
of a knowledge graph interconnecting these aspects. Novel technology will be
developed for automatically identifying and cataloging public climate data and
related highly reusable tools. The proposed approach is multimodal, dealing with
images as well as tables from text-based publications. This project also has a
focus on teaching and training of students at various levels, from high school
to doctoral programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.