* 2333204
* I-Corps:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based Image Fusion Technology for Guiding Prostate Biopsies
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Pingkun Yan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial intelligence (AI)-driven image fusion technology
designed to guide cancer biopsies. Currently, the gold standard approach for
guiding biopsies employs fusing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound,
which can increase cancer biopsy yield by 30%. However, less than 20% of
procedures are performed with fusion guidance. The existing methods for fusing
MRI and ultrasound images require external tracking hardware that acts like a
“medical GPS” to track the position and orientation of an ultrasound probe. The
hardware is cumbersome to set up and adds significant cost to the system. The
available systems also require clinical users to manually align MRI and
ultrasound volumes, which is called image registration. Image registration is a
challenging task and has a significant impact on the accuracy of the system,
often leading to the poor performance of such systems. The proposed technology
uses AI models to remove the need for tracking hardware and reduce the expertise
requirement for image registration. This technology may improve biopsy
procedures by enhancing patient throughput, minimizing system setup time, and
increasing the accessibility of fusion-guided biopsies even in less-equipped
clinics.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of image fusion technology
using Artificial Intelligence (AI) that aims to eliminate the need for external
tracking hardware used in cancer biopsy procedures. The proposed technology
utilizes AI and machine learning to automate the fusion process, resulting in a
more efficient and accurate biopsy guidance system. It uses AI algorithms to
automatically identify image features within the input images for volume
reconstruction, cross modality image registration, and frame to volume mapping.
Results comparing his technology with traditional methods that depend heavily on
external tracking devices for fusing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and
ultrasound images show that it reduces human intervention and improves image
fusion performance. The technical work has been documented in peer-reviewed
papers, patent filings, and retrospective studies to validate the technology. In
addition, the proposed technology addresses the challenges faced by doctors,
offering an opportunity for improved biopsy accuracy, reduced costs, and a
shortened learning curve.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.