* 2333225
* EAGER: Foundations for the Systematic Study of Synthetic Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jaideep Vaidya, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Advancements in data-driven models in various fields like natural language
processing, computer vision, and robotics have been made possible due to the
availability of large amounts of data. However, concerns about privacy rights
have been growing, leading to the need for strategies that protect individual
data while still allowing data sharing. Synthetic data offers a potential
solution by preserving the statistical properties of the original data while
removing any personally identifiable information. Although many methods for
generating synthetic data have been proposed, there is still a lack of solid
theoretical foundations in this area. This project bridges the gap between
theory and practice. The project's novelties are in developing the fundamental
principles for the systematic study of synthetic data, and in clarifying the
technical vocabulary and the associated concepts. The project's broader
significance and importance is in its ability to allow institutions to
articulate, enforce, evaluate, and validate their required constraints for
synthetic data generation methodologies, significantly accelerating data-
sharing. With heightened privacy and enhanced utility hand in hand, this
framework will shape a world where privacy is safeguarded, knowledge is shared,
and AI-based methods truly flourish for the betterment of humanity. The project
conceptualizes the philosophical considerations of synthetic data, establishes
properties of synthetic data, develops formal definitions of what it means to be
“synthetic”, and develops a comprehensive evaluation framework for synthetic
data that includes curated datasets, metrics, and baselines. The research
improves our scientific understanding of privacy, utility, and synthetic data.
The project also cultivates the integration of research and education, by
providing new security or privacy projects for undergraduate and graduate
research and outreach activities, and serves as an invaluable teaching tool and
excellent entry point into the field of privacy and security research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.