* 2333548
* RAPID: Impact of Highway Infrastructure Failures on Transit Usage: The Case of the 11 June 2023 I-95 Bridge Collapse in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Zhiwei Chen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will collect time-sensitive
data on traffic flow patterns, transit ridership, individual travel
trajectories, and travel behavior stemming from the recent collapse of a
northbound I-95 interstate highway bridge in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. In
addition to the disruptive nature of the I-95 bridge collapse on daily lives, it
also has the potential to bring about individual behavioral changes that promote
sustainable transportation, particularly transit, usage. High-resolution data
before the bridge collapse, during the bridge reconstruction process, and after
the bridge is fully repaired is essential for understanding and harnessing this
potential. However, such comprehensive data has not been collected in assocation
with previous highway infrastructure failures. As the bridge repair is expected
to be completed within months and traffic patterns in Philadelphia have already
started to change, it is urgent to initiate data collection efforts before
important information is lost. This project aims to fill this critical data gap
through a multi-scale and multi-stakeholder data collection approach. The
generated datasets will be a valuable resource for the research community and
others to investigate the impact of highway infrastructure failures on transit
usage. While the focus of this project is on a recent highway bridge collapse
and transit use in Philadelphia, the data has the potential to derive
generalizable insights about forced travel behavioral processes resulting from
man-made or natural disasters.

This project involves multiple scales of data collection by working with various
stakeholders building on existing partnerships, including: (i) link-level
traffic flow data from roads throughout the impacted region of the city
collected via collaborations with the Philadelphia Streets Department; (ii)
route-level transit ridership data collected via collaborations with the
Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA); (iii) individual-
level travel trajectories using GPS data from mobile devices collected using
Gravy Analytics; and (iv) information on individual travel behavior, attitudes,
and sociodemographic characteristics from a comprehensive travel behavior
survey. An inclusive and cost-effective event-triggered sampling approach will
overcome statistical challenges related to data collection. This approach will
ensure that data are collected from all types of communities and population
groups throughout the bridge reconstruction process by sampling critical
discrete time points where substantial behavioral changes are observed from low-
cost, aggregated traffic flow measures. The generated datasets will be
transferred to and stored at computing facilities at Drexel University and
shared with the broader research community and the public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.