* 2334371
* Planning: CRISES: Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Housing and Homelessness
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Michael Lens, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The housing and homelessness crises are caused by a complex web of factors
ranging from lack of housing production and zoning policies to structural racism
in labor markets and criminal justice systems. The consequences of homelessness
for individuals and families are profound, and these crises strain public
services and systems. Research on housing and homelessness is often siloed, and
fragmentation in funding and program delivery across housing and homelessness
organizations undermines effective solutions. This planning project focuses on
the development of an interdisciplinary research Center that brings housing and
homelessness research communities together. The project considers the social,
health, economic, and policy dimensions of these intersecting crises, and
emphasizes the structural reforms that are needed to reduce homelessness and
improve the well-being of individuals. It also aims to inform the public debate
on housing and homelessness by replacing misconceptions with data and accessible
research. Research on housing and homelessness is often not informed by
interdisciplinary research approaches spanning economics, psychology,
anthropology, geography, sociology, and other social science disciplines. The
project plans for interdisciplinary research to advance knowledge by integrating
the perspectives of housing and homelessness research, employing a dynamic
rather than static framework of homelessness, and integrating structural and
individual approaches to the experiences of different demographic and risk
groups. Planned activities will help inform policy solutions to the housing and
homelessness crises, such as identifying a strategic interdisciplinary research
agenda, improving the data ecosystem for social science research on housing and
homelessness, and supporting community participatory research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.