* 2334455
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Community And Structural Collapse During Mass Extinctions (CASCaDE)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Pincelli Hull, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 73,288.00

We live in a time of widespread change to the natural systems that make our
planet habitable. The climate is warming and we are in the midst of a
biodiversity crises arising from our extensive and expanding use of natural
resources and spaces. What do these changes mean for the future of planet? The
fossil record provides us with the means to understand the resilience and
collapse of ecosystems due to rapid climate change. Here the researchers will
use the fossil record to explore why some intervals of earth history are
particularly prone to mass extinction, while others are not. To do this, they
will examine changes in fossil communities across intervals of global warming
using cutting-edge approaches from food web modeling. Their results will allow
them to assess the relative importance of network structure and composition,
versus changes in the productivity of systems, to the stability of ecosystems
during times of rapid global warming, like those we are living in today. More
technically, the research will answer the question of why rapid warming events
of the Paleozoic and Mesozoic consistently trigger mass extinction, whereas
similarly extreme climatic events of the Cenozoic do not? The researchers will
test the hypothesis that it is the evolution of modern ecosystem structures
established in the aftermath of the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass extinction that
has made Cenozoic communities relatively resilient to the effects of global
warming as compared to those in the past. To do this they will i) reconstruct
marine food webs across global warming events while accounting for preservation
bias; ii) estimate productivity and biomass at the base of the marine food web
through time; iii) predict primary and secondary extinctions using by advancing
and applying food web modeling approaches; and iv) test the role of network
structure in the stability of Cenozoic marine ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.