* 2334653
* Conference Proposal: 2023 CREST Program / Understanding Interventions Conference
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Anthony DePass, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST), this project aims to provide a convening of researchers and
practitioners from CREST programs and the Understanding Interventions
communities of scholarship and practice. This project will provide venues for
professional development (workshops), dissemination (symposia, poster sessions)
of interventions research, as well as discourse (deeper dives), and training
(workshops) for members across communities of practice and research. In
addition, this project will facilitate networking to foster opportunities for
collaborations between the various research and practice stakeholders. This work
is important to informing the approaches, strategies and activities of programs
aimed at broadening participation in science careers.

This two-day conference will facilitate training, networking and dissemination
of work related to the funded CREST program sites and interventions related
research. Expected results include increase networks between CREST and UI
communities leveraging the newly developed STEM social media platform, UI
IMPACTS (Inclusive Matching for Professional Advancement and Career Training in
Science). We also expected community building and communication between
participants and the general science community beyond the UI/CREST Conference.
The CREST/UI joint conference proceedings and presentations will be disseminated
via the UI Journal, UI INDEX, and the UI Portal. All abstracts from posters,
symposia and deeper dives will be published in a conference issue of the UI
Journal. All presentations will be available on the UI Portal. The Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program provides support
to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions through
the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.