* 2334744
* Travel: DEF CON31 AI Village Travel
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Austin Carson, SEEDAI INC
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 49,896.00

This conference proposal requests funds to support student participation in the
DEF CON 31 computer security conference, scheduled for August 10-13, 2023, in
Las Vegas, Nevada. The DEF CON conference brings together computer security
professionals, journalists, lawyers, federal government employees, security
researchers, and students with an interest in cybersecurity for all aspects of
computer systems, including software, computer architecture, and hardware. The
event includes “villages” that are dedicated spaces arranged around a specific
topic. This year the AI Village is hosting the first public generative AI
cybersecurity event focused on testing several industrial AI platforms. The
funds will be used to provide travel support for twenty-seven community college
students. This support will broaden participation in computing, expand the
dissemination of the latest research results on AI and cybersecurity, and help
to build the workforce for secure AI products and systems.

The goals of this project include informing the development of AI models and
products, and gaining a better understanding of opportunities for community
colleges to provide experiential learning to students interested in AI
development, management, and security. SeedAI will partner with Houston
Community College to recruit and select students using an application process.
Students selected for the travel support will contribute to a large-scale
security exercise for AI models, working alongside other attendees of the
conference. The project will allow students to inform the high growth field of
computer science, networking, cloud, and high-performance computing
environments. Students will also meet and engage with peers in the field and
develop an understanding of how hackathons work and why they can be important
tools for AI and computing development. Students from underrepresented groups
and students of color will benefit from their participation by acquiring insight
and access that positions them to pursue higher degrees in computing and AI
development, infrastructure creation, and management; step confidently into AI
careers, and inform AI system infrastructure with their unique and diverse
perspectives. Approximately sixty-five percent of Houston Community College
students are Black, indigenous or people of color and 25% of those are enrolled
in the AI, computing, and engineering tracks. The larger scientific and
computing community will benefit from voices that represent communities commonly
left out of the AI narrative.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.