* 2334448
* Collaborative Research: Physics Informed Real-time Optimal Power Flow
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ferdinando Fioretto, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2026
* USD 225,000.00

This NSF project aims to develop a physics-informed real-time optimal power flow
model using machine learning techniques to address the gap in providing close to
optimal solutions for power plant outputs while considering practical dynamical
constraints to avoid frequency fluctuations and grid instabilities. The
intellectual merits of the project include developing techniques to integrate
physical and dynamical principles in machine learning pipelines and methods to
ensure scalable and reliable solutions to optimal power flow problems. The
broader impacts of the project include significant long-term impacts on power
grids, reducing carbon emissions and increasing grid reliability, especially
under extreme weather, increased demand, and uncertainty from intermittent
generation. The PIs will also engage with national laboratories and non-profit
organizations to ensure that the developed model is accessible and usable by the
broader community, including utilities, policymakers, and researchers.
Furthermore, the project will provide opportunities for training and education
in the intersection of physics, engineering, and machine learning, thereby
contributing to the development of a skilled workforce in the field of energy
and sustainability.

The project makes four key scientific and engineering contributions: (1)
Advancements in combining physics-informed neural networks with conventional
feed-forward neural networks to predict solutions to optimal power flow problems
in real-time, pursuing dynamic stability while also optimality. (2) Novel
approaches of ensuring constraint satisfaction in the learned embedding. (3)
Investigation of techniques to ensure scalability of training to large,
realistically-sized networks. (4) Pursuit of model robustness by assessing model
performance under measurement noise and analyzing model reliability to develop
insights into high-quality approximations of the optimal power flow problem. The
proposed model holds the promise to expedite the adoption of increased renewable
energy into the power grid, reducing curtailment resulting from stability
concerns and suboptimalities resulting from conventional heuristic droop
control.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.