* 2334058
* I-Corps: A Machine Learning Tool for Medical Device History and Recalls
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Soumya Sen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software system to predict medical device recall likelihood.
Between 2003 and 2020, 8.9% (4,889) of medical devices in the US were recalled
due to issues that could cause serious health problems or even death. These
recalls impact patient outcomes, and both device manufacturers and health
insurers incur large financial losses. Timely prediction of recalls may benefit
multiple stakeholders in the healthcare system. However, manufacturers presently
rely on their own lab studies, proprietary data, and customer feedback to
evaluate device safety and predict recalls. The proposed technology uses
advanced data analytics to study the history of adverse events of medical
devices and performs predictive modeling for recalls. This data analytics-based
system may improve the evaluation of medical device recall likelihood with
benefits to patients, medical device manufacturers, insurers, regulators, and
other stakeholders by avoiding malfunctions and device recalls.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a data analytics platform
that uses historical data from multiple data sources to visualize and analyze
medical device recall likelihood. The proposed technology is an online decision
support system that uses data analytics to extract insights from FDAâ€™s 510(k)
device approval files to study and predict recalls. The proposed system uses
natural language processing to automatically extract relevant information from
device files and performs predictive modeling for medical device recalls using
supervised machine learning. The system leverages the characteristics of related
predecessor devices and features from the device citation network to help
manufacturers and analysts explore recall probabilities of different medical
devices. Initial results suggest that this system may provide significant
benefits in predicting device recalls in a timely manner, which may improve
patient safety and reduce financial losses for several stakeholders in the
healthcare ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.