* 2334539
* Conference: 2023 Soft Condensed Matter Physics GRC and GRS: The Soft and Sustainable Building Blocks of Living and Active Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Daniel Blair, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 28,000.00

This award supports the 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Soft Condensed
Matter: The Soft and Sustainable Building Blocks of Living and Active Systems
taking place at Colby Sawyer College in central New Hampshire from August 13th
through 18th, 2023. Specifically, this award will increase the number of junior
researchers, graduate students, post doctoral fellows and underrepresented
groups by offsetting the cost of travel and registration fees. This conference
will continue its long tradition of assembling a highly interdisciplinary group
of scientists to explore the broad range of topics under the umbrella of Soft
Condensed Matter.

The 2023 Soft Matter GRC program brings together topics that cross-cut methods
and materials of interest to those rooted in condensed matter and biologically
derived materials such as active gels, colloidal dispersions, membranes and
applications of machine learning. Moreover, this conference will highlight the
ever increasing role that soft matter science will play in developing a new
circular economy for polymeric materials with an emphasis on the materials
science and processing. In addition to broadening participation through the
increased number of young and diverse participants, we will hold a GRC organized
event that is specifically designed to broaden awareness and provide guidance to
women and minorities who are participating in the conference. In addition, this
award will partially support those attending the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS)
which will bring together graduate students and post-doctoral fellows with a
program designed to encourage the open exchange of ideas that is facilitated by
peers and a small number of senior moderators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.