* 2334256
* CAP: AI-Assisted Supervisory Control of Wind Farm Connection to the Grid for Stability Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2025
* Hamed Nademi, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2025
* USD 399,339.00

This project is an ExpandAI Capacity building pilot (CAP), which focuses on
establishing and growing AI related activities at the California State
University at San Marcos. This will be accomplished by growing a pool of AI
practitioners that will drive a sustainable expansion of AI-powered research and
education at the institution. As we embrace renewable energy sources, we face
the challenge of maintaining a stable energy grid. Artificial Intelligence (AI)
can pave the path for optimized use of renewables by enhancing prediction
capabilities to increase power systems awareness before failures occur. On the
educational side, activities will result in self-contained, hands-on projects
and modular training tutorials that will enrich Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering undergraduate and graduate curricula.

The project aims to develop novel AI and machine learning models for supervisory
control of wind farm connection to the grid for stability monitoring. State-of-
the-art techniques convert power measurement to waveform images for analysis
which has a considerable overhead for real-time analysis. This project will
instead focus on developing innovative AI/ML models that can directly analyze
raw data for accurate fault prediction and detection to achieve improved
response during faults or other emergency conditions. This is essential for
maintaining grid stability. Additionally, the project will establish new
cyberinfrastructure to provide multi-disciplinary research opportunities in AI
and power systems. While oscillation prediction and mitigation in wind farms is
the target problem, the same concept can be applied more generally to grid
anomaly detection and cybersecurity challenges. In addition, the AI/ML models
developed could potentially pave the way for other asset monitoring
applications, such as electrified transportation systems and healthcare
monitoring. Given the plethora of applications where the approach can be
applied, the project is likely to have significant broader impacts. The ExpandAI
Program supports AI-powered education and workforce development, infrastructure
and research at Minority Serving Institutions to strengthen and diversify U.S.
research and education pathways and provide historically marginalized
communities with new opportunities in STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.