* 2334261
* EAGER: SSMCDAT2023: Revealing Local Symmetry Breaking in Intermetallics: Combining Statistical Mechanics and Machine Learning in PDF Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,112.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress on a project
advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University. This EAGER
project furthers the understanding of the structure of semiconductors,
especially those with a high degree of atomic disorder. Semiconductors are
critical to modern electronics, with their physical properties, like
conductivity and band gap, largely depending on their atomic arrangements.
Despite significant progress in studying well-ordered crystals over the past
century, understanding the structure of disordered crystals remains a challenge.
Key to this understanding is how factors such as composition and synthesis
methods affect atomic structure and, consequently, properties like electronic
and thermal transport. This project employs cutting-edge artificial intelligence
techniques, specifically symmetry-aware neural networks, to predict the forces
between atoms in disordered materials. These predictions aid in modeling the
results of experimental measurements, offering insight into these complex
structures. Given the inherent complexity of these disordered materials, the
project also involves developing innovative ways to visualize these structures
at an atomic level, enabling researchers to identify patterns between
semiconductor structure and electronic properties.

PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Establishing predictive relationships between composition, processing
conditions, and material properties in intermetallics and alloys has been
hampered by difficulties in understanding local structure. In an intermetallic
material, the local structure includes both the chemical tiling on the lattice
(i.e., motifs) and atomic distortions arising from asymmetric coordination
environments. Even with high fidelity determination of such structures, the
diversity of local structures remains challenging to visualize. As such, both
measurement and understanding of local structure remain key challenges, making
current intermetallic materials development efforts primarily empirical. This
EAGER project addresses these challenges with an integrated computational-
experimental approach. The Ge(1-x)MnxTe system serves as a model system due to
its significant solubility, strong neutron scattering, and continuous phase
transition with temperature and composition. Experimental insights are gleaned
from neutron pair distribution function measurements (PDF) collected from
intermetallics with various compositions. Computational insights into fitting
these PDF measurements hinge on (i) recent advancements in equivariant neural
net-based force fields for molecular dynamics simulations and (ii) a robust
statistical mechanics treatment of configurational and vibrational energies.
This fitting procedure remains true to the underlying bonding energetics within
the intermetallic or alloy, meaning the resulting structures can be scrutinized
for their distribution of local structures. A key part of this project is the
featurization of the resulting structural distortions and bonding. Featurization
optimization, unsupervised learning, and visualization developments will allow
insights into the impact of processing conditions and composition on the local
structure of these materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.