* 2334021
* CAREER: Towards Fault-tolerant Edge Computing for Cyber-Physical Systems: Distributed Primitives for Coordination under Cyber Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Lewis Tseng, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2028
* USD 313,190.00

Edge computing is an emerging paradigm that extends cloud computing by
allocating a range of (edge) servers at or near the user to provide necessary
networking, storage, and computing services. Cyber-physical systems (CPS)
connect physical devices to the Internet and to each other. This research
explores the marriage between edge computing and CPS, namely edge-based CPS. It
has attracted a tremendous amount of attention from both academia and industry
because it is expected to fundamentally change the way people interact with
engineered systems. One essential element –the study of fault-tolerant
distributed primitives– is still missing in the literature. This research is
focused on distributed consensus primitives that allow a collection of nodes to
work as a coherent entity in the presence of various failures and cyberattacks.
Concretely, there are three interrelated tasks: (i) identifying fundamental
properties, limitations, and trade-offs in the context of edge-based CPS; (ii)
designing algorithms that automatically adapt under changing conditions and
varying cyberattacks to maintain good performance; and (iii) designing and
implementing a realistic simulator to study performance under practical
scenarios. The expected outcomes will enable efficient and fault-tolerant
services for edge-based CPS, allowing more innovation in CPS applications. This
research is expected to advance the state of knowledge by identifying a set of
principles, fault-tolerance tools, and analyses for designing distributed fault-
tolerant primitives. The work will emphasize models and primitives that allow
for practical implementation, with plans for realistic demonstrations of their
fault-tolerance and performance advantages.

Edge computing and CPS are expected to be key components of next-generation
infrastructure, so making edge-based CPS fault-tolerant can yield large-scale
benefits. Conversely, missed opportunities for improvements caused by a lack of
foundational understanding could have significant performance and fault-
tolerance consequences. This research helps address these issues by identifying
trade-offs and limitations. The proposed research also plans to develop new
pedagogical material on distributed systems that the PI plans to teach, both
through courses at Boston College and in online tutorials made available to the
public. In addition, the research and outreach work will benefit society by
providing principles to help industry and academia design fault-tolerant
primitives for edge-based CPS; increasing partnerships between academia and
industry; involving women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented
groups in STEM; and increasing public scientific literacy and public engagement
with science and technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.