* 2334276
* Planning: CRISES: Planning for a Future Center on Sustainability and Governance in the Anthropocene (C-SAGA)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Rachael Shwom, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,470.00

Current planetary crises, like climate change, biodiversity loss, and
unsustainable development are accelerating rapidly due to human activity. These
environmental problems are increasing in complexity and cannot be solved by
simple technological fixes. Policies to address these interlinked challenges
need to draw on the best available science while also ensuring that they do not
create unintended consequences, especially for people who are already
vulnerable. This planning grant will enable researchers at Rutgers University to
work together with other scientists around the globe to explore possible
solutions to these problems through case studies across fisheries, food systems,
and biodiversity and invasive species that illuminate effective and innovative
policies and identify key gaps in environmental governance. The teamâ€™s
engagement with global partners contributes to the strengthening of
international social science exchanges and partnerships on environmental
challenges. Through these collaborations, the anticipated center will be a
catalyst to activate social science insights and build a suite of techniques and
technologies across cases that can be shared with partners in policy
institutions, NGOs, local communities, and elsewhere. This planning grant will
allow the research team to design a future Center on Sustainability and
Governance in the Anthropocene (C-SAGA). Barriers to governing include the
increasing complexity and interdependence of ecological and socio-economic
systems; spatially and temporally distant and diffuse environmental impacts;
novel conditions of deep uncertainty; and the potential for irreversible tipping
points, cascades and feedbacks. Ensuring that any response to these Anthropocene
challenges is grounded in justice is crucial. The innovation of the center will
be to coordinate and advance cutting-edge social science scholarship to identify
innovative mechanisms, behaviors and structures that can facilitate new forms of
governance. The proposed C-SAGA center will engage in transdisciplinary research
on new forms of governance for our current environmental challenges,
particularly policies and innovations that improve stakeholder participation,
involve different knowledge systems, and help create more equitable outcomes for
all through engaging with stakeholders and policymakers to design and implement
new experiments in transformative policy. The future center will be designed
around experiments in innovation, diffusion and learning, including developing
incubators for governance actors to exchange and scale up models, and training
to improve capacities in governing across knowledges and scales. In exploring
gaps in governance for sustainable socio-ecological transformations and
opportunities for collaborations with other institutions and potential partners,
the research team will create the foundations for a future proposal for a
research center that meets local, national, and global needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.