* 2334509
* Conference: 2023 Neuroethology: Behavior, Evolution and Neurobiology GRC Linking Diversity in Cells, Circuits, and Brain Architecture to Ecologically Relevant Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kim Hoke, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This project provides funding to support a conference focused on the neural
mechanisms of natural behaviors, or neuroethology. The conference sessions focus
on a broad set of principles by which the brain works, spanning development,
evolution, and physiology of nervous systems that relate to variation in
behavior. The conference includes extensive opportunities for training the next
generations of scientists and particularly focuses on increasing the diversity
of researchers in the field of neuroethology. A pre-meeting for students and
postdocs allows newcomers to the field a chance to meet mentors and develop peer
networks. The intimate size and remote location of the main conference promotes
many opportunities for early career scientists to meet luminaries in the field,
allowing students to develop a sense of belonging and develop collaborations
with cutting-edge scientists around the world. Given the increasing appreciation
among neuroscientists that studies of natural behavior offer uniquely powerful
insights into fundamental of brain function, this conference brings together
interdisciplinary researchers to tackle key questions that will advance our
understanding of neural circuits. This project supports the Gordon Conference in
Neuroethology, a venue to discuss innovative and interdisciplinary work into the
neural circuit basis of behavior. The Gordon Conference structure promotes
networking and collaborations across fields, and the program brings together
researchers focused on natural behaviors, neurophysiology, molecular and
cellular neuroscience, and computational neuroscience. Sessions cover broad
topics relevant to leveraging neural circuit variation to understand fundamental
principles of brain function, and the conference structure promotes discussion
and interchange of ideas across disciplines. The conference leadership also has
a strong plan for developing mentorship networks and sense of belonging for
early career researchers that will increase diversity and inclusion in the
field. This conference provides a key opportunity for leveraging the newly
developed cutting edge technical and computational tools to devise key insights
neural circuit function impacting behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.