* 2334936
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: End-to-end Learning of Fair and Explainable Schedules for Court Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ferdinando Fioretto, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

The American Court system is a large and complex socio-technical system that
handles millions of criminal cases every year. However, the current pretrial
scheduling process is plagued by a staggering one in five defendants missing
court dates. This imposes high costs on the judiciary as an institution, and can
be particularly harmful to defendants who have insecure employment situations,
care-giving responsibilities, or lack transportation to court. These disparate
impacts have profound negative effects. To address these issues, this project
investigates Fair and Explainable Learning to Schedule, a novel approach that
tightly integrates machine learning, constrained optimization, and knowledge
representation to learn schedules with certifiable fairness guarantees and
enable neuro-symbolic reasoning to provide meaningful and refinable
explanations. The proposed research will develop new tools to ensure that
pretrial scheduling can decrease nonappearance and be fair to all defendants
equally and has thus the potential to have significant societal benefits.

From a scientific standpoint, this project will develop a new generation of
integrated learning and optimization tools as well as explanation tools to
realize the potential of fairer and more equitable schedules. The proposed Fair
and Explainable Learning to Schedule will make key contributions in several
areas, including: (1) enabling deep learning systems to handle combinatorial
structures to represent schedules; (2) developing end-to-end training procedures
that integrate constrained optimization within a learning pipeline; (3)
providing guarantees on the satisfaction of user-specified fairness notions in
the learning process; (4) developing neuro-symbolic approaches to provide
explanations about scheduling and fairness properties; (5) integrating learning
and logic-based reasoning to provide personalized explanations at appropriate
abstraction levels to users; and (6) developing new datasets for fair pretrial
court scheduling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.