* 2334340
* Planning: CRISES: Climate Adaptation Solutions Accelerator (CASA) through School-Community Hubs
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Simone Pulver, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,098.00

Universities, planning agencies, and non-profit groups are pioneering
initiatives to help historically underserved and vulnerable communities cope
with environmental changes related to climate impacts, such as rising sea
levels, storm-related flooding, longer heat waves, and increasing numbers of
wildfires. However, there are daunting barriers to rapid and broad-based climate
adaptation outreach. Traditional forms of soliciting public input often do not
generate productive community engagement in historically underserved
communities, and establishing trust through new community organizations can take
years. Research demonstrates that public schools are neighborhood institutions
that are trusted by communities and that schools have been used successfully to
deliver other types of community services. This project is a novel research
effort proposing to investigate how schools can function as hubs for fostering
community climate adaptation in the historically underserved communities most
vulnerable to climate change. The project supports partnerships with three
California public schools to establish school-community climate adaptation hubs.
Each hub uses school-based activities to support climate adaptation in a
vulnerable neighborhood, to connect residents to innovative adaptation solutions
specific to the local context, and to build relationships between community
members relevant city and county adaptation planner. The activities under this
grant build students’ capacity to develop climate solutions, improve school
learning outcomes, foster community climate capabilities in historically
underserved communities, and advance just and effective adaptation planning.
Case studies analyses of the three school-community climate adaptation hubs
support preparation of a proposal for a new center: the Climate Adaptation
Solutions Accelerator (CASA) through School-Community Hubs.

In the context of climate change adaptation, schools have already been mobilized
as community centers during climate emergencies, but they can also support rapid
and broad-based climate preparedness. Working through schools to connect
communities and planning processes, CASA will build research capacity and
infrastructure for the rapid and broad-based scaling of just and effective
climate adaptation solutions. Exploratory research activities for CASA focus on
three key areas. First, the project identifies existing and needed resources for
mapping the intersecting climate risks facing each neighborhood that is home to
one of California’s 10,000 K-12 public schools. These data are shared with
schools and used to customize adaptation innovation resources. Second, the
project develops a system for identifying innovative community-based climate
adaptation initiatives being pioneered in California. Third, working in
collaboration with three public schools and three climate adaptation innovators,
the project investigates the opportunities and challenges of accelerating
climate adaptation solutions through school-community hubs from the perspective
of four stakeholder groups: historically underserved communities vulnerable to
climate change, climate adaptation innovators interested in scaling their
solutions activities, school administrative and teaching personnel, and city and
county planners responsible for climate adaptation. Data collected via case
study methods are analyzed to identify effective strategies for ascertaining
community preferences and needs, key obstacles to scaling innovative adaptation
solutions, potential organizational templates for school-community adaptation
hubs, and the needs and preferences of local policymakers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.