* 2334631
* RAPID: DRL AI: A Community-Inclusive AI Chatbot to Support Teachers in Developing Culturally Focused and Universally Designed STEM Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Sunandan Chakraborty, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Large language models (LLM) represent a new and rapidly changing technological
advancement for K12 STEM learning. It is critical at this point in time to
investigate and provide pathways for including justice, equity, inclusion, and
community cultural capital and wealth in designing LLM-based educational
systems. In the context of developing an AI chatbot, this RAPID project will
research the ways in which teachers can plan universally designed and culturally
relevant and responsive K12 STEM learning activities and environments. This
research will contribute to an improved LLM that will incorporate novel methods
to incorporate community data and reinforce knowledge from user communities into
the LLM that is largely missing from large text corpora on which LLMs are
usually trained. The AI chatbot will increase teacher capacity to create more
inclusive STEM activities and support career pathways by facilitating the
inclusion of more underrepresented learners in STEM careers. This proposal was
received in response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating
Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal
Settings (NSF 23-097) and funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

The project will convene a series of focus groups to elicit training data for
the chatbot, adopting a community-based participatory action research approach.
This approach recognizes that AI can foster and grow community well-being by
including the community in the design, orienting the AI to address community
issues, and adopting an interdisciplinary and systems-based stance. The AI
training will be sensitive to cultural nuances and techniques like sentiment
analysis will help to understand the context and ensure culturally appropriate
responses. Human-centered AI methods will be used to continuously incorporate
user feedback by deploying the chatbot and actively seek responses from the
diverse set of participants. This process will reinforce knowledge from user
communities that is largely missing from content on which AIs are typically
trained, producing an AI system that will generate more culturally aware text.
Importantly, the project will create a model for developing community sourced AI
LLMs that can continue to be refined and researched. A beta-level chatbot will
be made available for teachers to improve their lesson plans, activity
structures, and learning environments by the end of the project year for further
research and development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.