* 2334313
* EAGER: Exploring Customized STEM Employment Approaches for People with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Christina Carnahan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project is conducting early-stage, exploratory research to investigate
customized employment approaches for restructuring STEM workplace settings and
employment practices to increase access and inclusion for postsecondary students
with disabilities. The work reflects that of an EArly-concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award. The University of Cincinnati is partnering
with Siemens Corporation to address two research questions: 1) Can customized
employment approaches be used to create jobs that meet both the needs of STEM
employers and individuals with intellectual disabilities (ID)? and 2) What tools
best support employers and disability specialists in identifying STEM positions?
Using a multiple case study approach, the researchers are gathering and
analyzing data from employer and employee interviews, workplace observations,
and employee writing samples. The project includes an advisory board with
individuals with ID, family members of people with ID, and STEM employers. There
is an external evaluator to provide feedback to the investigators and to assess
the success of the research.

This research was created in response to the Workplace Equity for Persons with
Disabilities in STEM and STEM Education solicitation (NSF 23-593). The
solicitation activities support fundamental, applied, and translational research
that advances knowledge and practice about diverse, equitable, inclusive, and
accessible STEM and STEM education workplaces and postsecondary training
environments for persons with disabilities. The solicitation states that EAGER
proposals explore work in its early stages on untested but potentially
transformative research ideas or approaches. EAGER projects must focus on one or
more of the solicitation's three research themes and this award focuses on the
solicitation’s first research theme: “studying barriers and solutions to
diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility in STEM workplaces and
postsecondary training settings.”

The research findings that are being generated from this project inform how STEM
industry employers structure job descriptions to create more inclusive
opportunities for technically skilled workers with disabilities. There is
potential for the project activities and the results to be used by other
investigators to conduct fundamental and/or applied research to further study
customized employment for persons with disabilities in STEM. The project team is
presenting the research at professional conferences and using social media
podcasting.

This Workplace Equity for Persons with Disabilities in STEM and STEM Education
award was funded by the NSF’s Eddie Bernice Johnson INCLUDES Initiative, which
seeks to motivate and accelerate collaborative efforts to advance and sustain
systemic change that broadens participation in STEM at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.