* 2334829
* RAPID: Exploring an AI Literacies Framework for Young Children: A Delphi Study
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Xiaohui Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,920.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming society, and it is becoming
increasingly clear to educators and researchers that K-12 students must be
prepared for an AI-driven future. One crucial area that requires research is
early childhood education (ECE) for children aged 5 to 8 years old. The
potential impact of AI on early childhood cannot be overstated: there are far-
reaching implications for language development, cognitive skills, sensory
perception, and social-emotional development, which are the holistic goals of
ECE. Prior research suggests that exposing young children to AI is feasible and
can have positive effects on their AI knowledge and skills. These studies often
focus exclusively on how children learn with and about AI, without fully
considering the holistic goals and practices of ECE. There is an urgent need to
address such issues in ECE AI education and ensure early AI learning is
appropriate, effective, and equitable. This proposal was received in response to
the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial
Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097) and
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This project will develop an interdisciplinary framework for ECE AI learning by
using the Delphi methodology, an iterative process of converging expert opinions
on emerging topics. A panel of 30 experts of diverse and inclusive
representation from three fields: AI, Child Development and Early Education, and
Child-Computer Interaction will be recruited. These experts will explore three
fundamental questions across cognitive, situated, and critical framing of AI.
(1) What: What are the most appropriate AI learning goals and content for young
children? (2) Who: What developmental advantages/constraints and equity concerns
must be considered for AI learning? and (3) How: How can we introduce AI
effectively and equitably? The research process involves three iterative rounds
of discussion, survey, and review of materials prepared and synthesized by the
research team. By articulating the underlying concepts and principles of AI
literacies in ECE through cognitive, situated, and critical framing and from
multidisciplinary perspectives, the resulting framework will help advance our
understanding of how young children can develop knowledge and skills related to
AI and inform future endeavors in this area, with particular attention to
individuals with special needs and cultural relevance to marginalized and
underserved communities. The outcome of the project also has the potential to
guide the development of age-appropriate curricula and pedagogy for young
children as well as provide a basis for assessing and evaluating AI literacies
in young children.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.