* 2334665
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Deep Learning-based Multimodal Analysis of Sleep
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ping Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2025
* USD 124,997.00

Sleep is one of the most fundamental behaviors for animals and humans, and
understanding group sleep will provide key insights into neuroscience and social
behavior and interactions. To overcome limitations that stem from single
modality animal behavior platforms, the project will develop a multimodal
machine learning method to simultaneously monitor and process
Electroencephalogram (EEG) data and animal behavior data to systematically study
group behavior, especially sleep, and to annotate animal social
movements/behavior. The outcomes from the project will potentially provide a
powerful toolkit based on deep learning to make sense of complex animal behavior
and EEG activity pattern for mechanistic exploration. Subproblems from this
project will be developed into course materials and will be capstone projects or
directed study for undergraduate students.

The project will process multiple data modalities and group activities involving
multiple entities from multiple data sources through a multi-modal machine
learning framework enabling the extraction and aggregation of the most pertinent
information. A “dictionary” of movements at the semantic level will be developed
for learning and processing of long video and EEG data, which is a significant
challenge for current state-of-the-art self-attention transformer models.
Additionally, to incorporate group interactions, transformer models for dialogue
modeling will be developed. The proposed simultaneous EEG and behavior study
will provide biological underpinnings of group sleep, leading to insights into
brain electrical signaling and behavioral outputs - how the brain marshals its
signaling units to generate behaviors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.