* 2334562
* Travel Grant: Inaugural Data, Analysis and Software in Heliophysics (DASH) Conference; Laurel, Maryland; October 11-13, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Julie Barnum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide travel support in order to increase attendance at the
Data, Analysis, and Software in Heliophysics (DASH) conference to be held on
October 11-13, 2023, at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
(JHU/APL) on the Laurel, Maryland campus. Immediately following the DASH
Conference, a paired International Heliophysics Data Environment Alliance
(IHDEA) meeting will be held, and this travel grant will be extended to DASH
attendees who also plan on attending the IHDEA meeting. This meeting is the
first dedicated meeting about analysis techniques, data, metadata, services, and
software. The travel grants will be used to increase attendance among early
career and post-doctoral attendees, as well as attendees from smaller
institutions that lack travel money, in order to increase the impact and reach
of the conference and increase the diversity of attendees.

The Data, Analysis, and Software in Heliophysics (DASH) conference will serve as
a starting point for researchers within heliophysics to come together and
discuss challenges associated with the wide variety of data sources and to build
cross-disciplinary relationships and collaborations. The heliophysics research
community is diverse, with science concepts ranging from the physics of the Sun,
space plasma interactions, magnetosphere and ionosphere dynamics and coupling,
and even ground level effects such as the flow of induced currents. Members of
the heliophysics community will benefit from the attending the DASH conference
and this travel award will enable early-career and postdoctoral researchers, who
might not otherwise be able to attend due to limited travel funding, to
participate in the discussions, share their research, discuss challenges, and
strengthen their collaborative network. Travel award criteria will be developed
and vetted by the DASH committee and will include need, relevance, career stage,
and equity considerations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.