* 2334370
* Planning: CRISES: Global Center for Participatory Assessment and Governance of Climate Intervention Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Mahmud Farooque, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,963.00

Climate intervention technologies (CIT) include several technologies in
proposed, theoretical, or experimental stages that aim to modify the earthâ€™s
climate, including through the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere or
the reflection of sunlight into the atmosphere. Both climate change and the
potential use of CIT will challenge human societies and have far reaching
impacts on the natural environment. There is a high degree of uncertainty about
whether such technologies would work, who would benefit and who would suffer
from their use, where such technologies might be located, what their effects
would be on surrounding populations, and what their impact would be to those
already most vulnerable in society. The significant potential for disruption and
conflict surrounding CIT leads to the importance of exploring the social
dimensions of these technologies to inform how society might make decisions
about them. This planning grant explores the opportunities, resources and
organizations needed for creating a global research center for participatory,
inclusive, and responsible governance of climate intervention technologies
(CIT). The envisioned transdisciplinary center will undertake comparative
empirical social science research in the global north and south to explore
public views on CIT research and deployment and how this research can be
integrated into governance.

A central focus of the envisioned Center for Participatory Assessment and
Governance of Climate Intervention Technology Research is how knowledge of
geographically and demographically contingent public values and perspectives can
inform collaborative decision-making on CIT research, testing, and deployment at
national and global scales. The planning team uses participatory technology
assessment (pTA), an inclusive and deliberative public engagement model, as an
overarching framework for integrating research and practice across this center.
Towards this end, the planning grant convenes core collaborators to identify
pathways of inquiry along five focal research areas related to CIT: (i)
Foresight and Assessment, (ii) Expert and Stakeholder Engagement, (iii)
Anticipatory and Polycentric Governance, (iv) Evidence-based Decision and Policy
Making, and (v) Civic and Informal Education and Training to inform a center for
participatory assessment and governance of CIT. Targeted outreach through
interviews, meetings or workshops with CIT researchers, developers, funders,
policy stakeholders, and potential collaborators and creation of white papers
will identify gaps, needs and opportunities within the five focal research
areas. A wider group of collaborators will convene to assess the white papers to
create an integrated, interdisciplinary, and comprehensive research agenda, and
develops recommendations for a future center for research and innovation in
participatory assessment and governance of CIT.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.