* 2334084
* Conference: US-UK Workshop on Transformation in Urban Underground Infrastructure; 28-29 September 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Elise Miller-Hooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

This award supports a workshop that will bring together leading experts from
diverse, but complementary backgrounds in civil engineering, urban planning,
disaster management, computer science, operations engineering, public policy,
sensing, energy and other fields to identify gaps and opportunities for
advancement and define a vision for supporting the transformation of underground
urban infrastructure systems. Urban cities across the world have been a major
driver of economic growth, technological innovation, and cultural vitality.
However, their infrastructure systems are often patchworks of legacy and new
components with incompatible standards, materials, and governance structures. As
a result, the performance of such systems has been inherently unpredictable
under normal conditions and more so when subject to extreme events. Without a
paradigm shift in how infrastructure systems are engineered, constructed, and
operated, the gap between the service they can deliver and the demand from
citizens will continue to widen in the foreseeable future. Within urban
settings, the challenges faced by underground infrastructures, such as water and
wastewater, transportation, telecommunication, and power, are exacerbated due to
difficulties in access and the harsh environment in which they reside. Early
success in building digital models at city scales through smart city and digital
twin concepts offers a promising direction that is now newly enabled by
breakthroughs in sensing and computation. However, key knowledge gaps remain a
barrier to wholesale changes.

The workshop will catalyze creative thinking and knowledge exchange with the
purpose of devising a vision for transformation in underground infrastructure.
It will expose relevant research areas, knowledge gaps, research opportunities,
barriers, and fundamental research needs. It will aid in identifying fundamental
theories and methods needed to answer fundamental, open questions, such as, “How
do we plan for and achieve decarbonization goals for and by way of underground
infrastructure systems?” and “How do we optimize day-to-day operations of
underground infrastructures under normal, changing normal, and disaster
conditions?” Through a joint workshop with the United Kingdom, this award will
create an international research roadmap. It will also generate networking
opportunities across nations, disciplines, and between academia and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.