* 2334585
* Conference: Grantsmanship Workshop at American Indian Science and Engineering Society 2023 National Conference
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kathy DeerInWater, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,084.00

Given the underrepresentation of Native students in STEM higher education and
Native faculty at higher education institutions, AISES recognizes the need to
support Native serving tribal and non-tribal institutions in securing STEM
research funding. To that end, AISES in collaboration with the National Science
Foundation (NSF) will develop and host an NSF Grantsmanship Workshop to be held
during the pre-conference day of the AISES National Conference in Spokane,
Washington, October 19-21, 2023. The goal of the NSF Grantsmanship Workshop is
to provide professional development in NSF grant proposal development through
the Workshop, as well as the professional development and network building
opportunities at the AISES National Conference, to faculty from Tribal Colleges
and Universities (TCUs) and Native American-Serving Non-Tribal Institution
(NASNTI).

This workshop will potentially impact the STEM research infrastructure at
institutions serving Native students. Faculty participants will learn about NSF
programs and how to develop proposals to address their research and teaching
needs. Faculty will be able to expose their students to STEM research, which
will help in their recruitment and retention in STEM. The long term goal is to
improve the capacity for Native and Native-serving faculty to pursue new funding
to support STEM research opportunities. Given the significant
underrepresentation of Native students, professionals, and faculty in STEM
fields, AISES believes now is a critical time to focus on strengthening the STEM
research infrastructure of Native-serving institutions to move the needle on
increasing representation of STEM research by Native faculty and thereby
increasing the impact on STEM persistence among Native students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.