* 2334298
* Planning: CRISES: Southeast Center for Just, Resilient, and Sustainable Ecosystems (SECURE)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Amirhosein Jafari, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Extreme heat events are becoming more prevalent and severe in many regions. This
project develops plans for a research center to investigate how extreme weather
in the Southeast US disproportionately impacts disadvantaged communities. An
interdisciplinary research team will examine how to improve public safety and
resilience by building collaborations among community-based organizations,
industry, and academics to address disaster preparedness, emergency response,
technology adoption, and social-behavioral and policy aspects of climate-
resilient systems serving urban and rural communities. The project seeks to
strengthen infrastructure while serving social justice goals. This project
develops research approaches to address critical community needs and solutions
to improve crisis management strategies in the context of energy supply systems
(e.g., power grid), built environment, transportation systems, and health
infrastructures.

This project prepares for establishing the Southeast Center for Just, Resilient,
and Sustainable Ecosystems (SECURE) to transform scientific knowledge and
research products from cross-disciplinary programs for long-lasting benefits to
the community through a wide range of stakeholder networks. The goal is to
improve climate resilience and impacts through five research pillars: 1)
multidimensional community vulnerability frameworks; 2) needs assessments to
understand barriers to climate mitigation; 3) resilience and sustainability of
interdependent energy, transportation, health, and building infrastructure; 4)
community engagement to co-design solutions on climate preparation; and 5)
workforce development opportunities for individuals with diverse backgrounds and
experiences. The resulting knowledge-to-action and socio-technological
integration frameworks impact interdisciplinary fields and disadvantaged
communities, including Indigenous and low-income households, for pre-disaster
resilience, adaptation, and mitigation. The workforce development plan includes
creation of a diverse and inclusive environment for under-represented
populations (i.e., people of color, women, veterans, and low-income residents,
among others) and seeks to build a comprehensive talent pipeline and future
climate-resilience leaders, especially for underserved communities in the
Southeast and similar communities in the nation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.