* 2334525
* RAPID: Responsible, Ethical, and Effective Acceptable Use Policies for the Integration of Generative AI in US School Districts and Beyond
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Patricia Ruiz, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 177,306.00

The rapidly evolving space of artificial intelligence (AI) is requiring school
and district leaders to make sense of how emerging technology applications,
including those that use generative AI (GenAI), are being integrated in schools
and districts across the United States. Much uncertainty exists about what GenAI
is, how it works, and what the implications are for students, families,
educators, and the broader school community. School and district leaders have
shared challenges that they are facing regarding the use of AI for teaching and
learning, including concerns around issues of privacy, data security, and bias.
They are also concerned about existing inequities in accessing digital
technologies and tools, and that this disparity could present further structural
barriers for students and communities. To address the need for policies,
guidelines, and guardrails, this project will recruit and convene a GenAI
Working Group made up of school and district leaders that represent diverse
identities and district demographics.

The GenAI Working Group, in collaboration with a Digital Promise team and
subject matter experts, will work to answer the following research questions:
(1) What tensions do leaders experience when adapting acceptable use policies
(AUPs) for emerging technologies such as GenAI? (2) What do acceptable use
policies that are "ethical, responsible, and effective" look like? (3) How can
districts develop policies that allow for learning to advance while protecting
and centering human agency? This project will be both informative to the
research field and have direct broad impacts via AUPs for districts and schools.
The GenAI Working Group will: (1) write, adapt, and share a set of sample GenAI
AUPs for a range of district contexts; (2) work with others at their districts
to write and share their own district's AUPs for the responsible, ethical, and
effective integration of GenAI; and (3) participate in a final public webinar
where they will share what they learned about GenAI and their policies. This
proposal was received in response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly
Accelerating Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and
Informal Settings (NSF 23-097) and funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.