* 2334240
* EAGER: SSMCDAT2023: Database generation to identify trends in inter- and intra-polyhedral connectivity and energy storage behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Richard Hennig, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress on a project
advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University. This EAGER
project focuses on research and education activities that support the selection
and design of future battery materials. The electrode materials in a
rechargeable battery must reversibly take in and release lithium-ions and
electrons when powering a device and when charging. The ability of materials to
do this depends on the types of atoms they contain (composition) and how the
atoms are arranged (atomic structure). To better understand the relationships
between composition, atomic structure, and battery cycling behavior, this
project assembles a database of battery electrode materials. This involves
producing programs that translate atomic structure information from spatial and
visual representations into numerical values, which enables this information to
be visualized alongside battery behavior data. The generated database is used to
identify trends and relationships between atomic structure, composition, and
function through visualization of data, as well as using regression and machine
learning algorithms. The use of data science algorithms helps to establish
unintuitive and higher dimensional correlations between data categories included
in the database. The database and tools created through this work are published
under an open-source license and made available along with documentation and
tutorials. In addition, university-level course materials are created using
research products, which help to teach about energy storage, data science, and
relationships between atomic structure and materials properties relevant to
real-world devices. PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This EAGER project focuses on assembling a database of intercalation battery
electrode materials that combines chemical composition and cycling behavior with
encoded values representing structural connectivity. To do so, existing
resources are adapted and new programs are created, especially to translate
spatial connectivity within and between polyhedra to numerical representations.
Using the produced database, fundamental structure-function relationships are
identified through visualization, regressions, and machine learning algorithms.
From the established relationships, materials with targeted cycling behavior are
selected based on their composition and structure, which are experimentally
prepared and characterized with structural and electrochemical methods.
Experimental results inform the modification and iterative application of data
science tools and structure-function relationships. The database, workflows, and
programs generated through this project are published under an open-source
license and made available along with documentation and tutorials. In addition,
modules for higher education courses are created using products of this research
to advance instruction of structure-property relationships, electrochemical
energy storage, and data science tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.