* 2334336
* Collaborative Research: Planning: Center for Aggression and Violent Behavior Planning Grant
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Paul Ward, Mitre Corporation Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Many profound crises faced by our society are tied to aggression and violent
behavior (AVB) including, but not limited to, bullying, intimate partner
violence, sexual harassment terrorism and mass shootings. The impact of
aggression and violent behavior is felt across different contexts (e.g., in
homes, at workplaces, and in physical and online communities) and amidst various
daily activities. This award supports planning for a center to address negative
impacts of aggression and violent behavior via interdisciplinary research.
Specifically, the planned center has two primary goals: (1) integrate AVB
knowledge from multiple perspectives, and (2) translate that knowledge base into
meaningful interventions that reduce AVB in society. This project synthesizes
institutional, disciplinary, and contextual knowledge from a range of
perspectives including academic researchers, non-profit foundations, not-for-
profit organizations, private sector representatives, government leaders, and
the public. This knowledge provides insight into the potential catalysts for,
and effects of AVB. The project investigates under what circumstances
individuals are risk of becoming a victim to AVB and situations that are more or
less likely to spark AVB. This science-based approach to understanding
aggression and violent behavior enables the development of timely, relevant, and
impactful interventions for the people and groups who most need it.

This project develops a taxonomy of intervention models for the reduction of
aggression and violent behavior. External interviews with network partners,
including educators, administrators, policy-makers, non-profit volunteer
organizations, and law enforcement agencies are used to identify connections
between AVB and critical societal concerns. Research activities are informed by
engagement with external partners so that science production informs practical
applications. Throughout each of these developmental steps there is an emphasis
on the manifestations of AVB across different contexts (e.g., family, school,
and workplace), timeframes (e.g., short, such as minutes, to long, such as
months), and levels of analysis (e.g., event, individual, group, and society).
This integration is bolstered by the inclusion of disparate methodological
approaches including the usage of wearable sensors, geographical modeling and
computational modeling. The research project closes the gap between science and
practice by focusing research plans on issues and topics informed by deep
community engagement with partners from diverse segments of society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.