* 2334253
* Conference: CRISES: Engaging Communities in Developing Technologies to Support Community Flourishing
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Dustin Stoltz, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 65,589.00

The social sciences give insight into human behavior and lived experiences that
serve as a strong foundation for efforts to address societal crises. The 2.5-day
conference, run by an interdisciplinary team of researchers from Lehigh
University, builds a framework for convergence and innovation that includes
community-based participatory research (CBPR) and computational social science
(CSS), and emerging technologies. CBPR focuses on collaboration and equity
between community members with lived expertise and researchers with learned
expertise, in the pursuit of knowledge and positive social action. CSS is an
interdisciplinary methodological approach that builds on computational advances
to enable social scientists to work with large-scale data in real-time to
structure, scale, and iterate models to address complex societal questions.
Bringing together methodological experts in CBPR and CSS for extended, in-depth
conversation about their tools and approaches with the goal of finding
convergence between these methodologies has the potential to radically transform
how research teams approach questions in many different domains of human-
centered science.

The conference explores the idea that together these approaches (CBPR and CSS)
are a powerful foundation for understanding of community needs and guiding the
development of technologies to address specific societal crises. These separate
approaches ask parallel questions. The conference is a place where researchers
from both traditions, along with computer scientists and technology developers,
are joining in knowledge sharing. Additionally, the conference focuses on three
case studies of societal crises: 1) housing insecurity, 2) climate change and
agriculture, and 3) health literacy. Following a CBPR approach, community
members directly affected by these three societal crises are attending the
conference to share their experiences and begin the process of community
building necessary for the long-term partnerships between research teams and
community members needed to effectively engage in efforts surrounding community
flourishing. Presentations, discussions, and visioning activities are guided by
questions drawn from three themes: Human-Centered, Scientific Innovation, and
Well-being. The outcomes of the conference are expected to be: 1) the impact
that the experience has on individual participantsâ€™ approaches to future
research projects, 2) the success in establishing ongoing partnerships among
conference participants, and 3) the continued effort to establish a center for
engaging communities in co-developing technologies for community flourishing.
Concrete deliverables of the conference include a roadmap to guide the process
of integrating CBPR and CSS approaches and a set of pilot project outlines based
on the three case studies of local, regional, and national crises.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.