* 2334353
* Conference: Experimental and Computational Advances in Single-Molecule Biomolecular Electronics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Juan Artes Vivancos, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This symposium will bring together both theoreticians and experimentalists who
focus on studying charge transport through individual biomolecules and
biomolecular complexes. The symposium will bring scientists from different
disciplines for exchange of ideas and develop synergistic activities. Main
objectives include discussion of recent advances in experimental measurements
and the experiments that aimed to the understanding of the transport mechanisms
in biomolecular systems. Another objective is to determine challenges that must
be overcome by theory and simulations to describe charge transport in biological
systems accurately. These discussions will include the use of new emerging
techniques, such as artificial intelligence and machine learning. New
applications of biomolecular electronics, such as biosensors or biomolecular
electronics measurements as tools for single-molecule biophysical studies will
be discussed. Participation of junior researchers, postdoctoral researchers, and
students of underrepresented minorities will be given a high priority. This
symposium is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.