* 2334638
* Becoming a Scientist: A Study of Identity Balance and the Persistence of Hispanic Undergraduate Students in Engineering and Biological Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,08/31/2024
* P. Wesley Schultz, Claremont Graduate University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 155,558.00

Advancing a diverse and technically competent STEM workforce is critical for
contributing to the progress of science and to the health, prosperity and
welfare of our nation. While the number of Hispanic students, who are U.S.
citizens and permanent residents, earning STEM bachelor's degrees has increased
rapidly during the past decade, Hispanic students enrolled in STEM programs are
leaving college or switching majors at higher rates than their White peers. This
loss may be related to the stereotypes, lack of support, and the exclusionary
spaces that Hispanic students are exposed to in college. Research suggests that
developing and maintaining a strong STEM identity is an important predictor of
persistence and success in STEM disciplines. Understanding the complexity of
Hispanic students' identity, and the balance of that identity, in the context of
social stereotypes, could lead to improved STEM undergraduate academic, research
and internship programs, which would advance persistence to bachelor's degree
completion. The project team is exploring a framework that considers both
implicitly and explicitly held identities for understanding how students achieve
and maintain a strong STEM identity across time, and what experiences facilitate
or hinder this process. The researchers hypothesize that the strength and nature
of the balance between implicitly held associations and identities influence
student's explicitly held STEM identity, and that these processes are
qualitatively different due to prevailing stereotypes for White and Hispanic
undergraduate students, enrolled in Engineering and Biological Sciences degree
programs. The current investigation is also examining the identity trajectories
of White and Hispanic undergraduate students as they make critical career and
academic decisions. Results from the research are advancing knowledge about
balanced STEM identity for historically underrepresented minorities. Findings
inform university administrators and educators about how their institutions
might make evidence-based modifications to undergraduate research, internship
and academic programs that impact minority STEM student retention and
persistence to degree completion. This research is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education,
learning and participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.