* 2334690
* Elements: A Deep Neural Network-based Drone (UAS) Sensing System for 3D Crop Structure Assessment
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Guoyu Lu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 05/31/2024
* USD 543,866.00

This project develops a 3D reconstruction sensing system that can be installed
on unmanned aerial systems (UAS), to be used by agricultural researchers,
growers, and service providers to assess crop growth. Applying Artificial
Intelligence (AI) technology for large scale agriculture reconstruction
applications, the sensing system would be able to estimate crop structure for a
large coverage area at a much lower cost than current standards that rely on
light detection and ranging (LiDAR). The project would develop and refine a deep
neural network-based 3D assessment workflow, based solely on a low cost and
lightweight 2D LiDAR and color camera configuration. Researchers, growers, and
service providers would be able to extract detailed crop structure and forecast
yields, based on a 3D time series of crop growth. The technology would provide a
less expensive alternative to the current 3D LiDAR sensor approach, and the
sensing system could also be applied to related areas such as high-throughput
phenotyping and variation estimation of general terrestrial vegetation. Outreach
and extension activities are included, to deliver research outcomes to the
stakeholders, including agricultural researchers, growers and service providers.
PhD students, undergraduates, and high school students will be trained through
this project, including a summer activity training high school students through
the Rochester Institute of Technology Imaging Science High School Summer Intern
Program.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Biological Infrastructure within the NSF Biosciences
Directorate, and by the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems within
the NSF Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.