* 2334206
* Collaborative Research: Travel: Geosciences United - A joint Technical Conference of the National Association of Black Geoscientists and the American Geophysical Union
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 71,250.00

The National Association of Black Geoscientists (NABG) and the American
Geophysical Union (AGU) will host a joint student-centered conference. The two
organizations will host a technical conference with the theme “Geosciences
United: Collaborating for a Sustainable and Equitable Future at the 42nd NABG
Annual Technical Conference”. Requested support will defray registration, travel
and subsistence expenses of approximately forty student participants. The
conference will be held at the AGU headquarters in Washington D.C. on 27-30
September 2023 as a hybrid event (in-person and virtual). The PIs expect that
this conference will attract attendees representing many of the federal agencies
because of its central location at AGU headquarters in Washington, DC. In
addition, the PIs will actively recruit a national cadre of students from
minority serving institutions (MSIs) and other institutions who are majoring in
geoscience disciplines representing atmospheric sciences, geoscience, marine
sciences, and environmental sciences. Students will present research and
participate in other activities of the conference. The objective is to expand
the disciplinary representation of NABG to include more students from MSIs
interested in the broader disciplines of Geosciences and to build new
relationships to unite geosciences disciplines.

During the past year, land-falling hurricanes and extreme drought/extreme
flooding, and wildfires directly impacted the U.S. Thus, the relevance of
atmospheric and environmental sciences to NABG members and their employers
presents obvious opportunities to broaden the disciplinary areas of NABG while
also engaging a broader audience of scholars and students in these disciplines.
This meeting builds on successful efforts to improve the diversity of the
geoscience workforce since 2009 and serves as an opportunity for academic
institutions, government agencies, and the energy/environmental industry to
recruit students from underrepresented groups to STEM disciplines and employment
in the national geosciences workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.