* 2334735
* ATD: Spatio-Temporal Modeling for Identifying Changes in Land Use
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2023,07/31/2024
* George Michailidis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 167,387.00

Modeling land development dynamics represents a key problem in urban and
regional planning. Land use changes have impact on the environment, the quality
of life, public finances and economic development trajectories of local
communities and larger scale regions. Further, there is a need to assess and
quantify threats posed through multiple scenarios about future land
developments. Land use models that account both for key drivers of human
behavior, as well as fine scale spatial and temporal dependencies are valuable
tools to various stakeholders for this task. The project aims to develop methods
and open source software tools for modeling, predicting and assessing threats in
land use change. It will provide various stakeholders, community organizations,
regional planners, policymakers, businesses as well as diverse scientific fields
with new capabilities to gain insights into key drivers of land use changes and
also assess the environmental, economic and social impact of both short and
longer term developments and threats. In addition, the project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students. To achieve the stated goals, the
project leverages a modeling framework that enables integration of structural
economic geography and related models, with fine scale spatiotemporal data
driven models. In addition it rigorously addresses the following technical
issues: (i) development of fast estimation and statistical inference methods for
the proposed models, (ii) development of techniques to perform unsupervised
learning tasks including identifying regime changes in the parameters of the
models and clustering regions with similar land use developments based on
dynamic programming algorithms, and (iii) development of a framework that can
incorporate projected paths from scenarios outlining future threats, and predict
the corresponding land use outcomes, as well as assess their impact. The
methodology will be tested and illustrated through a highly dis-aggregated
spatiotemporal data set that contains detailed information for each land parcel
in the state of Florida, assembled and curated from county tax auditor
databases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.