* 2334701
* Tribal College and University Cyberinfrastructure Facilitation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Alexander Grandon, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2028
* USD 4,999,494.00

Through the Tribal College and University (TCU) CI Facilitation initiative the
American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC) collaborates with the 37
TCUs nationwide to enable the identification, refinement, adoption, and
integration of cyberinfrastructure resources into the TCU campus information
technology environment in support of STEM applications. Specific activities
including campus cyberinfrastructure facilitation, cyberinfrastructure
engagement, strategy and policy development, and CI workforce and professional
development activities to support the advancement and use of cyberinfrastructure
resources and technologies for crosscutting mission-driven applications such as
Native language, climate science, and geographic information systems.
Communities of practice, starting with the IT Directors/CIOs and STEM faculty
communities provide collaboration and capacity building opportunities within the
TCUs. The initiative’s flexibility allows each TCU to tailor project activities
to their individual science application, campus information technology, and
faculty and student needs.

Access to better cyberinfrastructure resources accelerate the exposure and
adoption of new technologies and techniques including data storage policies and
technologies that preserve data sovereignty and reflect cultural data access
requirements. The CI-enabled STEM research at the TCUs provide education and
workforce development opportunities to the underrepresented American Indian and
Alaska Native populations serving many first-generation students. The use of
cyberinfrastructure resources to support, preserve, and promote Native American
culture, languages, and heritage empowers the TCU community, including students,
faculty, and staff, to become leaders grounded in indigenous values.

This effort is also supported by National Discovery Cloud for Climate (NDC-C)
resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.