* 2334354
* Planning: CRISES: Interdisciplinary Center for the Study of Catastrophic Surprises
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* James Kendra, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,986.00

Understanding that a catastrophic surprising event (such as a major natural
disaster, public health crisis, or unanticipated military or terrorist attack)
is about to occur has long been an aspiration of public and private sector
crisis managers. This planning grant seeks to develop the basic science needed
to understand, theorize, and forewarn against potentially catastrophic
surprises. It provides support to identify and recruit partners to establish a
team for a national-level center that draws on multiple branches of knowledge to
develop new ways of representing surprise dangers for officials, policymakers,
and the public - especially those who are politically and economically
marginalized - with the explicit goal of determining ways to better anticipate,
avert, or contend with catastrophic surprise.

To address hazards, whether surprising or not, requires an interdisciplinary
approach that integrates knowledge of how the natural and built environments
interact with social systems. Through this grant, the core planning team -
comprised of faculty in the social, health, and engineering sciences - will
bring together their expertise in quantitative and qualitative methods,
community-based participatory research, risk modeling, field epidemiology,
policy analyses and mapping, and quick response disaster research. They will
identify and recruit additional partners across various scientific domains from
the academic, private, and public sector to collaboratively conceptualize
surprises that can prove catastrophic and identify application domains for
critical investigation. Methods include numerous meetings for scientific
discussion and deliberation; use of new technologies for remote collaboration;
and creativity-enhancing approaches such as idea-matrices that have been
identified in the management literatures. This planning grant surfaces new
approaches that are needed, and for which no other disaster-related center
cohesively addresses, providing a springboard to move beyond previous efforts to
generate a transformative understanding of surprising events. The broader
impacts of the grant include the development of a center proposal, an article
that will present the planning groupâ€™s state-of-the-science thinking on
surprises, and the integration of the intellectual capital developed during the
planning stage into coursework for students pursuing work in the disaster
management field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.