* 2334288
* Conference: NSF Workshop on the Convergence of Smart Sensing Systems, Applications, Analytic and Decision Making
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Mingyi Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 03/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

We live in a highly interconnected world, and this interconnectivity is
predicted to grow exponentially in the next decade. As a result of this rapid
expansion, we anticipate a network of more than 50 billion interconnected smart
systems, encompassing intelligent appliances, cars, gadgets, and tools. These
systems possess the capability to collect extensive real-time data, perform
complex computational tasks, and deliver valuable services and actionable
insights, greatly enriching our lives and collective productivity. Essential
components of these smart systems include distributed sensors, communication
modules, as well as analytical and computational modules. These components are
intricately intertwined and rely on each other. Overall, there is a natural
synergy between different sensing technologies, their applications, and
methodologies developed in analytical areas. The objective of the proposed
workshop is to identify significant research and educational challenges
pertaining to these areas related to smart sensing technologies.

More specifically, the workshop aims to address significant research gaps in how
researchers approach problems and formulate solutions in sensing applications
while integrating tools and algorithms from analytical areas. Overall, the
workshop aims to foster collaboration, knowledge exchange, and innovation
between experts from various fields to advance the understanding and application
of analytical tools in sensing systems. The main goals and areas of focus are as
follows:

1 )Aligning the State-of-the-Art of Analytical Areas: The workshop aims to
bridge the gap between various scientific fields, academia, and industry in data
science, particularly machine learning, by presenting the cutting-edge
computational and analytical capabilities in a way that is understandable to the
sensing community. It seeks to establish effective methods to keep sensing
system researchers updated on advancements in analytical areas and make these
practices available in a publicly accessible repository.

2) Appreciating Algorithmic Limitations & Application Requirements: The workshop
recognizes that the direct application of advanced algorithms from analytical
areas to sensing systems can be distracting and limited, especially when
considering the physical constraints inherent in sensing systems. Researchers
need to develop customized computational and analytical tools that respect these
constraints and align with specific application requirements. 3) Application-
Specific Sensor Systems: The workshop acknowledges the broad range of sensors
used in various applications and aims to develop new sensors or integrate
existing ones to meet specific application requirements. It brings together
experts from different fields to define and deliver technologies that address
performance, cost, sampling, environmental, deployment, data collection, and
ease-of-use needs in sensor systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.