* 2334411
* EAGER: SSMCDAT2023: Natural Language Processing and Large Language Models for Automated Extraction of Materials Chemistry Data from Scientific Literature
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Taylor Sparks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports
progress on a project advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh
University. This project addresses the problem of materials data in scientific
journal papers being hard to access and use in modern computer assisted research
environments because of the use of portable document format (PDF) files.
Previous attempts to encourage better formats have not worked well. To tackle
this problem, the team will use advanced artificial intelligence and natural
language processing which enables computers to “understand” text, to
automatically extract materials data from scientific research papers. A crucial
element of the team's approach involves leveraging valuable commercial
resources, such as the Pauling File, which provides well-curated examples of
materials data. The team will utilize this training data to enhance the
performance of the large language models employed in the work. Large language
models can “understand” text and it can generate text in a seemingly human way.
Access to organized materials data has the potential to transform solid-state
materials chemistry and enable faster progress in the field. The project also
seeks to engage with materials scientists, authors, and editors from diverse
subdisciplines of materials science to integrate this technology seamlessly into
academic publishing workflows. This project also supports training graduate and
undergraduate students, and creating outreach materials such as podcast episodes
and YouTube courses to promote a wider understanding of artificial intelligence
and materials science.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress
on a project advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University.
This activity addresses the challenge of limited machine-readable materials data
in academic literature, mainly due to the prevalence of PDF formats. Prior
attempts to encourage machine-readable formats have been unsuccessful. The
result has been the emergence of inaccurate and labor-intensive information
extraction tools. The team aims to capitalize on very recent advances in natural
language processing and large language models, and combine them with the Pauling
File's hand-labeled data. This approach eliminates the need for manual labeling,
empowering materials chemists to write papers as they always have, while using
artificial intelligence to extract and organize materials data into machine-
readable formats accurately and automatically. The approach includes steps for
machine-learned versus rules-based token size reduction, comparison of open-
source versus commercial large language models, expert analysis of errors and
incompletions, and expansion to materials property extraction data in addition
to synthesis data. Success in this endeavor would be potentially transformative
to solid-state materials chemistry by leveraging progress that has been made in
materials informatics. The activity aims to transform the materials data
landscape, enabling widespread materials informatics progress by automating data
extraction from research articles. The project's broader impacts extend to other
academic domains, with potential applications in different scientific fields. It
also promotes bilingual outreach and education including unique social media
content delivered through YouTube and podcast formats. Finally, the activity
will substantially bring authors, editors, data practitioners, and publishers
together to assess data extraction performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.