* 2334197
* Collaborative Research: Education DCL: EAGER: Redefining Cybersecurity Education for Criminal Justice Professionals: Bridging the Gap in National Cyber Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Juan Li, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 120,036.00

Criminal Justice professionals play a critical role in safeguarding the nation's
infrastructure against cybercrime and upholding national security. However,
limited resources, time constraints, and a lack of standardized frameworks have
hindered their access to comprehensive cybersecurity education and training. To
address this gap, the University of Washington Tacoma and North Dakota State
University are pushing a collaborative project that aims to develop tailored
curriculum modules and scalable pathways for the widespread adoption of
cybersecurity and privacy education among Criminal Justice professionals across
the country. By equipping them with essential skills, this project will
significantly enhance the nation's cyber capabilities and foster a diverse and
interdisciplinary cybersecurity workforce proficient in technical and non-
technical domains.

The project focuses on providing scenario-based offensive security and Web-based
showcase labs with interactive simulations and case studies in three progressive
courses, revolutionizing cybersecurity education for future Criminal Justice
professionals. The curriculum starts with foundational courses in cybersecurity
and privacy and progresses to specialized training in cyber forensics, cyber
intelligence, and solving Criminal Justice-specific cyber challenges. Strategic
partnerships between academic institutions and Criminal Justice-related agencies
ensure curriculum alignment with industry standards and the evolving needs of
professionals. The project also integrates artificial intelligence (AI) into the
curriculum to enhance their capabilities. Exploring AI applications in law
enforcement, ethics, cybersecurity, privacy protection, and social media will
provide valuable insights into AI's practical implications and ethical
considerations. The development of a web portal will facilitate
interdisciplinary collaboration, enabling researchers and practitioners to
exchange ideas and foster teamwork across cybersecurity, privacy, artificial
intelligence, and Criminal Justice domains. Moreover, the project aims to
support underrepresented minority students, fostering diversity in the
cybersecurity workforce and promoting inclusivity in the field

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.