* 2334945
* EAGER: A Comprehensive Approach for Generating, Sharing, Searching, and Using High-Resolution Terrain Parameters
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Michela Taufer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 225,000.00

Terrain parameters quantitatively describe a landscape's surface properties (for
example, slope or topographic wetness). Terrain parameters hold significant
potential for advancing climate-related science and engineering efforts. As
terrain parameters can be generated at different spatial resolutions, they are
valuable resources for scientists working on soil moisture prediction, fire
propagation, estimation of soil carbon content, soil respiration, and hydrology.
These applications are critical for understanding land-atmosphere interactions
and mitigating the impacts of climate change across ecosystems and landscapes.
However, the process of deriving terrain parameters from digital elevation
models is accurate, but expensive in terms of computational resources and time.
For more efficient generation of terrain parameters, this project implements a
flexible workflow to generate terrain parameter datasets at different
resolutions for different regions of interest. All the products of this project
(data, metadata, and software) are stored in an open-access commons to ensure
they are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). The team of
researchers promotes increased participation of underrepresented students,
particularly women, through mentoring students in Systers (the organization for
women in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of
Tennessee Knoxville) and the collaboration with the Women in Data Science (WiDS)
at Stanford.

Terrain parameters are derived from Digital Elevation Models. High-resolution
terrain parameters enable accurate spatial analyses and decision-making in
climate-related science and engineering domains, but generating high-resolution
data is computationally expensive, hindering the usability of terrain parameters
for multiple applications. The project addresses this challenge to make terrain
parameters available for climate study in three ways. First, the project
implements a workflow to generate 15 terrain parameters at any resolution (from
30 km to 3 m) while preserving performance and accuracy. Performance is
evaluated by measuring wall times and memory usage cloud platforms. The accuracy
is validated by comparing the data with the derived terrain parameters. Second,
the project uses the workflow and exploits data parallelism to generate large
high-resolution datasets (i.e., down to 3 m) for North America (i.e., Canada,
the United States, and Mexico). The project deliverable comprises rich metadata
annotating the parameter values and Jupyter Notebooks for data search and
access, reproducible data generation, accuracy validation, and performance
measurement. Third, by bringing together an interdisciplinary research team of
leading scientists with experience in data science and soil moisture dynamics,
the project facilitates collaboration among federal agencies (including NSF,
NASA, and USDA, among others) and institutions to pursue interdisciplinary
research, share insights, and deliver innovative solutions for climate-related
issues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.