* 2334784
* Conference: Macrosystems Biology and NEON-Enabled Science Investigator Meeting 2024
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2024
* Daniel Allen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 12/31/2024
* USD 92,929.00

Most of the world’s pressing environmental problems, including climate change,
habitat destruction and biodiversity loss, pollution, and unsustainable water
use are the product of interactions between human societies and ecosystems that
occur at regional, continental, and global scales. Therefore, we need rigorous
and actionable science at these large spatial scales that can be used to inform
environmental policy and management. This conference will bring researchers
funded by the Macrosystems Biology – NEON Enabled Science (MSB-NES) program
together to share their research findings and discuss new efforts to study and
address environmental problems across large spatial scales. The conference will
also promote training and professional development by offering a series of
plenaries on team science; diversity, equity and inclusion; safe and inclusive
working environments; and open and transparent science. It will also foster the
development of national research talent by offering a venue for early career and
senior researchers to interact and network across the broad range of MSB-NES
funded projects.

This conference will support a meeting of researchers funded by the NSF
Macrosystems Biology and Neon Enabled Science (MSB-NES) program. This meeting
will build on prior meeting themes of collaboration, inclusive research, and
open and transparent science. This meeting will have three primary goals: 1)
Providing networking and community-building opportunities among actively funded
MSB-NES PIs and researchers. 2) Providing learning opportunities for the
community through a series of plenary speakers that will focus on topics
fundamental to the macrosystems biology community. And 3) coordinating the
production of a Macrosystem Biology special issue in a scientific journal that
highlights MSB-NES research and our meeting themes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.