* 2334134
* EAGER: Elastic Electronics for Sensing Gut Luminal and Serosal Biochemical Release
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Jinxing Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 70,000.00

Microbiota-gut-brain communication plays an important role in the progression of
psychiatric disorders, such as anxiety, depression, and neurodevelopmental
disorders. Gut serotonin, which accounts for 95% of the body's serotonin, serves
as an important link between gut microbiota and the brain. However, knowledge of
gut serotonin's function and impact on the enteric nervous system is limited due
to the lack of proper bioelectronic tools. The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a
series of soft organs with inherent motility, joined in a long and twisting tube
from the mouth to the anus. As a result, biochemical sensing in the GI tract has
historically been challenging because conventional bioelectronic probes are
rigid and fragile. This award aims to develop a new bioelectronic tool based on
tissue-like soft materials that make both the mucosal and serosal sides of the
intestinal epithelium accessible to neurochemical sensing, thus allowing us to
study the biochemical effect on various physiological factors. The project is
expected to create a powerful research tool that will provide novel insights
into the dynamics of gut serotonin and lay the foundation for the development of
transformative diagnosis and treatment for patients with psychiatric disorders
through intervention in the GI tract. The research thrusts will be tightly
coupled with comprehensive educational and outreach components, including
Biodesign course and RET projects about soft electronics, to prepare future
scientists and engineers from diverse backgrounds in the highly
interdisciplinary research fields of bioelectronics. This project seeks to fill
the critical technology gap of accessing the gut electrically by developing a
soft and elastic graphene-based bioelectric sensor array that provides robust
and intimate intestinal epithelium tissue interfacing with both the mucosa and
serosa, thus enabling simultaneous and multiplexed biochemical sensing during
continuous gut motion. The project includes three roles: (1) Systematic
examination of the electrochemical performance of nitrogen-doped graphene
electrode materials for sensitive and selective sensing of multiple
neurotransmitters. (2) Development of a new microfabrication process for
graphene microelectrode production to create a fully soft, graphene-based
microelectrode array for biochemical sensing. (3) Evaluation of the feasibility
of the elastic electronic sensor arrays to be interfaced with both the mucosal
and serosal sides of the gut for multiplexed and multi-channel biochemical
sensing in the actively moving gut of a rodent model. The proposed research will
lead to a new tool for collecting critical datasets on motility-associated
temporospatial fluctuation of gut biochemicals in the actively moving intestine
of rodent animals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.