* 2334844
* I-Corps:  Higher-potency Insecticidal Dusts by Solid-State Transformation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Bart Kahr, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of insecticidal formulations that extend the life of current active
ingredients that are failing due to widespread resistance. The development of
resistance to exogenous insecticidal chemicals forces the need to invent new
active ingredients with new mechanisms of action. The goal of the proposed
technology is to provide more effective formulations that may serve to repurpose
existing insecticides that were earlier thought to no longer be effective.
Reformulating known insecticidal compounds to increase efficacy may be an
alternative to the costly development of new active ingredients. Further,
reformulating known insecticidal compounds in more bioavailable forms may be
cheaper, less risky, greener, and faster. Little engineering or research and
development to replace existing products. The outcomes of this endeavor are
broadly applicable to the control of urban pests, pet protection, agriculture,
and public health. Markets for new products extend from deadly mosquito control
(malaria has been confirmed in the United States for the first time in decades)
to bed bug eradication, or simple pet collars. Products commonly sold in
hardware stores may be reengineered by the proposed process.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of insecticidal chemical
formulations that employ activated crystalline forms of contact insecticides
that have not been previously discovered. Contact insecticides that are the
mainstays of pest control are failing due to widespread resistance among vector
populations, a major public health challenge. Insecticide resistance also has
been found in urban pests such as bedbugs and cockroaches. Insecticides that
work on contact often involve crystals, but exploiting the relative activity of
different crystals of the same compound has not been investigated. The proposed
technology has been shown to overcome resistance among resistant malarial
mosquitoes from West Africa. In this study, the common insecticide deltamethrin
was reformulated to contain a new solid form of the active ingredient dispersed
on chalk. The new solid form is prepared in situ by a simple and inexpensive
method that may enhance deltamethrin’s efficacy against a wide variety of
arthropods. The proposed technology may enhance the ability to eliminate insects
with deltamethrin, and overcome organisms with vexing resistance that
compromises disease prophylaxis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.