* 2334091
* RAPID-Evolution
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Shane Elipot, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 625,027.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award recommendation, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget that supports scientists at
institutions in their respective countries. The global climate system is rapidly
changing under anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, and a major mechanism of
climate change associated with profound environmental, social and economic
impacts is the meridional overturning circulation in the Atlantic Ocean (AMOC).
AMOC transports heat through the Atlantic, and climate and weather on the
surrounding continents is sensitive to its mean state and variability.
Furthermore, AMOC exerts significant control on the ocean’s sequestration of
anthropogenic carbon. IPCC projections have a declining AMOC over the next
century, but at present the only way to know the state of the AMOC, and to
assess the validity of climate models, is by observing it with moored arrays of
which there are very few. Since 2004 the UK and US have worked in partnership to
implement the 26°N RAPID-MOCHA array. The array is simple in design but heavily
dependent on research vessels. Recent developments in observing technology and
process understanding provide an opportunity to test new approaches to observing
the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). This project will design
and test lower-cost, sustainable observing systems to provide AMOC estimates at
the accuracy and frequency required by users. Target stakeholders are
researchers, forecasters, and decision-makers planning for the effects of
climate change. The program will be delivered in a partnership between UK (NOC,
Met Office) and US (University of Miami and NOAA Atlantic Oceanographic and
Meteorological Laboratory).

This particular component of the program will provide glider measurements of
temperature, salinity and currents from ADCP, which will be used to test the
step method for deriving the wester boundary overturning transport from ocean
bottom pressure gradients. The higher density of measurements from the glider
will allow for better testing of this approach than can be done from the
moorings alone. Glider sections will cover the entire 0-1000m zonal section
spanning from the Bahamas shore to 40 km offshore where the abyssal plain
starts. The meridional component of direct ADCP velocity measurements will be
validated by the estimates of velocity that will be obtained from the density
section through a geostrophic calculation and by comparison with the moored
current meter data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.