* 2334074
* Early-career Participant Support for Additive Manufacturing Modeling, Simulation, and Machine Learning Symposium at MS&amp;T 2023; Columbus, Ohio; October 1- 4, 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Jing Zhang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2024
* USD 9,793.00

This award provides early-career participants (senior graduate students and
post-doctoral scholars) with an opportunity to present research at the Symposium
of Additive Manufacturing Modeling, Simulation, and Machine Learning (AMMSML) at
the Materials Science & Technology 2023 (MS&T23) conference in Columbus, Ohio,
held October 1-4, 2023. The Symposium of Additive Manufacturing Modeling,
Simulation, and Machine Learning is one of the key symposia at the MS&T23
conference, sponsored by the Minerals, Metals & Materials Society (TMS) Additive
Manufacturing Committee, the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering
Committee, and the Computational Materials Science and Engineering Committee.
Additive manufacturing continues to have significant societal impact through
design and manufacturing innovation, personalized healthcare products, and
enhancement of supply chains. Data-driven approaches such as machine learning,
offer tremendous opportunities to tackle challenges associated with
understanding and practicing additive manufacturing. Despite extensive efforts,
challenges still exist in physics-based model formulation, experimental
validation, and machine learning applications. The AMMSML symposium will serve
as a unique platform to share the latest research and development related to
these topics.

The objective of this award, through providing participant support, is for the
selected students and post-doctoral scholars to make technical presentations at
the AMMSML symposium and interact with leading experts in the field. The
awardees will have the opportunity to showcase their research, improve
communication and presentation skills, increase their networking exposure, learn
about emerging research, and be inspired to prepare for a career in additive
manufacturing and/or machine learning. The grant opportunity will be announced
through professional organizations and relevant media to reach out to a broad
audience and maximize its impact. The project will make a special effort to
reach out to students and post-doctoral scholars from underrepresented groups
when broadcasting this opportunity, targeting their involvement and ultimately
retention in careers related to advanced manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.