* 2334061
* CRII: SaTC: RUI: Understanding and Addressing the Security and Privacy Needs of At-Risk Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Ada Lerner, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 71,209.00

Technology and the internet are increasingly involved in our personal as well as
public lives, providing people with many benefits, but also creating risks to
our privacy. Minority and marginalized groups especially benefit from
information, community, and social engagement when they use technology. However,
they are also in more danger. They are more likely to be targeted, and may have
fewer resources to protect themselves. Technology may not be designed for their
needs. Such groups are especially at risk when their personal lives are revealed
and, in some cases, communicated to many online. They can face a variety of
unusual security and privacy concerns, including the revelation of their offline
identity, targeted harassment or doxing, and usability failures such as account
lockout when interacting with security systems that use abnormal behavior (such
as the use of pseudonyms) as heuristics for suspicion. This project will study
how people who may be at risk use technology and what security and privacy
dangers they experience. It has the goal to create new technology that better
meets the needs of all people in our society.

This project investigates how people's personal lives can be compromised online
and what computer security and privacy challenges they have. The project uses
surveys and interviews, and designs systems informed by the results of those
data. Contributions will include the development of guidelines for inclusive
design and the generalization of those guidelines to marginalized groups, the
creation of new systems responding to problems faced by these groups, and the
evaluation of the effectiveness of these systems for supporting users' real
world needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.