* 2334426
* EAGER: INFORMATE: Improving networks for organizational repositories through metadata augmentation, transformation and evolution
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ray Habermann, METADATA GAME CHANGERS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Plato Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 116,450.00

This project seeks to analyze the interaction of many components of the
scientific communication ecosystem, characterized for purposes of this project
as the Global Research Infrastructure (GRI). Core questions for analysis include
how the scientific field measures the impact and benefits of research funding in
the U.S. This is a challenging task, requiring careful analysis and
characterization of data and tools for collecting and presenting it, and
understanding the breadth and capabilities of the entire infrastructure. Several
key aggregate data repositories will be utilized for this early concept
research, notably centering on the CHORUS alliance of scientific publishing
information. CHORUS provides analysis ready extracts from the GRI, and currently
acts as an interface between publishers and 12 federal agencies, providing a
proxy for the broader infrastructure. The project will 1) characterize available
CHORUS data, focusing on sources and connections, 2) determine connectivity for
funder and researcher identifiers and organization affiliations, 3) search for
and find currently missing identifiers for organizations, 4) discover
collaborations across funders, organizations, and datasets in journal article
metadata, and 5) compare CHORUS and agency repository content to understand the
contributions and limitations of both sets. This project will help federal
agencies understand the capabilities of the Global Research Infrastructure and
jump start understanding of new metadata sources and impact assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.