* 2334268
* CAP: Expanding AI Curriculum and Infrastructure at Texas State University to Advance Interdisciplinary Research and Grow a Diverse AI Workforce
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Apan Qasem, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project is an ExpandAI Capacity building pilot (CAP), which focuses on
establishing and growing AI related activities at Texas State University - San
Marcos. This project aims to significantly expand access to AI education,
infrastructure, and research opportunities through widespread integration of AI
technology into non-AI disciplines such as criminal justice, psychology,
firefighting and agriculture. By leveraging the collective expertise and
resources of the team, the project will promote interdisciplinary research and
education to grow a diverse pool of AI practitioners that will drive sustainable
expansion of AI technology across the Texas State University San Marcos campus
and in the nearby community. Led by a diverse team of researchers from various
academic departments, the project will catalyze institutional change at Texas
State University San Marcos by providing comprehensive training to
underrepresented individuals, empowering them to pursue AI-related careers
thereby enriching the field with diverse perspectives.

The proposal describes a four-pronged approach to AI-related institutional
transformation at Texas State University San Marcos: (i) enhancing instructional
and curricular capacity by developing innovative models for teaching and
learning using AI; (ii) improving the efficiency of AI research by providing
high-performance computing training that will speed up data pre-processing and
neural network training; (iii) investing in foundational and use-inspired AI
research and (iv) workforce development initiatives for individuals
traditionally underserved in AI. Curriculum development initiatives include the
establishment of an Applied AI Summer School and the development of several new
AI-related course modules in areas such as Data Analytics, Python programming,
Deep Learning, Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision. Evidence-based
pedagogical approaches - such as inclusive pedagogy, reflective practices and
contextualization â€“ will be employed to support student learning. In
collaboration with the Texas State University San Marcos Center for Analytics
and Data Science, this project will establish an inclusive AI ecosystem and
promote interdisciplinary collaboration, driving groundbreaking research in use-
inspired AI. The ExpandAI Program supports AI-powered education and workforce
development, infrastructure and research at Minority Serving Institutions to
strengthen and diversify U.S. research and education pathways and provide
historically marginalized communities with new opportunities in STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.