* 2334103
* Feasibility Study for Startup Accelerator Ignition Program
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Per Stromhaug, NEXTCORPS INC
* Standard Grant
* Alan Cohen
* 12/31/2025
* USD 4,558,836.00

This project aims to transfer knowledge and experience from an existing startup
accelerator to a newly formed one in a different region with a different
technology focus. Startup accelerators are proven to enhance early-stage
businesses, making them more viable, profitable, and faster. Technology hubs
around the United States are strategizing to become the "Silicon Valley" of
their industry, and a startup accelerator is often central to that ambition.
Startup accelerators also contribute to national defense by developing critical
technology domestically, reducing dependence on overseas supply chains. However,
startups often struggle to raise sufficient funds to reach commercialization.
Startup accelerators address this issue by offering relevant business
development training and financial support. Graduates are more successful at
attracting investors, development partners, and grant providers. That said, a
newly-launched accelerator faces its own challenges, needing to create a
curriculum and best practices from scratch. The researchers will examine whether
a centralized training and curriculum hub, based on an existing accelerator's
experience, could expedite the development of a new startup accelerator in a
different region with a different technology focus. The training will prioritize
diversity, equity, and inclusion, guiding the selection process. Academic
outreach to encourage interest in science, technology, engineering, and math
will also be encouraged. Promising results will lead to further research on a
larger scale with more participant hubs and data.

The project seeks to meet three technical objectives: identify features that a
startup accelerator should include to be effective, identify features of a
technology startup business that correlate with graduating a startup accelerator
program. Determine whether the NENY accelerator performed better than average
accelerator without this particular curriculum. The effectiveness of the
training will be measured using a rubric of self-assessment and external scoring
by industry and market experts. To minimize confirmation bias, the project team
will implement a process for selecting one group of early-stage businesses to be
participants in the startup accelerator; the others serve as controls who do not
receive the training. Companies in the control group will receive a stipend upon
completing the surveys required throughout the six-month duration of the
experiments. The researchers will compare the scores of the participant and
control companies to identify relative performance differences. The researchers
will evaluate the performance of the new accelerator by comparing it with other
regional technology accelerators founded near the same time. Researchers will
establish criteria for comparison in cooperation with industry experts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.