* 2334275
* EAGER: SSMCDAT2023: Deep learning Gibbs free energy functions to guide solid-state material synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Yong-Jie Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 198,498.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports
progress on a project advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh
University. This EAGER award supports research aimed at advancing our
understanding of how to synthesize solid inorganic materials, which serve as the
cornerstone for novel functional devices to meet societal needs for clean
energy, environmental sustainability, and human welfare. Nowadays, many new
inorganic materials have been virtually designed using computers, but they have
rarely been converted into real applications because of missing knowledge of how
to synthesize them in practice. In this project, a team of interdisciplinary
researchers with expertise in materials science and computer science will
develop a data-driven framework to predict the best ways to synthesize these
computationally designed materials. The team will utilize deep learning
algorithms of artificial intelligence to efficiently predict the free energies
of the material to be synthesized and their possible precursors, considering the
effects of temperature, pressure, and chemical compositions of the materials.
With these predictions, the team will assess the feasibility of the chemical
reactions associated with synthesis and correspondingly identify the optimal
reaction conditions. To validate and improve their computational predictions,
the researchers will also conduct laboratory experiments where they will closely
monitor the synthesis process as it happens using a real time characterization
technique. To demonstrate the effectiveness of their approach, the researchers
will focus on successfully synthesizing a group of novel inorganic compounds
known as transition metal oxynitrides, which are promising for energy conversion
applications but not yet fully realized experimentally. Through this project,
the team aims to bridge the gap between computational design and practical
synthesis, unlocking new possibilities for novel functional materials that can
benefit society.

This award also supports activities to make the field of science and engineering
more inclusive and diverse. It will broaden the participation of women and young
girls in these fields, especially in countries in eastern Africa. It will also
promote research involvement among undergraduate students from underrepresented
backgrounds. Moreover, the researchers will develop new educational materials to
teach data-driven materials science to undergraduate students at Drexel
University.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress
on a project advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University.
This EAGER award supports research aimed at advancing scientific knowledge in
the synthesizability of solid-state inorganic materials, especially those that
have been computationally designed but not yet realized experimentally. The
research will develop a data-driven framework, integrating deep learning
algorithms, computational thermodynamic modeling, and validation experiments to
efficiently predict synthesis pathways and optimal conditions. Utilizing deep
learning algorithms, the framework will predict temperature-dependent Gibbs free
energy functions for various compound stoichiometries, based on the relationship
between thermochemical properties of inorganic compounds and their electronic
structures. With the predictions of Gibbs free energy functions for the compound
to be synthesized and its various possible precursors, the framework will then
model the thermodynamics of each candidate synthesis reaction in the context of
the CALculation of PHAse Diagram (CALPHAD) method. Suitable precursors and
synthesis conditions will be rationally identified by assessing the dependence
of reaction spontaneity on the key controlling parameters of practical
synthesis. Experimental understanding of the reaction pathway and its dependence
on reaction conditions obtained through an in situ synthesis approach will be
used to validate and improve modeling predictions. The team will focus on
successfully synthesizing a group of computationally designed transition metal
oxynitrides, highly interesting for energy conversion applications but not yet
fully realized experimentally, as a demonstration of the framework's
capabilities. Through this project, the team aims to bridge the gap between
computational design and practical synthesis, unlocking new possibilities for
novel functional materials that can benefit society.

This award also supports various education and outreach activities that will 1)
expand the involvement of women and young girls in the fields of science and
engineering, particularly in countries in eastern Africa; 2) promote research
participation among underrepresented undergraduate students; and 3) develop new
learning modules that incorporate data-driven materials science in the
undergraduate curriculum at Drexel University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.