* 2334216
* Planning: CRISES: Climate Inequality and Integrative Resilience Center
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Paul Kirshen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Inequality undermines communities' climate resilience - or their ability to
adapt, self-organize, and transform in response to climate change-related
disruptions. At the same time, climate change will magnify existing
inequalities. The vicious cycle between climate change and inequality has
multiple interacting causes and consequences that call for rigorous
interdisciplinary research. This planning project will bring together
researchers, community members, and practitioners to envision and build the
Climate Inequality and Integrative Resilience (CLIIR) Center. The CLIIR Center
will aim to advance scientific knowledge on the links between inequality and
climate resilience to inform climate resilience policy decisions. To establish
the CLIIR Center as an impactful center of excellence, we will carry out
planning activities informed by convergence (a.k.a. transdisciplinary) research
principles and practices. The planning activities will bring together academic
and community collaborators for dialogues and structured activities. These
activities will: 1) expand and deepen external partnerships; 2) build capacity
for collaborative and transdisciplinary research; 3) clarify the new Center's
thematic areas; and 4) develop resources and frameworks to establish the CLIIR
Center as a hub for climate resilience decision support. The activities will
include community conversations, theoretical / methodological dialogues prompted
by research presentations, collaborative research skills training, climate
justice workshops, and the collection of case studies in metro-Boston on the use
of decision-support tools in climate resilience projects. With climate
resilience and inequality as an umbrella, we will primarily explore three
research themes: Indigenous Knowledge and Governance, Climate Migration, and
Climate Change and Health. These themes will serve as test cases for future
studies on models of, interactions among, and impacts in different resilience
domains and their intersections with inequality. The planning activities will
yield research questions and hypotheses on the mechanisms through which climate
change impacts lead to disparate quality-of-life outcomes in communities.  

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.