* 2334044
* Conference: Geo-Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Accelerating Geoscience Impact to Society and the Economy
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Elizabeth Long, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Climate driven disasters are increasing in number and frequency, the drive for
communities and countries to go to Net Zero, and the necessity of finding and
extracting raw materials from the Earth to feed our transition from a carbon-
based energy sector to one of renewables provides fertile ground for the
creation of geo-entrepreneurial activities and the generation of startups and
use-inspired research rooted in the geological sciences. However, there few
geologists and related geoscientists are founding startups or leading in idea
and company formation to create novel new products and services that benefit
society and drive the economy forward. To discover the reasons for the paucity
of geo-participation in innovation ecosystems, the Geological Society of America
(GSA), which has a global membership of over 22,000 in 115 countries, will hold
a series of virtual and in person, if appropriate, events to survey its
membership across the geological sciences. These conversations will help
identify factors that prevent geologists from initiating commercial ventures and
becoming entrepreneurs. Broader Impacts of the work include uncovering the
incentives, training, opportunities, and educational vehicles most likely to
create a cadre of geo-entrepreneurs and startup founders in critical areas of
the economy that rely on energy and non-living raw materials that come from the
Earth. An important focus of the events is getting feedback from early career
geoscientists and members of underrepresented groups. The Geological Society of
America will make public a report and surface the results of their findings by
posting the report on the GSA website and promoting it at other geo-community
outreach events.

To solicit ideas on developing entrepreneurial talent and speed the pace of
innovation in the geological sciences, the Geological Society of America will
run a series of broad, inclusive, and results-driven virtual and, when
appropriate, in person activities. These will be focused on engaging the geology
and associated geological communities in identifying needs and possible
solutions for moving the geosciences to a more entrepreneurial mindset and
finding out what resources are needed to move the field in that direction. An
important focus will be on input from early career scientists and those from
groups traditionally underrepresented in geoscience. Information will be
obtained via online surveys, virtual convenings of members, crowdsourcing
events, one-on-one conversations, social media, and panels of experts. An
important finding will be identification of gap filling needs required to
increase and accelerate more involvement of geologists and associated geo-
communities in innovation ecosystems and the entrepreneurial process. It is also
focused on uncovering vehicles, incentives, and training needed to increase the
number of geo-relevant enterprises led by founders and CEOs coming from geology
and associated geo-fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.