* 2334386
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SSMCDAT2023: Data-driven Predictive Understanding of Oxidation Resistance in High-Entropy Alloy Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Reza Shahbazian- Yassar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 91,989.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress on a project
advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University. This project
aims to understand the oxidation behavior of high-entropy alloy nanoparticles,
which are a new type of alloys containing multiple elements in roughly equal
proportions. Oxidation under industrial conditions negatively impacts the
performance of these alloys, limiting their broader use. In this project, the
team will employ a data-driven approach, combining experimental and
computational datasets with targeted experimental synthesis. The goal is to
develop reliable predictive models considering uncertainties in both types of
data, to lead to a better understanding of the oxidation behavior of high-
entropy alloy nanoparticles at the nanoscale. By gaining fundamental knowledge
through this interdisciplinary effort spanning materials science, chemistry, and
applied mathematics, the project has the potential to enhance the oxidation
resistance of high-entropy alloy nanoparticles. It will also provide essential
support for critical experimental studies to validate the data-driven models.
This research opens new possibilities for innovative strategies to synthesize
high-entropy materials, paving the way for exciting advances in future research
and technological applications.

The project provides comprehensive research training in materials chemistry and
data science to graduate students within a collaborative and interdisciplinary
research environment. The project will participate in a long program at the
Institute of Mathematical and Statistical Innovation and organize a workshop
centered around "Uncertainty Quantification for Chemistry and Materials
Science". Leveraging the outcomes of the project, the team aims to propel and
invigorate data-intensive research, particularly by integrating uncertainty
quantification into predictive modeling within the domain of solid state and
materials chemistry.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is made on an EAGER proposal. It supports progress on a project
advanced at the SSMCDAT 2023 Datathon held at Lehigh University. This project
aims to gain a mechanistic understanding of the interplay among elemental
segregation, migration, and oxidation resistance of high-entropy alloy
nanoparticles by integrating experimental and computational tools with modern
data science methods. The goal is to establish data-driven materials design
strategies that allow precise control over the oxidation kinetics of high-
entropy nanoparticles with composition design. The project will leverage
existing experimental and computational datasets on thermodynamic and adsorption
energetics, and combine this data with supplementary high-throughput first-
principles calculations and hybrid molecular dynamics / Monte Carlo simulations,
to develop machine learning models for elemental segregation and migration
models in high-entropy alloy nanoparticles under oxidation conditions. A novel
Gaussian Process regression model, which inherently includes uncertainty
quantification and allows for intuitive interpretation, will be developed to
predict oxidation behavior. Furthermore, the project will synthesize high-
entropy alloy nanoparticles with specific compositions and characterize their
structural and oxidation behavior, comparing the results with model predictions.
This this research will provide experimentally validated fundamental knowledge
regarding the structure-property relationships of high-entropy alloy
nanoparticles under oxidation environments. Additionally, the project will
establish a valuable suite of analytical and modeling tools for the field of
solid-state and materials chemistry. These tools will enable an integrated
approach to accelerate experimental-computational design of high-entropy alloy
nanoparticles, facilitating theory-guided synthesis research of multicomponent
material nanoparticles across a broader chemical space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.