* 2334880
* RAPID: Managed Groundwater Recharge (MAR) in a year of exceptional precipitation: Evaluating the impact of dry-well versus on-farm recharge on water quality
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Thomas Young, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Groundwater is a vital resource that provides drinking water to 2.5 billion
people on earth and accounts for about 43% of the water used for irrigation.
Many regions have experienced significant depletion in groundwater resources
over the last decades. Increased groundwater depletion has motivated the
intentional recharge of groundwater aquifers with excess surface water.
Intentional groundwater recharge, also called managed aquifer recharge (MAR) has
many benefits. It can increase groundwater storage, decrease land subsidence,
mitigate flood risk, starve-off sea water intrusion, help regulate streamflow
and stream temperature during dry seasons, and improve overall water security.
This research will investigate the difference in groundwater quality between two
MAR strategies that are used to introduce surface floodwaters into the
groundwater system at two side-by-site locations in Central Valley California.
Their findings will future implementation of intentional groundwater recharge
strategies that improve groundwater quality for communities.

Following the exceptionally wet year in California that recorded over 300% of
its normal precipitation in snowpack and rainfall, resulting in widespread
flooding, researchers will study the effect of using the floodwater to recharge
aquifers, at two sites undergoing two different MAR strategies, on the quality
of groundwater. The MAR strategies are drywells injection and surface flooding
of farm fields. The researchers will investigate the occurrence, distribution,
and changes in the concentrations of anthropogenic and geogenic contaminants
such as nitrate, arsenic, uranium, chromium, other pesticides, and indicators of
coliform bacteria. Investigators will quantify the release of contaminants to
groundwater from each recharge strategy and assess the links between contaminant
mobilization processes to hydrogeochemical conditions that affect the
mobilization. The findings from this research will improve understanding of the
effect of different managed aquifer recharge strategies and inform the future
development of treatment and abatement options during the recharge process for
future water management practices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.