* 2334968
* EAGER: Enhancing plasmonic mode coupling in metal insulator metal structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Shekhar Bhansali, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The project aims to investigate the metal-insulator interfaces in thin film
Metal-Insulator-Metal (MIM) structures for their applications in the fields of
nanophotonics, biosensing, and imaging. The proposed research will be useful for
the broader realms of thin film and semiconductor research. The outcome of the
work will be directly applied to mass manufacturing of reliable, high-
performance detectors and sensors for imaging and energy conversion
applications. Although MIM-based sensors, also known as plasmonic sensors, have
promising applications, their realization to real-world devices is delayed due
to a lack of understanding of the fundamental properties of the MIM stack. The
objective of this research is to carry out systematic studies on the properties
of the metal oxide and metal-organic materials used as insulators in MIM
junctions. The research described in this proposal is on the edge of
interdisciplinary involving materials science, nanofabrication, and Physics. It
involves almost every stage in the development of a micro-device, i.e., design,
fabrication, integration, characterization testing, and optimization. The
project will strive to hire a graduate student, preferably from underrepresented
groups, who will be trained to learn, practice and develop boundary-spanning
skills. Such skills are highly recommended for the nanotechnology workforce in
the industry and academia. The training and mentoring of the graduate student on
this interdisciplinary project will enable them to successfully transition to
the diverse STEM workforce. The results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals and have interest to diverse audiences in the field of nanotechnology,
materials science, electrical engineering, and physics.

The proposed research is designed to gain a broader understanding of insulating
materials, which are currently being explored to gain desired MIM diode and MIM
-plasmonic structure characteristics. In the past, metal–insulator interfaces
have been studied; however, with the advent of the newer concept of MIIM (double
insulating layer), to attain better response of the diode, there is a need to
study insulator-insulator interfaces. In this proposed work, we will conduct
extensive modeling and simulation, and experimental work along with detailed
materials characterization using state of art techniques such as Ellipsometry,
Atomic Force Microscope, Transmission Electron Microscope, Secondary Ion Mass
Spectroscopy, Xray-Photoelectron Spectroscopy, X-diffractometry to understand
the effect of bandgap, point defect, and oxygen transport in the interfacial
layers. The new knowledge generated from these experiments will be used in mass
manufacturing of high-performance sensors and detectors. The proposal aims to
compare the device fabrication techniques such as vacuum-based sputtering,
atomic player deposition, and ambient atmospheric pressure plasma deposition for
improved fabrication. The knowledge developed from this work will be
successfully disseminated in improving the quality of the MIM/ MIIM stack,
thereby improving the efficiency of plasmonic sensors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.