* 2334062
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grants for 2023 ACM Internet Measurement Conference (ACM IMC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Alberto Dainotti, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Goldsmith
* 09/30/2024
* USD 18,000.00

The 23rd ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), sponsored by ACM
SIGCOMM will be held in Montreal, Canada October 24–26, 2023. This grant will
help 10 - 15 US-based graduate students to participate in the conference to
disseminate their research outcomes, connect them with other researchers, and
train them as the next generation of scholars. The Internet Measurement
Conference is the premier international conference in the area of Internet
measurement. Attending the conference will help them pursue research in the
field. These travel grants will serve to widen the audience attending the
Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), raising the level of interaction and the
potential for new collaboration, new investigations, and higher quality
research. Given the rising cost of travel, the grant will enable students, who
otherwise do not have sufficient funds, to attend the conference.

This proposal will increase the dissemination of the conference's research
results to a larger and more diverse audience. Moreover, IMC has a strong track
record of giving preference in grant awards to women and minority students. To
encourage researchers from under-represented groups to get involved with
Internet measurement research, in the selection process, under-represented
groups or institutions will be considered the most important factor. Advertising
to a wide range of colleges and universities, participants from a more diverse
set of institutions should also be able to attend and benefit from the
conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.