* 2334587
* #WeHBSeeU: Examining the Impact of a National Social Marketing Campaign in STEM on Broadening Participation and STEM Identity Development
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Erin Lynch, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 999,829.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) is committed to enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education and
research at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in order to
broaden participation in the nation's STEM workforce. Accordingly, HBCU-UP
supports the project from the Quality Education for Minorities Network (QEM),
which aims to implement a strategic social marketing campaign to shift social
perceptions, STEM identity development, and public discourse regarding STEM
innovation generated by Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).
The project will leverage social marketing to mitigate or eliminate documented
barriers that potentially stifle broadening participation in STEM, and public
awareness of STEM innovations at HBCUs.

The project goal is to develop a digital dissemination platform for HBCU STEM
innovation that increases the public’s awareness of HBCU STEM research and
innovation while examining the impact of the platform’s social marketing
campaign on STEM identity development and scientific epistemological thinking.
The three objectives are to (1) increase the public perception of HBCU research
and STEM innovation, (2) explore self-reported perceptions of STEM Identity, and
(3) capture scientific epistemological thinking about STEM in the general
public. Over the course of three years, this project will explore strategic
social marketing campaigning on HBCU STEM innovation and research by exposing
the public to digital streaming content, community viewings and colloquia, and
listener determined podcast topics. By investigating the relationship between
scientific epistemology and STEM identity with STEM-oriented social marketing
campaign that highlights STEM innovation at HBCUs, the project has the potential
to engage the hundreds of thousands of content consumers in discourse around
STEM innovations and science topics and reveal the impact of intentional
dissemination on broadening participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.