* 2334389
* CAP: STARTER: South Texas AI Research, Training, and Education Resource
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2025
* Soma Mukherhee, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 11/30/2025
* USD 399,781.00

This project is an ExpandAI Capacity building pilot (CAP), which focuses on
establishing and growing AI related activities at The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV) by growing a pool of AI practitioners that will drive a
sustainable expansion of AI-powered research and education. On the research
side, interdisciplinary AI-driven projects will result in a vibrant South Texas
community of AI practitioners that will significantly boost the impact of AI in
areas such as agriculture, advanced manufacturing, and personalized medicine. On
the educational side, new AI micro-credential courses and course enhancements
will impart AI-related skills to large numbers of students, most of whom are
from under-represented groups given the composition of the UTRGV student body.
Significantly, two newly formed interdisciplinary Ph.D. programs will use AI-
enhanced courses to train students in cutting-edge research techniques. Outreach
to high schools and community colleges is planned.

Five research areas have been identified as potential growth areas for AI
technologies across campus including nanomaterials, advanced manufacturing,
agriculture, cybersecurity and biomedicine. For example, in the agricultural
domain, researchers will investigate Smart Farming AI tools - the use of
affordable drones and video sensors to gather and analyze data for improved
water utilization and soil fertility. In biomedicine, researchers will use
clinical phenotype, genotype, and biomarker datasets to train AI models for
improved disease modeling and personalized interventional strategies for
diseases that disproportionately impact the Hispanic population of South Texas.
Educational transformation is planned through two approaches: (i) creation of
domain-specific micro-credential courses for delivery of skills needed to engage
with AI tools; (ii) infusion of AI content into existing courses at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels through curriculum modification. Courses
emphasize both practical skills in use of AI tools as well as the theoretical
aspects of AI. The ExpandAI Program supports AI-powered education and workforce
development, infrastructure and research at Minority Serving Institutions to
strengthen and diversify U.S. research and education pathways and provide
historically marginalized communities with new opportunities in STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.