* 2334642
* Planning Proposal: CREST Center in Bioinformatics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Lauren Fuess, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST), this project aims to develop a nationally recognized center in
bioinformatics research and training at Texas State University (TXST), a
minority serving institution (MSI). Bioinformatics skills, broadly defined as
approaches for processing and analyzing large biological data, are increasingly
in demand in the national workforce. However, underrepresented minority (URM)
groups are poorly embodied among STEM graduates with bioinformatics training.
The proposed center will bring together a diverse group of scientists applying
bioinformatic approaches to ecological and evolutionary research. Furthermore,
our project will address gaps in the recruitment and training of URM students in
bioinformatic-related fields by creating new curriculum as part of an
undergraduate training pipeline. At the graduate level, the center staff will
transform existing bioinformatics coursework into a PhD program. Combined, these
efforts will directly address national gaps in the training of URM in
bioinformatics and augment efforts to create a nationally recognized
bioinformatics center.

This project supports the initial development of a research and training center
in bioinformatics through preparation of a Bioinformatics CREST center proposal.
Bioinformatics and related fields are among the fastest growing sectors in the
US. However, URMs remain poorly represented within the broader bioinformatic
workforce. A robust group of faculty at TXST are currently working with
bioinformatics approaches and offering graduate training in bioinformatic
skills. The program will build upon these strengths to develop: 1) a synergistic
group of researchers working with bioinformatics, 2) undergraduate bioinformatic
training, and 3) plans for center evaluation and sustainability. The CREST
program provides support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-
serving institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively
integrate education and research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.