* 2334319
* Planning: CRISES: Center for Humane AI Studies (CHAIS)
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Roslyn Mickelson, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,866.00

This project investigates the development of artificial intelligence (AI) to
better understand how to realize the benefits of AI and minimize risks. A
interdisciplinary group of researchers from the social sciences and humanities
will analyze the position of AI as part of society and not a purely technical
system. The project develops the model for a research center in AI focusing on
three critical aspects of the AI crisis: trust, equity, and literacy. The
research project identifies how to trustworthiness in AI as a fundamental pillar
for human reliance the use of AI. The project emphasizes the role of equity and
fairness in the application of AI. This project advances the potential for all
people to develop basic AI literacy so they can interact with it safely and
responsibly.

This project brings together leaders in multiple disciplines to plan for the
proposal of a Center for Humane AI Studies (CHAIS). The research team consists
of an interdisciplinary group of scholars from multiple social-sciences,
humanities, computational and health sciences. The research program identifies
and studies the ways that AI can both exacerbate and ameliorate social crises
through a focus on three areas: 1) trustworthy AI operationalized as the
intersection of ethical AI and human-centered AI, 2) equity and AI considering
the concern that automated systems often entrench existing inequalities or
discriminate against marginalized people, and 3) research in the development of
AI literacy because AI is increasingly becoming integrated into various aspects
of our lives, from everyday consumer products to complex decision-making
processes in areas such as healthcare, education, finance, and transportation.
The CHAIS project organizes a number of activities to develop capacity in
convergent AI research, including an innovation salon, reading group, special
topics courses, workshops, and a seminar series. The project creates learning
and knowledge opportunities through K-12 teacher training, faculty development,
and a graduate level public policy program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.