* 2334423
* I-Corps:  Antimicrobial polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe to reduce biofouling in hydroponic farming
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Songping Huang, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a antimicrobial polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe that can inhibit
biofouling by bacteria for the agriculture industry. Currently,
polyvinylchloride (PVC) is the predominant material used for tubing and nutrient
beds thanks to its cheap cost and environmental resistance. However, farms must
either regularly dissemble and clean PVC components or replace them altogether,
since the regular use of biocides does not prevent biofouling. The goal is to
reduce the cleaning and maintenance required in micro/drip irrigation and
hydroponic farms, saving costs, and improving productivity. Bacteria are able to
grow on most plastic surfaces as there are few approved antimicrobial
alternatives. The proposed technology is designed to include antimicrobial
materials embedded into PVC that are safe for use in agriculture and could save
US farmers significant time and money every year.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a bismuth oxide nanomaterial
that may be used as a broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent. The goal is to treat
PVC pipe by embedding the bismuth oxide nanomaterial or using it as a coating
for use in agricultural applications. Although antimicrobial surface treated PVC
tubing is available, the high cost has prevented widespread adoption and no
antimicrobial PVC materials are currently approved for food production by the
FDA, EPA, or state entities. Bismuth, unlike other antimicrobial metals such as
mercury, lead and cadmium and many others, is known to be nontoxic to mammalian
cells, and may be safely ingested at gram-scale quantities. Tests of the
proposed nanomaterial showed that nanostructured bismuth oxide was found to be a
broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent as shown by its minimum inhibitory
concentration, which ranges from 0.75 μg/mL to 2.5 μg/mL, depending on the
bacteria tested. In addition, a strong growth inhibitory effect also was found
on methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) derived biofilms. The
proposed technology may show similar efficacy in agricultural settings since
bismuth oxide nanomaterials are not limited to targeting bacteria-specific
proteins like most antibiotics. Also, bismuth oxide nanomaterials do not behave
like any conventional antibiotics in that they do not trigger the rapid
development of drug resistance like the conventional antibiotics. The lack of
available and agriculture approved antimicrobial polymers presents a current
unmet need, and use of new antimicrobial materials embedded into PVC may save US
farmers significant time and money.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.