* 2334125
* I-Corps: High efficiency multi-material heat sink/storage by additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Mohammad Elahinia, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an additive manufacturing process to produce solid-state heat
management systems using shape memory alloys (SMAs). SMAs benefits from a solid-
solid phase transformation, which is of interest in many applications of heat
sink/storage. However, there are challenges in processing of SMAs such as nickel
titanium (NiTi) using conventional methods, which limits its design to simple
geometries. The proposed technology overcomes these challenges by fabrication of
SMAs through additive manufacturing methods. Heat management systems using NiTi
may be additively manufactured using 3D printing technology. This technology may
have a wide range of applications including heat sink/storage for satellites,
telecommunication antennas, and consumer electronics. There is a growing need to
develop better solid-state heat management systems driven by the need for safer
and more environmentally friendly systems.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an additive manufacturing
method to fabricate shape memory alloys into complex geometries. Shape memory
alloys such as nickel titanium (NiTi) offer solid-solid phase change, which
reduces the risk of leakage observed with other phase change materials. In
addition, NiTi as a phase change material with high volumetric latent heat as
well as excellent corrosion resistance has been reported to improve the
efficiency for thermal storage systems. The proposed technology couples phase
changing NiTi material with a high thermal conductivity material such as copper
to produce energy storage and conversion systems. It has been demonstrated that
using a sandwich of NiTi/Copper can increase the time to reach the critical
temperature when compared to a copper heat sink alone. This result indicates
that this may be used in a wide range of applications including heat
sink/storage for satellites, telecommunication antennas, and overshoot
controllers. Moreover, the reversible solid-solid martensite transformation
eliminates the risks of leakage and reduces the cost of maintenance of these
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.