* 2334059
* Conference: Rustbelt RNA Meeting 2023-2025
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Charles Hoogstraten, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2026
* USD 50,000.00

The Rustbelt RNA Meeting (RRM) is an annual conference that brings together
scientists from the industrial Midwest and surrounding regions to present and
discuss new developments in RNA-related research. This grant will support the
2023 (25th annual meeting), 2024, and 2025 meetings. A unique feature of the RRM
is its emphasis on fostering the professional development of young scientists
through both formal and informal mechanisms. The meeting provides ample
opportunities for multiple platform and poster sessions as well as social
interactions, yet is short enough (roughly 1:00 p.m. Friday to 2:00 p.m.
Saturday) to be convenient. Students and postdoctoral scholars typically
comprise over 70% of attendees and deliver over 90% of the talks as well as the
majority of the posters. To broaden participation and further encourage
attendance by undergraduates and trainees from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM, scholarships will be awarded to cover their
registration fees. The RRM serves to expose trainees (often for the first time)
to an exciting meeting where the breadth and quality of the research presented
rivals that at national meetings, yet the atmosphere is welcoming and
supportive. NSF funding will be used predominantly for participant support at
the RRM, focused on trainees, and will allow their accommodations to be provided
free of charge.

The 2023 RRM will be held in East Lansing, Michigan, October 27-28, 2023. This
represents the first year the conference will be held in Michigan, one of the
major home states of Rustbelt attendees, and provides opportunities for outreach
to numerous smaller public and liberal-arts schools in the state. The 2023
meeting will assemble researchers with diverse backgrounds and interests in RNA
science and facilitate new learning experiences in emerging technology and
career planning via optional workshops. The 2023 RRM program will include
approximately 150 poster and 21 oral presentations by student and post-doctoral
trainees, providing a high-caliber interdisciplinary experience for
participants. The 2023 meeting will also feature a keynote lecture by Dr.
Jeffrey Kieft (Director, New York Structural Biology Center), an accomplished
and highly respected leader in the field, who has made numerous important
contributions to our understanding of the structure and folding of RNAs,
particularly viral RNAs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.