* 2334507
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Speeding-up large-scale simulations of atmospheric composition
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Roch Guerin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2025
* USD 207,394.00

This project targets improving how fast the GEOS-Chem 3D atmospheric simulation
software runs and brings together computer scientists from Washington University
and atmospheric scientists from MIT and Washington University. GEOS-Chem models
the evolution of the chemical composition of the earth atmosphere, and is an
essential tool in understanding climate change and what affects it. The
simulation is complex and speeding it up has been the subject of intensive
efforts. In particular, to leverage the near limitless computational resources
of the “cloud”, the simulation can be broken-up into small independent tasks
that can be assigned to different processors. The challenge is then to decide
how to best distribute those tasks across processors so that the simulation
completes as fast as possible. This is the focus of this proposal.

GEOS-Chem models the evolution of the earth’s atmosphere using a “cubed-sphere”
grid of the globe, with each grid element capturing an atmospheric column where
complex chemical models simulate the evolution of chemical composition. The
simulation operates in discrete time steps with neighboring columns exchanging
information after each time step. Columns’ computational costs vary, and peak at
sunrise and sunset because of temperature differentials. These variations need
to be accounted for when distributing columns across processors to ensure loads
as uniform as possible, as uneven loads significantly slow-down the simulation.
Designing task/column assignments solutions that realize this goal is the
primary intellectual focus of this project. This maps to a vector scheduling
problem with the added complexity that computations and communications both
affect the outcome. Developing solutions that account for those factors across
compute environments is a core technical challenge the proposal targets.

Tackling climate change and understanding what drives it is an enormous
challenge with broad societal implications. The ability to rapidly simulate how
the earth atmosphere responds to changes in its chemical composition represents
an essential tool in addressing it. The expected contributions of the project
can significantly boost our ability to explore how climate change arises and
develop solutions to mitigate it, both of which can have significant economic
and societal impact. In addition, the inherently interdisciplinary nature of the
effort will provide a unique training opportunity to the postdoc the project
will involve, and should position them well to succeed in an inherently
interdisciplinary research landscape.

Findings from the project will initially be made available on the project’s
GitHub site at https://github.com/rochguerin/GEOS-Chem. However, we anticipate
that as, contributions mature, especially those targeting enhancements to the
GEOS-Chem software, many will migrate to the main GEOS-Chem website at
https://geoschem.github.io/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.