* 2334243
* CAP: AI-Ready Institution Transforming Tomorrow's Research and Education with AI Focused on Health and Security (Jag-AI)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Zechun Cao, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2025
* USD 385,475.00

This project is an ExpandAI Capacity building pilot (CAP), which focuses on
establishment of a robust Artificial Intelligence (AI) infrastructure at Texas
A&M University-San Antonio, thereby enhancing the research capacity of the
institution and facilitating AI-focused educational curriculum development and
training. Towards this goal, the project will launch two initiatives: (1)
Foundational and Use-Inspired AI Research Initiative and (2) AI for All
Education and Training Initiative. The “Foundational and Use-Inspired AI
Research Initiative” focuses on research aimed at improving healthcare quality
of life, transforming national defense-security, and effective utilization of
cloud computing resources. The “AI for All Education and Training Initiative”
aims to generate interest, increase awareness, and advance careers in AI among
underrepresented minority groups, including women, by developing curricula &
providing training to faculty and researchers.

The project’s multiple inter-connected AI research threads in healthcare,
cybersecurity and cloud computing, are crucial to meeting future societal
expectations. The expected outcomes of the project will include (i) novel
contributions to research for enhanced reliability and trustworthiness of
automated medical imaging; (ii) reduced risks of running software containing
malware on cloud and (iii) efficient utilization of cloud-based AI-ML resources.
The ExpandAI Program supports AI-powered education and workforce development,
infrastructure and research at Minority Serving Institutions to strengthen and
diversify U.S. research and education pathways and provide historically
marginalized communities with new opportunities in STEM careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.