* 2334438
* Dynamic Drive Control Scheme for Energy-Efficient Electric Drive Systems
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Qadeer Ahmed, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software for electric powertrains. An electric powertrain powers
electronic vehicles and removes the need for an internal combustion engine.
Currently, the performance of an electric powertrain in extreme working
conditions, such as extreme heat or cold, is compromised and suffers from torque
derating, a decrease in efficiency, and a shortened lifespan as its parameters
change due to the change in operating and ambient temperatures. The proposed
technology is designed to address electric powertrain performance degradation
using a dynamic drive control scheme that facilitates the control of multiphase
electric machines. The proposed dynamic drive control scheme has the potential
to be employed in most large-scale industries including automotive,
aerospace/defense, rail, marine, and manufacturing industries that need to
enhance their overall product life and efficiency. The implementation of this
proposed technology may lessen performance degradation, rapid aging, and poor
efficiency.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a learning-based control
algorithm to facilitate control of electric drive systems (electric powertrains)
in multiphase electric machines. The proposed technology is designed to address
electric machine performance degradation due to harsh environment and operating
conditions using dynamic drive control. The proposed dynamic drive control
scheme facilitates the control of multiphase electric machines to overcome the
problem of thermally derated torque, minimizing the loss of lifetime, and
improving energy conversion efficiency. The technology allows the controller to
determine the schedule based on changes observed in the parameters of the
electric drive system to address the issue of thermally derated torque. It
utilizes the machineâ€™s losses to compute the optimal flux demand to ensure
improvements in the energy conversion efficiency of the machine and develop a
dynamic relationship between road load demands and flux. The optimal cost
function is formulated based on the operating voltage and current constraints to
minimize aging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.