* 2334272
* Planning: CRISES: Collaborative Research and Education Center for Transformative Water Solutions
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Donald Nelson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Within the United States, the provision of safe and reliable water is often
taken for granted. Water services in the U.S. and globally are under increasing
strain and are failing many of the most vulnerable and underserved populations.
Together, aging infrastructure, a shrinking water-sector workforce, increasing
urbanization, and changing rainfall patterns increase stress on water services.
There are rapidly increasing risks of safe drinking water shortages, a higher
prevalence of water-related diseases, increased flooding, and the inadequate
treatment of wastewater. An adequate response requires interdisciplinary teams
of experts to collaborate with communities and government agencies to innovate
appropriate solutions together. The project is initially focused on five related
water challenges in the Southeast U.S. that epitomize situations elsewhere:
water scarcity, water quality, aging infrastructure, flooding, and climate
change. The approach to all five challenges is grounded in environmental justice
with a vision to ensure all communities have equitable and reliable access to
safe and affordable water with considerations in stormwater management and flood
mitigation.

This project establishes the foundation of a research center that works to
advance equitable and just water services, thus providing for a resilient
future. In partnership with multiple actors, this project creates a shared
vision for a center that addresses research, education, and training needs to
respond to the urgent demands in the water sector. Collaborators include local
and state government agencies, utility managers, community-based organizations,
industry, and academic institutions. Through workshops, focus groups, and
interviews, collaborators discuss values and experiences, service challenges and
shortcomings, and identify data and workforce needs. This process leads to a
holistic understanding of current water services provision, future visions, and
the steps to get there. The research project builds regional capacity through
strengthened regional networks for sharing and collaborating and creating
innovative solutions that can be translated and scaled to other regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.