* 2334490
* EAGER: Quantifying Spatial Distribution of Micro- and Nanoplastics along an Antarctic Traverse
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Beizhan Yan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 11/30/2025
* USD 269,851.00

Microplastics and nanoplastics are generated from a wide range of synthetic or
semi-synthetic organic compounds derived from petroleum and have become
ubiquitous in the world since mass production began in the 1950s. Recent
research has found that these polluting particles have been observed in the most
pristine environments, including the Arctic and Antarctica. There is currently a
lack of data on how microplastics and nanoplastics are distributed in areas that
are far away from contaminating sources (e.g., cities). A better understanding
of their distribution would help to build the models that can tell us the fate
of such particles on our planet. In the case of Antarctica, the few existing
studies of microplastics and nanoplastics have focused primarily on these
pollutants in ocean waters, apart from one study that focused on samples
collected over ice and snow in the vicinity of Ross Island. This EAGER project
would leverage samples of snow collected by a British explorer during an
unsupported ski traverse across Antarctica that will lead him from the coast of
Antarctica to the South Pole. Samples will then be analyzed for microplastics
and nanoplastics using a state-of-the-art facility. The data analysis will
address the questions: Are there still pristine areas on Earth that have not
been contaminated by microplastics and nanoplastics? What is the concentration
of these pollutants within the South Pole snow?

This project will quantify the spatial distribution of Microplastics and
nanoplastics in Antarctica from the coast to the interior. Results will provide
a better process understanding and support the development of models that can be
used to quantify the spatio-temporal evolution of microplastics and to better
assess how they interact with the atmosphere. Nanoplastics can be smaller than
2.5 µm and are therefore not well characterized due limitations in the methods.
These particles are of great concern for the ecosystem due to their ability to
penetrate the bodies of various organisms, such as phytoplankton, zooplankton,
fish, and bacteria. This project will use an ultrasensitive Stimulated Raman
Scattering (SRS) platform to characterize nanoplastics smaller than 2.5 µm. The
SRS was developed by this team and has proven to be a powerful technology for
studying the health impact of nanoplastics at this scale. The samples collected
on the traverse offer a unique opportunity to better understand the depositional
fluxes of plastic in the remotest region on Earth, and importantly, show how the
concentration of plastics vary from the surrounding oceans to the scientific
base at the South Pole. The hypothesis is that microplastics and nanoplastics
will be affected by both local human activities (e.g., at South Pole) and
possibly by the long-range transport by winds across the continent. The
combination of the data acquired during the Antarctic traverse and the new SRS
platform makes this project unique from a technical point of view.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.