* 2334717
* Conference: Piloting a HSI Research Capacity Building Institute at the Annual Meeting of the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Lisa Alcorta, Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,913.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Conference project aims to provide training and
technical support to faculty, staff, and administrators from Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) to improve their proposal development skills, particularly
in applying for the National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Hispanic Serving Institutions grants. The Hispanic Association of
Colleges and Universities (HACU) will accomplish this by hosting a day-long
institute at the HACU 2023 annual conference, targeting under-resourced HSIs
that have never submitted or have been unsuccessful with NSF grants. Innovation
in STEM depends on a diversity of perspectives in the national scientific
workforce. However, many faculty and practitioners at HSIs lack practical
experience in developing competitive funding proposals for research and student
programming. To increase participation in NSF funding opportunities by HSIs, the
proposed institute will systematically train HSI personnel to write a
competitive and evidence-based proposal. The institutes expects up to one
hundred participants from fifty or more institutions to attend the inaugural
event.

The proposed institute will provide several hands-on proposal development and
writing sessions, led by experts from HSIs. Participants will learn best
practices for conceptualizing a compelling project and writing a persuasive
proposal, guided by expert mentors during and after the institute. The pilot
institute will be evaluated and results will be disseminated in announcements to
HACU members through email and social media, and will lead to the
institutionalization of an annual research capacity building institute that is
offered at subsequent HACU meetings. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.