* 2334854
* Collaborative Research: Conference: NSF Workshop Sustainable Computing for Sustainability
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Klara Nahrstedt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,753.00

The motivations behind this project are two-fold. It is driven by the growing
role of computing as an essential tool in devising solutions to the many major
societal problems created by climate change. At the same time, it is an
acknowledgment of the fact that, in spite of its positive role, computing is
itself facing sustainability challenges as well as contributing to some of the
factors behind climate change. Fostering the development of new initiatives
addressing those problems and challenges is the main goal of this project. The
project’s novelties lie in jointly addressing the dual role of computing as an
enabler of solutions to climate change as well as a contributor to climate
change itself, and in exploring the challenges faced by the interdisciplinary
teams needed to develop effective approaches. The project’s impacts are
similarly two-fold: It will help prioritize new research directions where
computing can have a transformative role in developing solutions to climate
change challenges and it will increase awareness of the need for computing to
account for sustainability in its own development.

Towards realizing the project’s goals, the investigators rely on a two-prong
approach. The project’s first phase consists of an open information gathering
effort conducted virtually (online) towards identifying critical, yet poorly
explored sustainability problems that computing can help address. The second
phase seeks to develop a concrete agenda for not only addressing those
challenges, but equally importantly help build and sustain the interdisciplinary
scientific community that successfully tackling them requires. This second phase
is in the form of a workshop bringing together not only researchers across the
required disciplines, but also researchers with expertise in building
interdisciplinary teams and team science towards informing the creation and
sustainability of successful teams involving participants across multiple
disciplines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.