* 2334757
* Conference: 2023 Staphylococcal Diseases GRC and GRS: New Insights into Staphylococcal Biology, Disease Mechanisms and Treatment
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Alexander Horswill, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 7,000.00

This award will support the Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on
“Staphylococcal Diseases: New Insights into Staphylococcal Biology, Disease
Mechanisms and Treatment” to be held July 29 – August 4, 2023 at Waterville
Valley, NH. This meeting will be attended by undergraduate and graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows, as well as senior researchers to discuss our
understanding of all aspects of these bacteria. NSF will support discussions on
the understanding of the structure, biochemistry, genetics of this phylum of
bacteria that have a unique surfaces structure. Talks will be presented on
fundamental properties of Staphylococci, their interactions with other
microscopic creatures, and how their genes regulate these aspects of
Staphylococcal biology. In addition to formal talks presented by experienced
researchers and trainees new to the field, engagement will be facilitated by two
poster sessions to stimulate interactions between researchers. NSF support will
be used to defray registration costs to allow attendance of participants from
early stages of their careers, especially for members of groups underrepresented
in this field.

Staphylococci are members of the Gram-positive phylum of bacteria, with an
envelope comprised of a single membrane and thick cell wall, unlike most other
bacteria. This thick cell wall has made it difficult to study some aspects of
these creatures, and is an important feature that allows them to infect
mammalian hosts. This Gordon Conference and Seminar will allow discussion of the
newest research on the structure and biochemistry of these tiny creatures,
including understanding of their role unique biochemistry, their interactions
within the microbial community, and how their signaling and gene regulation. The
meeting will bring together experienced investigators with early-career
scientists in both formal talks and discussion sessions to encourage informal
discussion and sharing of latest research results on the formation of structures
in the cell, cell wall structure and absorption of nutrients, and their
interactions with other communities of microbes in biofilms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.