* 2334233
* Conference: CRISES: Decarbonization: Enhancing Just Energy Transitions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Javiera Barandiaran, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

This project brings together leading experts on energy transitions to design
energy research priorities and strategies across the social sciences. The
project centers around a planned conference on the decarbonization of energy
systems, convening specialists based in a range of academic, non-profit, and
community-based organizations. Project participants build on their diverse
experiences of scholarly and engaged work to advance a common set of goals:
better management and anticipation of the many social and environmental impacts
that result from changes to energy systems. Specifically, this project studies
impacts of decarbonization associated with (1) transitions in fossil fuel
infrastructure, and (2) the phase-in of new forms of energy, particularly the
mining and use of lithium, needed for batteries found everywhere from electric
vehicles to large-scale stationary batteries that store wind and solar
electricity.

This project establishes national and global best practices for fossil fuel
decommissioning and the development of new energy initiatives. Industry,
community organizations and governments are central actors in energy sector
transitions. However, there is a lack of regulatory standards for fossil fuel
decommissioning and other policy arenas relevant to energy transitions. This
context presents both challenges and opportunities. The design of this research
consists of the following core elements: 1) online mapping of energy
transitions, 2) identifying best practices for energy transitions, and 3)
community engagement in energy transitions. This project advances the
formulation and application of justice principles within energy-related
decision-making processes. Drawing on current expertise, participants advance
just transition principles, environmental justice, and equity into processes of
energy system decarbonization, rather than as separate components of energy
change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.