* 2334311
* Planning: CRISES: Center for Urban Climate Adaptation Solutions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Jesse LeCavalier, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

Cities concentrate people, wealth, and infrastructure, and, as a result, cities
concentrate vulnerability to the growing risks posed by climate change. People
who are already socially and/or economically marginalized, such as members of
communities of color, families living in poverty, and the elderly, are
particularly vulnerable to climate risks. In many cities, this is compounded by
rising income inequality and unequal access to urban infrastructure and
services. While researchers and city leaders are increasingly aware of the need
to build more climate resilient cities, the project focuses on building
collaborative relationships and the preparatory work to propose a new Center for
Urban Climate Adaptation Solutions (CUCAS), which brings together urban experts
in multiple disciplines and institutions, works closely with civil society and
public sector stakeholders, and uses New York City as the projectâ€™s urban
laboratory. The significance of the new Center is in its inclusive, holistic,
transdisciplinary, and deeply engaged approach to the complexity of
understanding climate change hazards as well as a platform where citizens
actively participate in shaping responses to climate change.

Cities are increasingly experiencing the effects of climate change impacts, such
as rising temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, and sea-level rise, as
well as extreme weather events. The project inventories existing data and data
needs, maps civil society and institutional capacities, and conducts a needs
assessment in three core research areas: 1) a citywide spatial assessment of
multi-hazard climate change risks from coastal and pluvial flooding, extreme
heat, and air quality; 2) a citywide assessment of socioeconomic factors that
affect climate vulnerabilities, as well as civic and public capacities to
respond to climate change; and 3) an exploration of the potential for new urban
data technologies to support more efficient and equitable climate change
responses. By combining diverse sources of data and knowledge, including
collaboration with civil society partners, the project explores if it is
possible to co-design more effective, contextually appropriate responses to
climate change hazards. Based on the work in these three research areas, the
project conceptualizes a new Center for Urban Climate Adaptation Solutions
(CUCAS), to serve as a critical research and knowledge hub for New York City,
other U.S. cities, and beyond, as well as to act as a training center for the
next generation of urban climate change researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.