* 2334994
* Collaborative Research: A Solar-Powered Aerial Transformer for Enhanced Mobility and Endurance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Changhuang Wan, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 335,526.00

Under this Foundational Research in Robotics (FRR) project, a team of
researchers from Tuskegee University and Purdue University will investigate
origami structures to create extendable wings for unpiloted aerial vehicles
(UAVs), with four gimballed propellors capable of operating vertically in
rotorcraft mode or horizontally in fixed-wing mode. Wing extension and
retraction is always performed in rotorcraft mode, respectively just before or
just after gimballing of the propellors. The shape-morphing capability will
allow solar cells mounted on the wing surfaces to prolong fixed-wing operations,
while enhancing agility and reducing vulnerability to wind gusts in rotorcraft
flight. The project will also create associated algorithms for flight control
and mission planning, to stabilize the rotorcraft mode during wing extension and
retraction, to stabilize the aircraft during propellor gimballing, and to set
rotorcraft and fixed-wing flight profiles and transition points based on mission
requirements, characteristics, and constraints. Many UAV missions will benefit
from the extended operational time, multifunctionality, and increased mobility
conferred by the shape morphing wing and solar cells. These include surveillance
and reconnaissance, search and rescue, and precision agriculture. Experiments
will be conducted to demonstrate and optimize the performance of the new vehicle
under a variety of realistic objectives and conditions. Additionally, joint
educational activities will create communication and collaboration channels for
faculty and students from both universities, laying the foundation for a
continued and expanded partnership between the Tuskegee University Aerospace
Science Engineering Department and the Purdue University Aeronautics and
Astronautics Department.

The technical challenge addressed by this research is that extending mission
times requires a high surface area for mounting photovoltaic cells, however high
surface areas correspond to high aerodynamic disturbance forces that may
overwhelm the capabilities of the aircraft in rotorcraft mode. The solution
explored in the research is to use morphing wings based on Miura folding
patterns that extend for fixed wing operation and retract for rotorcraft
operation. Features of the Miura fold patterns may be exploited to implement
control surfaces equivalent to ailerons, flaps, and slats. The research approach
encompasses design of a platform for integrating solar panels with hybrid UAVs,
development of guidance and actuation strategies for a shape-morphing wing,
implementation of learning-enabled control laws for efficient rotor conversion,
and the establishment of a laddered procedure for system performance evaluation.
Optimization algorithms are employed to improve computational efficiency and
scalability for complex system design. The learning-enabled control framework
enables real-time optimal control with reduced data training requirements.
Through these technical efforts, the project seeks to have a significant impact
on safety, reduced manpower, energy savings, and insights for future unmanned
aerial systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.