* 2334406
* A Knowledge Management Resource Center for the Historically Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate Program
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2028
* USD 2,169,172.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) is committed to enhancing the quality of undergraduate STEM education and
research at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in order to
broaden participation in the nation's STEM workforce. Accordingly, HBCU-UP
supports the project from the American Association of Colleges and Universities,
which seeks to develop and deploy a Knowledge Management Resource Center. For 25
years, HBCU-UP has served as a national exemplar in building and supporting the
human and structural capacity of HBCUs to broaden the participation of
minoritized students in STEM. However, efforts to disseminate the program’s
lessons learned are complicated by a myriad of contextual and nuanced
challenges. The HBCU-UP Knowledge Management Resource Center (KMRC) aims to
mitigate these challenges by 1) capturing the broadening participation knowledge
of the HBCU-UP stakeholder community, 2) transferring that knowledge to
mainstreamed undergraduate STEM reform communities without sacrificing meaning,
and 3) positioning the HBCU-UP stakeholder community to gain more knowledge.

Specifically, the KMRC will utilize a culturally responsive, values-engaged
approach to assess the NSF HBCU-UP award portfolio, requiring both qualitative
content analysis strategies and quantitative tests of significance to determine
the effectiveness of the overall HBCU-UP award portfolio. By integrating
Cultural Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), an evaluative research framework
based in systems thinking, the KMRC will offer a deeper understanding of not
only what about HBCU-UP broadening participation interventions works, but for
whom, and under what circumstances they work best. Overall, the work of the KMRC
has the potential to establish a foundation of commonly known and accepted
metrics that are HBCU community-sanctioned and culturally and contextually
appropriate for assessing, interpreting, and adapting the broadening
participation impact the HBCU-UP award portfolio. Ultimately, this creates an
intellectual space for curating, disseminating, and transferring the cutting-
edge innovations in broadening participation occurring at HBCUs to a national
audience of STEM reformers from all institution types. By ensuring that the HBCU
broadening participation knowledge base is known and understood both within and
outside of the HBCU community, our national agenda for a diverse, competitively
trained, and liberally educated STEM workforce is mobilized and accelerated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.