* 2334590
* Workshops on Smart Manufacturing with Open and Scaled Data Sharing in Semiconductor and Microelectronics Manufacturing; Virtual and In-Person; Washington, DC; October/November 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* James Davis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The Workshops on Smart Manufacturing with Open and Scaled Data Sharing in
Semiconductor and Microelectronics Manufacturing will convene experts from the
microelectronics manufacturing and artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML) research and practitioner communities, including representatives
from relevant companies, universities, federal agencies, national laboratories,
and the Manufacturing USA Institutes. The workshop is motivated by and addresses
the critical need for manufacturing data in advanced manufacturing, a key
finding of the previous workshop series, held under the auspices of the
Subcommittee on Advanced Manufacturing and the Subcommittee on Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence of the National Science and Technology Council. The
inability to access manufacturing data that are contextualized, categorized, and
discoverable was identified as a critical industry-wide impediment to smart
manufacturing and the full potential of AI to the US economy. Manufacturing does
not have the data use or delivery infrastructure for enhancing productivity that
has evolved in many other industries.

The aim of the workshops is to formulate a strategy for accessing cross-company
microelectronics production data while keeping proprietary data secure. Such a
strategy promises to improve the productivity of US microelectronics
manufacturing companies by providing machine learning researchers with access to
the well-characterized data. These data are needed to innovate new machine
learning architectures specifically suited to categorizing manufacturing process
data. The workshop is unique in its focus on detailed industry data the analysis
of which defines critical business and technology decisions. The workshop is
also unique in emphasizing the broader data science and computer science
perspectives with a structure and format that facilitates building cross-
community views and interests. The workshop will start with individual community
discussions to share positions and understand vocabularies. These will grow into
a series of several cross community virtual roundtables to engage manufacturing
and AL/ML researchers with stakeholders from the microelectronics industry in
defining specific business and technical questions. These outcomes will be
addressed together in a subsequent in-person session in the Washington, DC area.
The in-person session will: (1) define and agree on mechanisms for facilitating
collaborative data sharing and model building at scale with current technologies
and/or by defining needs for new methods, (2) frame an industry, academic, and
government collaboration, and (3) create a draft action plan for cross-company
data aggregation in the microelectronics manufacturing industry. The virtual and
in-person sessions will include professional writers to assist the organizing
committee in taking notes and rationalizing the findings from each session to
guide the agenda for the remaining sessions. The in-person session will be
followed by a virtual general review and comment session that involves all
participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.