* 2334193
* EAGER: A New Explainable Multi-objective Learning Framework for Personalized Dietary Recommendations against Opioid Misuse and Addiction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Nitesh Chawla, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

As opioid overdose deaths have continued to increase over the past two decades
across the country, combating the opioid crisis is a national priority. Although
medication assisted treatment (MAT) is recognized as the most effective
treatment for opioid misuse and addiction, the anxiety and depression created
during the treatment and various side effects can trigger opioid relapse. In
addition to MAT, dietary nutrition intervention has demonstrated its importance
in opioid misuse prevention and recovery. However, research on how to provide
effective yet affordable personalized dietary nutrition interventions in opioid
misuse and addiction is lacking. To bridge this gap, the goal of this project is
to design and develop a new explainable multi-objective learning framework for
personalized dietary recommendations tailored to opioid users' characteristics
and circumstances to combat opioid misuse and addiction, and thus help enhance
national public health, safety, and welfare. The outcomes from this project,
including open-source code, benchmark data, and developed models, will be made
publicly accessible and broadly distributed through demos, publications, and
media presses, etc. It has been argued that combating the opioid epidemic will
take long-term commitment and effort for several generations. This project will
integrate research with education via student mentoring and various K-12
outreach activities to train and educate future generations in the prevention
and intervention of opioid misuse and addiction. The team will also broaden
participation in computing aiming at women and underrepresented groups.

By engaging novel disciplinary perspectives, this exploratory high risk-high
payoff project includes three interconnected research components for the
development of a new explainable multi-objective learning framework to combat
opioid misuse and addiction. First, based on the dietary data generated from the
online platforms such as Yelp, by addressing the issues of multi-modality,
heterogeneity, noise and sparseness of the online dietary data, the team will
develop novel multi-modal self-supervised graph learning techniques for online
opioid user detection to establish the first large-scale, high-quality, opioid-
user-related dietary benchmark dataset. Second, as it is a great challenge to
recommend optimal diets for opioid users due to their complex characteristics
and circumstances, the team will develop a new multi-objective learning
algorithm based on multi-hop reasoning to incorporate multiple factors (diet
preference, nutrient diversity, user-specific condition) for personalized
dietary recommendations to opioid users. Third, to further promote
recommendation receptivity, the team will design and develop a novel encoder-
decoder text generation model based on the reasoning paths to provide opioid
users with textual explanations of suggested recipes. The developed framework
will accelerate personalized dietary nutrition interventions for reducing opioid
misuse, and is expected to have a significant impact on addressing this crisis.
The research will advance scientific theory and benefit the information
integration and informatics domain as well as multidisciplinary areas such as
public health, epidemiology, and social and behavioral sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.