* 2334265
* PARTNER: Innovating AI for efficient and insightful data transformation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2027
* Jesse Thaler, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,800,000.00

This project is an ExpandAI Partnership between the University of Puerto Rico
Mayaguez (UPRM) and the AI Institute for Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental
Interactions (IAIFI) In this project, a minority-serving institution leads a new
collaboration with an AI Institute focused on scaling up already-established
research and education programs at UPRM and to pursue shared, complementary
goals around developing AI with use for society in mind and for developing the
next generation of AI education and workforce talent. The collaborative research
focuses on the development of AI for contributing to breakthroughs in high-
energy physics experiments. The project will also build community and new
centers of excellence in AI where such activities were not previously well
developed.

The present era is witnessing scientific discoveries where Artificial
Intelligence (AI) plays a decisive role in giving insights into data. The recent
explosion of deep learning techniques matched by continuously evolving computing
architectures has enabled AI tools to handle higher-dimensional and more complex
problems than previously achievable efficiently. The complex, high dimensional
data collected by high-energy physics experiments like those at the Large Hadron
Collider provide for convergent research in physics and AI. This research is
structured around the following AI themes: Optimal Transport in Deep Learning,
Physics Informed Uncertainty Quantization, Sparse Dictionary Learning, and
Computational aspects of Deep Learning. The intent is to enhance data reduction
by transforming the information in the low-level, high-dimensional space into a
higher-level and lower-dimensional representation. It will also benefit imaging
by enhancing sparse learning, classification, image super-resolution, spectral
unmixing, and segmentation. The project emphasizes inclusive participatory
design to promote positive societal outcomes of AI innovation. A key goal of the
research partnership between UPRM and IAIFI is to significantly increase
participation of UPRM in AI research, education, and workforce development. It
leverages ongoing research at UPRM on the Compact Muon Solenoid Experiment at
the LHC, the Artificial Intelligence Imaging Group’s work on AI research and
applications in hyperspectral and biomedical imaging, and IAIFI expertise on
advancing foundational AI through novel approaches. The project is partially
funded by NSF’s Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program within the Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.