* 2334045
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2023 IEEE International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB 2023)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Tempestt Neal, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB) is a leading global
forum for biometric research, focusing on automated identification methods using
physiological or behavioral characteristics such as fingerprints, facial
features, iris patterns, voice, and gait. IJCB showcases novel research
contributions covering various aspects of biometrics, including sensor design,
feature extraction and matching algorithms, security and privacy, the social
impact of biometric technology, multi-modal and multi-spectral biometrics,
mobile-based biometrics, template protection and cryptosystems, biometric
DeepFakes, and more. By providing a comprehensive platform for researchers and
practitioners, IJCB facilitates the exchange of knowledge and fosters
advancements in the field of biometrics. The field's significance extends to
areas such as digital data forensics and law enforcement, contributing to the
foundation of US competitiveness. One of the key advantages of the conference is
the close interaction between senior researchers and students. IJCB offers
various avenues for student growth, including poster sessions, competitions, and
the Doctoral Consortium. These activities provide students with opportunities to
present their work, engage in discussions with experienced professionals, and
gain valuable insights into the field. To ensure that students with financial
need can fully participate in the IJCB conference, particularly in activities
like the Doctoral Consortium, this funding supports student travel expenses.

The consortium is purposefully designed to enable research exposure and training
opportunities for the next generation of scientists. The IJCB 2023 Doctoral
Consortium, held as a parallel event to special sessions on the first day of the
conference, includes brief oral research presentations by participating students
and a mentoring session with senior researchers. Thus, participating students
establish professional relationships with experienced researchers, gain valuable
insights from senior members of the research community, receive constructive
feedback, and expand their professional network. Preference is given to students
from underrepresented groups, including women, minorities, and people with
disabilities, as well as students attending the conference for the first time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.