* 2335775
* Collaborative Research: EDGE FGT: Transformation and Genomic Resources to Advance Diverse, Emerging Model Angiosperms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Alex Harkess, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 159,716.00

The flowering plants, also known as angiosperms, encompass the most successful
living group of land plants, and include all of our major domesticated crop
plants. For these reasons, understanding the evolution, development, genetics
and physiology of diverse angiosperms is a major focus for plant biologists.
However, successful pursuit of such research programs requires the existence of
a specific set of investigative tools, particularly a well-annotated genome
sequence and methods that allow for the stable insertion of experimental DNA, a
process known as transformation. This project will use cutting-edge approaches
to both optimize effective transformation protocols and improve the genomic
resources available for a set of promising experimental angiosperm systems that
represent poorly understood lineages of the flowering plant tree of life. The
generation of these tools in the selected model systems has considerable
potential to improve the ability to conduct comparative studies of plant
biology. Moreover, dissemination of protocols developed will create a template
that can be applied by other researchers to even more angiosperm models, thereby
having an even broader positive impact on the field. With respect to outreach
and training, activities include creating a YouTube-based video explaining how
modern plant transformation works, supporting diverse training opportunities at
all academic career levels from undergraduate students through postdoctoral
fellows, and developing undergraduate course resources. Recently, major
breakthroughs in several species have shown that overexpressing genes that
regulate morphogenesis, specifically Baby Boom/Wuschel2 (Bbm/Wus2) and Growth
Regulating Factor 4/GRF Interacting Factor 1 (GRF4-GIF1), results in
significantly enhanced plant transformation and regeneration. This project
strives to adapt these methods on a set of diverse angiosperms, targeted because
they occupy the phylogenetic gap between well-studied crop and model systems.
The primary target taxa are Aquilegia coerulea (columbine, Ranunculaceae);
Spirodela polyrhiza line 7498 (duckweed, Araceae); and Asparagus officinalis
(asparagus, Asparagaceae). If time allows, efforts will also extend to Nymphaea
thermarum (Rwandan waterlily, Nymphaeaceae) and Aristolochia fimbriata
(dutchmanâ€™s pipe, Aristolochiaceae) to further circumscribe the phylogenetic
backbone of the angiosperms. As a complement to the development of these key
tools, the project will use next-generation sequencing to improve genomic
resources for the three primary model taxa, particularly in regard to the
annotation of small RNA producing loci. Education on and distribution of the
developed methodologies and resources are a key component of the project. Gene
constructs will be deposited in nonprofit global plasmid repositories and
protocol videos will be published to enable users unfamiliar with transformation
to successfully repeat the process. All sequencing data will be made publicly
available as soon as completed with no embargo. Additionally, funds will support
1) the training of undergraduate researchers, leveraging already successful
resources such as the NSF-supported Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) summer programs and 2) the creation of public science communication videos
to improve public understanding of transgenic approaches.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.