* 2335944
* Leveraging the unique metabolism of Megasphaera elsdenii for metabolic engineering to medium and long chain organic acids for use in jet fuels and biomaterials
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Janet Westpheling, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2027
* USD 899,897.00

Bioproduction of sustainable fuels and materials, including aviation fuel, is a
pressing and urgent issue. The knowledge and technologies developed in this
proposal, mitigates climate change by creating carbon-neutral fuel. These
biotechnologies increase rural economic development by creating a demand for
sustainably grown plant biomass, decrease reliance on fossil carbon, and
increase U.S. economic competitiveness. This project identifies long chain
organic acid biosynthetic pathways in Megasphaera elsdenii, evaluates their
activity under varying growth conditions, develops advanced genetic tools, and
leverages those tools to improve the production of hexanoic acid, which is a
sustainable aviation fuel precursor. The project is linked to a “women” in
science program for 5th graders in the Clarke County public school system. As a
new initiative, the project institutes joint training in STEM education for
preservice student teachers, in conjunction with the University of Georgia
College of Education.

The metabolic diversity of microorganisms is only beginning to be understood and
represents an untapped source of pathways to produce compounds that are
difficult or impossible to engineer in existing model microbes. Megasphaera
elsdenii, has the native ability to condense acetyl-CoA to efficiently generate
C4 to C8 compounds at high flux and high yield, making it a compelling platform
for the study of these pathways and to engineer the organism for production of
fuels, chemicals and biomaterials. This project identifies long chain organic
acid biosynthetic pathways in Megasphaera elsdenii, evaluates their activity
under varying growth parameters, develops advanced genetic tools, and leverages
those tools to improve flux to hexanoic acid, which is a sustainable aviation
fuel precursor. A basic genetic toolset that allows gene deletion and
heterologous expression is used to delete every nonessential gene predicted to
be involved in chain elongation and analyze the impact on fermentation products
to enable understanding of the genes responsible for each step. M. elsdenii has
the rare ability to grow anaerobically on lactic acid as a carbon source as well
as the ability to co-utilize lactic and acetic acids. The project involves
physiological studies on wild type as well as mutational analysis to dissect the
pathway(s) for anaerobic acetic acid utilization and lactic acid bioconversion.
This project lays the foundation for engineering plant sugars to longer chain
molecules and for alternate approaches to bioprocessing, such as the co-culture
or sequential fermentation in which one organism converts sugars or biomass to
lactic acid and an engineered M. elsdenii converts the lactic acid to a higher
value product enabling strategies for a broad range of anaerobic microbial
fermentations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.