* 2335969
* MASTER: Missouri Advanced Security Training, Educa
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Sajal Das, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 193,917.00

This project seeks to establish a new CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at the Missouri University of Science and Technology (S&T) to prepare
highly-qualified Cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government
workforce. The proposed CyberCorps®: SFS program is called Missouri Advanced
Security Training, Education and Research (MASTER). Missouri S&T has been the
first institution in the state of Missouri to be designated as a National Center
of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education as well as a National
Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Research. The project
will produce 20 MS and PhD graduates in the field of cybersecurity to serve the
nation. It will increase the number of minorities and women in cybersecurity
professionals and workforce. It will provide outreach and disseminate research
findings to broader communities including high schools, community colleges, HBCU
partner universities, and academic communities in the field of cybersecurity.
Such awareness will be generated through workshops and summer camps organized by
the MASTER project team, as well as research publications and presentations in
the academic and professional venues.

The proposed MASTER project will offer experiential learning by participating in
the university's strategic plan themed Smart Computing and Smart Living, in
which Cybersecurity plays a major integral role. Currently, the Computer Science
Department building is being instrumented to act as a smart environment that can
track and predict activities, occupancy, surveillance monitoring, energy usage,
and so on. SFS students will design and operate security monitoring software and
tools. Furthermore, a new course "Experiential Entrepreneurship for Computer
Scientists" will be offered to provide the Missouri S&T CyberCorps® scholars a
first-hand experience with real information-security tools applied to real-world
scenarios. The Cybersecurity curriculum has been certified for National
Standards 4011 (INFOSEC) and 4014E (ISSO). It includes a wide range of courses
on security, privacy, trustworthiness and reliability issues. This project will
also develop several new courses such as Big Data Security or Security and
Privacy in Social Networks which are current research topics of the faculty
team.