* 2335788
* Education DCL: EAGER: Experiential Learning Platform and Curricular Modules for Quantum Computing Security and Privacy Education
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ying Mao, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,999.00

Quantum computing is a revolutionary technology due to its advantage of
exponential speedup in certain computational tasks compared with the classical
computing paradigm. A number of vendors nowadays provide cloud-based access to
physical quantum computers for researchers to design, implement, and optimize
quantum algorithms. However, with prevailing malicious attacks to cyber
infrastructure, this cloud-based quantum-classical model introduces significant
security and privacy concerns to quantum computing systems. It becomes
imperative to cultivate skilled cybersecurity professionals with expertise in
quantum computing. However, this is challenging due to the lack of educational
material that integrates both quantum computing and cybersecurity and privacy
subjects. This project fills this gap by developing a comprehensive set of
curricular modules and an experiential learning platform with hands-on labs to
support quantum computing systems security and privacy (QuanSP) education and
workforce development at scale.

The project team is developing hands-on labs and curricular modules for
integrated multidisciplinary quantum computing and cybersecurity education. It
allows students to learn two traditionally disconnected subjects with
experimentation labs and engaging curricular modules. These materials
incorporate socio-technical aspects of QuanSP to provide a holistic
understanding of the subject matter. The learning-by-seeing-and-doing experience
offered by the visualization-driven lab platform fosters systematic thinking of
learners on quantum computing security and privacy. The project further provides
hands-on opportunities to implement and create sophisticated security- and
privacy-by-deign strategies to counteract adversarial threats targeting
different layers in the cloud-based quantum computing ecosystem. The project
team is integrating the developments into curricula at different levels and
disseminating the outcomes to the broader community in the field through
outreach activities to advance QuanSP research and education. The investigators
are committed to broadening the participation of women and minorities by
involving them as undergraduate and graduate student researchers in the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.