* 2335368
* Conference: Community Recommendations for Advancing Geoscience Entrepreneurism
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Rajul Pandya, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,898.00

Climate change and environmental degradation threaten everyone and the planet.
There is a need to quickly develop, test, and scale the most innovative
solutions while avoiding unintended consequences. An entrepreneurial landscape
is emerging in areas related to the environment including, but not limited to,
energy, ecosystem/sustainability services, clean energy, emissions detection and
reduction, carbon offsets, etc. Geoscientists, however, are notably lacking in
that landscape. This not only decreases the overall scope of innovation,
especially for a field so central to the challenges, it also undermines our
collective ability to assess the effectiveness of innovations. To discover the
barriers to geo-innovation and entrepreneurship, the American Geophysical Union,
the largest geoscience professional society, with over 60,000 members, will hold
a series of virtual events to survey its membership that reaches across all
fields of the geosciences. Broader Impacts of the work include uncovering the
incentives, training, opportunities, and educational vehicles needed to create a
large cohort of geo-entrepreneurs and startup founders. Efforts will include
robust representation from early career scientists and members of
underrepresented groups. The professional society will make public the report of
their findings by posting it on their website and will convene a panel at their
December 2023 national meeting to discuss the findings and generate discussion
on additional means of increasing geo-entrepreneurial activities and mindsets
among geoscience faculty and their students.

To solicit ideas on developing entrepreneurial talent and speed the pace of
innovation and delivery of innovative solutions on energy, environmental, and
climate issues to society and the economy, the American Geophysical Union (AGU)
is convening key players from across the geo-entrepreneurship ecosystem to
identify different pathways that potential entrepreneurs with geoscience
training can take to successfully launch products and services that advance
sustainable, resilient, and inclusive futures. With input from the geoscience
community and guidance from a steering committee of geo-entrepreneurial experts,
AGU will deliver a report that identifies barriers, highlights successes, and
offers concrete recommendations to spur and scale geo-entrepreneurial activity.
The report will set a solid foundation for developing an entrepreneurial mindset
in, and opportunities for, university faculty, students, and other interested
parties. The work will involve four phases: (1) identifying key stakeholders and
interviewing geo-entrepreneurs as well as forming an 8-member steering committee
to guide the project; (2) developing, distributing, and analyzing a survey of
the AGU and geo-entrepreneurial community; (3) engaging five virtual focus
groups to explore key themes identified by the survey results; and (4) convening
an in-person meeting of experts to develop a final report and recommendations.
To assist in this process, the steering committee will guide the overall project
by identifying leaders, organizations, and stakeholders in geo-entrepreneurship
and innovation. They will also help to develop the survey and focus group
questions. This committee will also provide critical input on how focus group
and survey outputs are analyzed and will shape recommendations for the final
report. At the December 2023 AGU national meeting that attracts tens of
thousands of attendees, a panel of experts and discussion session will be held
to further engage geoscience communities and present possible means by which
they can be active in innovation ecosystems and in the creation of geo-founded
startups and commercial ventures providing solutions to pressing climate and
environmental problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.