* 2335713
* Strain Effects in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Field-Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Kevin Brenner, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2025
* USD 266,600.00

Title: Strain Effects in Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Field-Effect
Transistors

Strain is a powerful variable in the design and performance of electron devices.
Not only has it played a central role in boosting Si technology, but it
continues to enable entirely new types of devices like straintronics and
electronic skins. In comparison to bulk semiconductors, monolayer transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have considerably richer relationships with strain
due to their atomic thickness. This not only allows these materials to access
deformations not possible with micromachined Si, but also results in strain
being an unintentional artifact of many common device processing steps. This
project will investigate the effects of strain on field-effect transistors
(FETs) with monolayer TMD channels, which can advance the performance limits of
these devices and solve major integration and reliability challenges associated
with deleterious strain. Knowledge distilled from this project will support K-12
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs in the region
through the Caruth Institute for Engineering Education (CIEE), an educational
center located at the investigator's university. This includes the development
of hands-on summer campus hosted at CIEE, and the development of STEM-related
lesson plans for school districts around the region that promote diversity in
engineering.

The goal of this project is to provide a rigorous investigation of the effect of
strain on the low-field and high-field transport in monolayer TMDs and at their
contacts. The proposed research has potential to be transformative in the field
of electronic devices as strain can dramatically modulate the band structure,
driving record piezoresistive effects in the low-field transport and tuning
saturation velocity in the high-field transport. Furthermore, new quantitate
knowledge on the effects of strain at contacts can advance technologies such as
flexible devices, where contact failure is often described empirically. In
addition to the uniform strain, the effects of short-range strain fluctuations
on the transport will be characterized and fit to newly developed transport
models. Devices will be fabricated on flexible substrates with varying channel
lengths, which allows for a decoupling of the channel and contacts. Strain will
be imparted using mechanical deformations, and characterized using Raman
spectroscopy and photoluminescence. Electrical characterizations will be fit to
low-field (Boltzmann Transport Equation) and high-field (multivalley Monte
Carlo) transport models that account for several scattering mechanisms. This
includes phonons, neutral and charge defects, and the development of some of the
first models to account for short-range strain variation. All knowledge
generated by this project will be disseminated through publications and
inclusions in the investigator's courses to reach the broadest possible
audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.