* 2335849
* CISE Research Investigators Conference: Pacific Islands Regional CISE Aspiring Investigators Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Scott Robertson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,990.00

In alignment with national goals to broaden participation in science and
engineering, the University of Hawaii will lead a workshop to prepare
researchers in the region to develop high-quality and competitive proposals that
meet the expectations of the National Science Foundation Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Core Programs. The workshop will
support researchers at minority-serving institutions (MSIs) across Hawaii and
Guam to build skills to increase the number of competitive proposals developed
and submitted to the NSF CISE Core Programs. The workshop will foster
interdisciplinary collaboration by bringing together researchers from different
information science-related programs and disciplines within the region.

Workshop attendees will include both aspiring PIs and senior research mentors.
The workshop will be structured to facilitate information sharing, as well as
networking among participants. Aspiring PIs will be matched with mentors who
will advise on proposal development during and after the workshop. Key
information will be shared via mentors’ plenary presentations and panel
discussions. Breakout sessions with mentors will be scheduled to facilitate peer
connections and gain feedback on proposal elements. Workshop content will
include the NSF proposal development process; identifying relevant CISE Core
Programs; the NSF merit review criteria and specific program solicitations; key
components of a competitive proposal; the proposal review process; ethics of
research; and dissemination of results. The workshop will provide mentorship and
networking opportunities to strengthen researchers’ careers and the long-term
sustainability of the University of Hawaii System's and other regional
universities’ research activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.