* 2335731
* Conference: Attribution of Extreme Weather and Climate Events and their Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Rachel Silvern, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2025
* USD 99,999.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (National
Academies) will conduct a consensus study that examines current scientific
capabilities for attributing extreme weather events and their impacts to human-
caused climate change. Extreme weather events—for example, drought, wildfires,
extreme heat, and hurricanes—are accelerating in their frequency, magnitude, and
impacts on the global community. Impacts from these events can have devastating
consequences to natural resources, ecosystems, communities, infrastructure,
economies, livelihoods, and human health. Given the significance of extreme
weather events, it is critical to improve capabilities to assess and forecast
future extreme events and identify strategies to better communicate this science
with the public. This activity will inform a broad audience, including
governments and regulatory agencies globally, the scientific community,
corporate and non-profit entities, the media and science communicators, the
legal field, and real estate investment interests. The study will help decision
makers and other stakeholders assess the extent to which extreme weather events
can be attributed to climate change, identify priorities to improve scientific
capabilities, and may inform legal and financial consequences as part of “loss
and damage”—policies that support vulnerable countries’ management of impacts
from climate change. In particular, the attention of this study to extending
scientific tools to regions without well-established capacity could support
efforts of frontline communities to manage the impacts of climate change.

Building on a 2016 National Academies report that examined the state of extreme
weather attribution, an ad hoc committee of experts will author a consensus
report that will: provide an updated assessment of current scientific
understanding and capabilities; explore the value and utility of attribution
science for different applications; assess current capabilities for the
attribution of impacts of extreme weather events to climate change; examine
methodologies of extreme event attribution, identify challenges, and provide
guidance for best practices; provide guidance for engaging different
stakeholders; and identify research priorities. The committee will be
responsible for gathering and reviewing relevant literature and using its expert
judgment to synthesize this information into a consensus report. As input to the
study, the committee will organize a large workshop to broadly engage the
community of scientists conducting relevant research and stakeholders who will
ultimately use this information. The final consensus report will be available
publicly upon release via the National Academies Press website and information
about the report and its recommendations will be shared broadly with key
stakeholder communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.