* 2335625
* Education DCL: EAGER: Teaching Privacy via Stakeholder Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Kathryn Fisler, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Education about the social impacts of privacy and cybersecurity is critical to
individual welfare and to creating technology that is in the public interest,
but it is also challenging to make effective. Students often struggle to relate
abstract concepts like the right to privacy, control over personal data, or
freedom of speech, to the concrete technical choices they must make. This
project realizes and evaluates a new pedagogical approach to teaching privacy
and cybersecurity, focused around "stakeholders": people who are directly or
indirectly affected by a technical system. The project's novelties are (1) the
stakeholder approach, which combines teaching about abstract, high-level
concepts with concrete applications, and (2) a preliminary investigation of the
effectiveness of this approach. The project's broader significance and
importance are that it creates an effective template for privacy and
cybersecurity, produces open-source assignment materials, and impacts computer
science education through new pedagogies and curricular recommendations.

The project develops a new, stakeholder-focused approach to teaching privacy and
security. The stakeholder approach is a template for reasoning about privacy and
cybersecurity concerns in the development of technical systems, with a focus on
relating high-level, abstract concepts to concrete implementation choices via
stakeholder needs. The stakeholder needs give students concrete but possibly
conflicting requirements to support. Ideally, the stakeholder approach leads to
(a) students making deeper and more substantive connections between abstract
concepts related to privacy and cybersecurity (e.g., data autonomy and
ownership, transparency, accountability) and concrete social impacts (e.g.,
identity theft, reputational damage); (b) students engaging more deeply with
social impact concepts and how they relate to technical decisions they face; and
(c) students perceiving cybersecurity as an area in which they can work towards
fair and equitable computing systems. The research team is developing and
deploying stakeholder-based assignments in five computer science courses at
Brown University, spanning introductory, intermediate, and upper-level courses
taken by undergraduates and cybersecurity master's students. The data collected
from these assignments will help answer the central research question of whether
the stakeholder approach results in meaningful improvement in students' ability
to relate normative concepts to concrete problems and technical design
decisions. This work will therefore contribute to academic computer science
education, workforce development, and socially-responsible computing by
proposing new pedagogies and curricular structures for effective teaching of
privacy and cybersecurity and their societal context.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.