* 2335807
* SaTC-EDU: EAGER: Developing metaverse-native security and privacy curricula for high school students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Chien-Chung Shen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

The metaverse refers to a computer-generated virtual space where users can
interact with one another in real-time. It uses different technologies and
platforms, allowing for widespread integration into various aspects of our
lives. However, it also brings up a range of security and privacy threats.
Although the metaverse is envisioned as the evolution of social media platforms,
the metaverse blurs the boundaries between physical and virtual identities and
incorporates virtual economies, creating unique security challenges like virtual
crimes, theft, and fraudulent transactions. Teenagers, due to their vulnerable
developmental stage, lack of experience, and technological fluency, are at risk
for online scams, cyberbullying, and identity theft within the metaverse. The
project team will develop metaverse-native security and privacy curricula. The
developed curricula will assume a crucial role, akin to defensive driving
courses, in preparation for entering the metaverse. Although participating may
not eliminate all potential "accidents," it will significantly reduce them and
minimize the impact on teenagers’ safety and privacy. Moreover, by involving
students from communities currently underrepresented in cybersecurity in the
design and development of the metaverse-native security and privacy curricula,
we can foster their interest in the field of cybersecurity and ensure that the
curricula are meaningful to their peers. This collaborative approach contributes
to strengthening the national cybersecurity workforce pipeline. Additionally,
the research instruments, assessment tools, and outcomes of this work will be
disseminated through workshops, publications, presentations, and a web portal.
By sharing knowledge and insights, we can promote awareness and empower
individuals to navigate the metaverse safely and securely.

The project has two interconnected goals: to educate teenagers about the unique
security and privacy challenges in the metaverse and to inspire them to pursue
cybersecurity-related majors in college and subsequent careers in the field. To
accomplish these objectives, the project team will collaborate with high school
students to identify metaverse-specific security and privacy threat scenarios.
Through their participation, we will design and develop metaverse-native
security and privacy curricula. These curricula will be piloted with their high
school cohort to evaluate their effectiveness and refine their content. The
project will make significant contributions to cybersecurity education and
workforce development, yielding several key outcomes. First, the team will
create a set of prototyped metaverse cybersecurity scenarios designed to engage
and motivate high school students. Second, the team will develop and document
principles for iterative co-development with youth. Lastly, the team will
produce materials that enable the monitoring and assessment of student learning
and interest in cybersecurity. The project will conduct ongoing research and
comprehensive formative and summative evaluations to gain insights and lessons
learned, further advancing cybersecurity education in high schools.

This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in
this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the
Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National
Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and
economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.