* 2335647
* I-Corps:  Digital therapeutics software solutions for autistic children
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Charles Gilbert, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of training software for autistic children. Currently, almost 3% of
children are diagnosed with autism and only one-third receive the mental health
services they need. All autistic children have difficulties transitioning
between different activities and environments, creating stressful situations for
them and their caregivers. The proposed technology creates customizable software
solutions, including academic materials and curriculum aids, for teachers,
caregivers, and parents. Current software solutions do not meet their needs
because they are “one size fits all” and do not allow customization. The
proposed solution combines children’s love for technology with parents’ insights
about their interests to provide them with the personalized therapy and
education they need. User experiences to train visual perception and transitions
based on each child’s interests and needs will employ amusement as the context
for learning. This will engage children’s attention and motivation, and may
allow users to transfer learning from a software environment to their everyday
tasks, supporting therapists, teachers, and parents.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of software interventions for
autistic children. The proposed technology is designed to provide vision therapy
to train visual acuity, and will include visual schedules to help autistic
children and teenagers communicate and gain independence in their daily lives.
The digital image processing methodology and software was built upon previous
experience in brain circuits, visual perception and learning in humans, and
mouse models of autism. Users identify target figures immersed in photographic
naturalistic backgrounds depicting city and nature landscapes. The goal is to
help autistic children train their visual acuity in identifying letters, words,
numbers, shapes, and objects. It is particularly challenging for autistic
children to shift between tasks and behaviors. Results using this approach show
that with practice, individuals can learn to identify target figures more
efficiently and to allocate attention to elements that are relevant for the task
at hand. The proposed software requires identifying different figures in
different visual scenes to help users train cognitive flexibility and
transitions, alternating between different targets of attention. With practice,
the proposed software may help train attentional skills and transitions between
tasks and behaviors, and will include academic materials and curriculum aids as
educational support.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.