* 2335755
* Education DCL: EAGER: Career Kickstart: High School Pathway to a Thriving Cybersecurity Career
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Alyssa Chudnofsky, The College Board
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,688.00

The number of open positions requesting cybersecurity-related skills continues
to grow, while employers struggle to find skilled workers. As the cyber
workforce demand rises, the talent pipeline is limited; only 15% of high schools
offer a cybersecurity course (cybersupply.org). Though multiple organizations
have developed cybersecurity standards, curricula, and teacher training,
implementing national-scale solutions that are acknowledged by higher education
and industry remains a challenge. The Career Kickstart (CK) project aspires to
expand the Advanced Placement (AP) model to the career and technical education
space. Like AP courses, CK courses will offer opportunities for students to earn
college credit and will provide a course framework, professional learning
opportunities, and instructional resources that support high-quality teaching
and college-level work for all students. The project is supporting the
groundwork (Phase I) for developing the CK Cybersecurity Pathway, which leads to
a nationally recognized pathway, so all students – not just those who attend
schools with the resources to launch a cyber program - leave high school with
the motivation and skills to pursue advanced training, certification, and a
career in cybersecurity. The project advances knowledge within the career and
technical education space – specifically in developing high-quality resources
for high school cybersecurity coursework. Similar to designing AP courses and
exams, the CK program is crafted by college faculty and experienced teachers who
serve on an Advisory Committee. Industry experts are also involved to ensure the
program is aligned to workforce needs. The CK project is utilizing the Advisory
Committee to refine the program’s design, the coursework and assessments, the
teacher preparation model, and the suite of resources to ensure easy
implementation. Through three in-person sessions, the group is creating and
rapidly prototyping the pathway’s key learning objectives (LOs) a student must
master and demonstrate in an assessment to obtain college credit. This includes
LOs aligned to meet the needs of cybersecurity entry-level jobs. In addition,
the project team is prototyping and piloting CK professional development – a
training model that follows other AP trainings and builds a strong teacher
community. This is yielding a blueprint for professional learning that’s
effective, scalable, sustainable, and dynamic. To evaluate dimensions of Phase
I, the CK team is utilizing a range of tools including surveys (industry,
committee members, teachers, students, and administrators), assessments
administered both to high school students and college students, and classroom
observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.