* 2335208
* CAREER: Uncovering Mechanisms of DNA-protein Crosslink Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2023,04/30/2027
* Jaime Lopez-Mosqueda, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2027
* USD 25,000.00

Timely and accurate duplication of DNA is essential for the growth of all
eukaryotic organisms, but the replication process is subject to obstruction by
DNA damage such as DNA-protein crosslinks. Sustained DNA-protein crosslinks
prevent segregation and transmission of chromosomes to daughter cells; hence,
removal of DNA-protein crosslinks is critically important for cell survival. The
overarching goal of this project is to determine how cells choose distinct
cellular pathways to bypass or repair DNA-protein crosslinks. A
multidisciplinary strategy combining biochemistry, molecular biology and yeast
genetics will be employed to investigate how cells mark DNA-protein crosslinks
for proteolytic degradation. Additionally, the project will engage a diverse
group of students living in rural areas to provide training, skills, and
experiences in scientific research and promote their participation in STEM
careers.

The research project aims to elucidate the biochemical and molecular mechanisms
underlying selective targeting and removal of DNA-protein crosslinks that
physically impede DNA replication, gene transcription and chromatin remodeling.
Multiple, non-redundant pathways cooperate to repair or bypass DNA-protein
crosslinks. SPRTN is the founding member of mammalian proteases dedicated to
DNA-protein crosslink repair and several paralogues and orthologues have since
been identified in species across multiple kingdoms, underscoring the conserved
nature of DNA-protein crosslink repair. Given the multitude of proteins that can
be covalently trapped on DNA, how SPRTN selectively targets them for removal in
a crowded landscape of chromatin-associated proteins remains unknown. Aim 1 will
investigate a unifying mechanism to target DNA-protein crosslinks, irrespective
of their size and chemical composition. Aim 2 will investigate how SPRTN
proteolytic activity is down-regulated to prevent aberrant destruction of
chromatin-associated proteins. Aim 3 is a genetic approach to identify
additional factors important for DNA-protein crosslink repair in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The last goal involves high school students from
rural schools performing screening experiments in their own classrooms, and thus
provides them with STEM career development and mentoring opportunities.

This project is jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the Biological Sciences
Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.