* 2335702
* Berkeley FrameNet Website Migration
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Collin Baker, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2028
* USD 65,037.00

The FrameNet team has built a super-dictionary of English that humans can read
and computers can also use for natural language processing (NLP). Words that
describe the same kind of event with the same set of "roles" are grouped
together in a SEMANTIC FRAME. Over the past 25 years, FrameNet researchers have
defined more than 1,224 frames for 13,687 words and labeled 202,978 examples of
them. This project will shift the FrameNet public website from several aging
servers to cloud hosting, so that students and NLP researchers will be able to
read and download the data for years to come.

The FrameNet website is a vital point of entry into Frame Semantics for
thousands of visitors. Both casual visitors and researchers can either search
for lexical units to find frames, or search frames to find lexical units.
Computational Linguistics research has benefited from the influence of the
theory of Fillmore's Frame Semantics, and FrameNet data has been widely used in
the development of systems for NLU. For example, recent research has creatively
combined statistical and symbolic approaches to NLU, such as using BERT (Devlin
et al. 2019) to improve automatic semantic role labeling, or injecting FrameNet
labels into neural nets.

FrameNet has had much broader impact than initially envisioned. Instructors use
FrameNet to introduce students at all levels to lexical semantics. The thousands
of downloads of FrameNet data have sparked various studies outside of
traditional NLP, e.g. detection of moral values in tweets, explorations of
framing in religious and political texts. Berkeley FrameNet has inspired
development of FrameNets in a dozen languages and research on cross-lingual
projections of frames and frame shifts when translating. The Berkeley FrameNet
project has also hired many students from diverse backgrounds, many of whom have
gone on to successful careers in NLP and/or academia.

The URL of the project is https://framenet.icsi.bekeley.edu Because the previous
servers for the project are aging and will be retired soon, this URL has been
redirected to a duplicate of the FrameNet public website on a server at
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora in Brazil, thanks to help from colleagues
there. The purpose of this project is to recreate the website and database on a
cloud-hosting platform in the US, and maintain it there for at least five years.
The FrameNet lexical database, including all frames, frame elements, lexical
units, and annotations will be retained indefinitely at secure locations
worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.