* 2335876
* ECCS-EPSRC: NeuroComm: Brain-Inspired Wireless Communications -- From Theoretical Foundations to Implementation for 6G and Beyond
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2026
* USD 104,752.00

Current wireless systems, from Wi-Fi to 5G, have been designed by following
principles that have not changed over the last 70 years. This approach has given
us dependable, universal wireless connectivity solutions that can deliver any
type of digital information. As computing systems substitute universal digital
processors with specialized circuits for artificial intelligence (AI), and as
wireless connectivity becomes an integral part of the sensing-compute-actuation
fabric powered by AI, it is essential to rethink the fundamental principles
underpinning the design of wireless systems. The global telecom market is
estimated at around USD 850 billion, with the UK telecom industry generating
around GBP 30 billion in 2020. The countries that will lead in the creation of
the new technological principles and capabilities underpinning 6G will have a
significant international market edge, making fundamental research on the
subject a critical national policy issue. In this context, neuromorphic sensing
and computing are emerging as alternative, brain-inspired, paradigms for
efficient data collection and semantic signal processing that build on event-
driven measurements, in-memory computing, spike-based information processing,
reduced precision and increased stochasticity, and adaptability via learning in
hardware. The neuromorphic sensing and computing market was valued at USD 22.5
million in 2020, and it is projected to be worth USD 333.6 million by 2026.
Current commercial use cases of neuromorphic technologies range from drone
monitoring to the development of fast and accurate COVID-19 antibody testing.
NeuroComm views the emergence of neuromorphic technologies as a unique
opportunity for the development of efficient, integrated wireless connectivity
and semantic processing - referred to broadly as wireless cognition.
Specifically, NeuroComm aims to systematically address the integration of
neuromorphic principles within an end-to-end system encompassing sensing,
computing, and wireless communications.

The informational currency of neuromorphic computing is not the bit, but the
timing of spikes. Neuroscientists have long studied the efficiency and
effectiveness of spike-based communications in biological neurons. In the
context of wireless cognition, spike-based processing and communication raise
novel fundamental questions regarding optimal joint signaling and computing
strategies. NeuroComm will take the approach of starting from first,
information-theoretic, principles, addressing the problem of what to implement
before investigating how to best deploy neuromorphic based wireless cognition.To
this end, the project aims at developing an information-theoretic framework for
the analysis of wireless cognition systems with neuromorphic transceivers. The
efficiency of neuromorphic computing hinges on the co-design of hardware and
software. NeuroComm posits that a close integration of neuromorphic computing
and communications at the design stage will be needed in order to fully leverage
the benefits of brain-inspired wireless cognition. NeuroComm is a collaboration
between King's College London (KCL) as lead institution and Princeton University
(PU) as academic partner, along with NVIDA, Intel Labs, AccelerComm, and IBM
Zurich as industrial partners. The research will build on the PIs' expertise in
information theory, machine learning, communications, and neuromorphic computing
to explore theoretical foundations, algorithms, and hardware implementation.

This research was funded under the NSF Directorate for Engineering - UKRI
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead Agency Opportunity (ENG-
EPSRC), NSF 20-510.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.