* 2335921
* I-Corps: An automatic training dataset labelling tool to fill the gap for missing training image datasets
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Chaowei Yang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an automatic training dataset labelling tool and service.
Currently, labelling is accomplished manually, which is time-consuming, and
there is a high demand for high-quality training datasets. While popular spoken
language applications can leverage numerous teams of dedicated training dataset
general labelers to help create training datasets, it poses a significant
challenge for scientific and professional domains to produce high-quality
training datasets to feed into Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML)
models and algorithms. The proposed technology uses a semi-automatic training
dataset labelling tool and online management service to facilitate automatic
cropping, segmenting, and labelling of image datasets. Images are a popular data
type that is widely used in climate change, smart cities, medical and health
domains. The proposed technology may reduce the time and resources spent on
obtaining training datasets by millions of data science professionals,
researchers, and students, as well as companies and other organizations.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a software training dataset
labelling tool and online service that works automatically to fill the gap of
missing high-quality training image datasets. Spatiotemporal Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML)-based capabilities are under development
to automatically classify, label, store, and share training datasets among a
group of users. The proposed technology is designed to provide an automated data
labeling software tool to automatically tag data and help to identify and
classify the data. This process may be used to create training datasets for
machine learning models. Specifically, this is an image labelling tool that may
be used to classify and label digital images. The proposed technology was
developed initially for sea ice research and results confirmed that sea ice
images can be automatically labelled. This technology potentially may be used in
many areas including climate change and biomedical research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.