* 2335812
* Education DCL: EAGER: Enhancing Cybersecurity Awareness of American Indian Farmers and Food Producers: The Ponca Tribe of Nebraska as a Case Study
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Lawrence Loucks, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 116,440.00

As information technology is increasingly integrated into modern farms, the food
and agriculture industry has become a focal point for cybercriminals and nation-
state actors. With many American Indian farmers and food producers selling farm
products directly to their tribe, any potential cybersecurity attack impacting
such farmers could have disastrous food security consequences for an entire
community. This project creates a more secure workforce in the food and
agriculture industry through the design and delivery of a cybersecurity
educational and workforce initiative. The project's novelties are a curriculum
that focuses on cybersecurity risks and threats in the food and agriculture
industry, which also takes into consideration culturally sensitive materials for
American Indian farmers and food producers. In addition to the specific
curriculum, the project's broader significance and importance are the creation
of guidelines and lessons learned for creating and maximizing the delivery of
cybersecurity educational content to American Indian farmers and food producers.

The project contributes to the growing research on cybersecurity curriculum
development and the broader improvement of cybersecurity awareness in the
farming and agriculture communities. The first contribution is the development
of a ten-module cybersecurity course, mapped to the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce
Framework. These modules help educate and train American Indian farmers and food
producers about cybersecurity practices, risks, and threats in the food and
agriculture industry. The second contribution of the project is the creation of
guidelines and lessons learned emerging from the delivery of the cybersecurity
curriculum to the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, as well as other American Indian
Tribes in Nebraska and the surrounding states. Finally, the cybersecurity
curriculum is available to the wider community, providing a foundation for
future cybersecurity educational initiatives in the farming and agriculture
domain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.