* 2335240
* NSF CISE Research Expansion Principal Investigators Conference, 2023-2024
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Jacqueline El-Sayed, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 649,777.00

The American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), in collaboration with the
American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC), is conducting a grantees
meeting to convene principal investigators (PIs) from the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Minority-Serving Institutions (CISE-MSI)
Research Expansion Program. The meeting provides an opportunity for participants
to share ongoing/formative experiences about their project, with a focus on
creating opportunities to disseminate promising practices and engage in
collaborative problem-solving around shared challenges. Specifically, the
meetings: a) provide the opportunity for grantees and other researchers to
interact directly with one another and NSF representatives—in turn, increasing
knowledge, generating and sharing ideas; b) strengthen professional networks and
collaborative relationships; and c) share lessons learned with emerging
researchers who plan to submit a new CISE-MSI solicitation proposal in the next
two years. The project builds on practice in community-building, particularly
among faculty researchers at MSIs, who share a common focus on diversity and
inclusion. The project takes advantage of the proximity of Tribal College and
University faculty to the in-person meeting venue, providing an opportunity to
engage faculty interested in participating in an upcoming round of CISE-MSI
funding.

The project goals are threefold: 1) host an in-person 2.5-day Grantees Meeting
inviting all current CISE-MSI PI Team Grantees to participate in plenary
sessions, information gathering/sharing, mentoring and community building; 2)
facilitate a virtual 5-week Proposal Development Workshop providing aspiring
CISE-MSI research teams with instruction, writing labs, and expert feedback on
the development of key components of their proposals (e.g., project description,
budget/budget justification, and project summary); and 3) deploy a Mentoring
Program so that each aspiring CISE-MSI research team is matched with experienced
coaching to support their progress throughout the program. A key outcome of the
meetings is a multi-stakeholder agenda that addresses current issues facing
engineering—ultimately, advancing knowledge in a variety of engineering fields
by providing forums for MSI CISE awardees and stakeholders to learn, explore,
and share ideas that promote innovation in education, research, and practice and
produce transformational engineered systems and engineering graduates adept at
technological innovation and leadership. Results of the meetings include
establishing the groundwork for a community of practice where PIs from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs), Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) and Alaska Native
and Native Hawaiian Serving Institutions (ANNHs) can collectively further their
respective program goals as well as the broader goals of the CISE-MSI program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.