* 2335335
* EAGER: SPRITE: Sensor Processing and Realtime Intelligence at The Edge - Supporting the National Discovery Cloud for Climate with Advanced Networking, Cloud, and Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Climate research holds immense significance due to its direct impact on various
aspects of our lives and the environment. As a result, there has been a
consistent rise in the deployment of atmospheric sensors (e.g., weather radars,
satellites, etc.), leading to a substantial increase in data volumes that need
to be efficiently distributed to the cloud. This project will investigate the
implementation of distributed machine learning for climate modeling and weather
forecasting. The goal of this project is to better support climate researchers
with scientific workflows that will enable them to develop better weather
warning and forecast systems.

The project's objective is to investigate the federation of current computing,
data, and networking resources in order to streamline the development of
scientific workflows for climate and atmospheric science researchers. The
ultimate goal of SPRITE is to contribute to the design of a National Discovery
Cloud for Climate (NDC-C), with the overarching purpose of advancing climate-
related science and engineering. The proposed research will leverage existing
testbeds, including the CASA radar network located in the Dallas/Fort Worth
Metroplex, as well as several NSF-supported testbeds such as CloudLab, Chameleon
Cloud, Open Cloud Testbed, Open Storage Network, and FABRIC. To accomplish these
goals, real atmospheric observations obtained from the CASA testbed and National
Weather Service radars will be utilized.

Severe weather and changes in climate have a global impact which is manifested
through extreme droughts and forest fires, extreme rainfall events and
catastrophic flooding, and severe tropical and convective storms. Better warning
systems that are based on climate and atmospheric science are required to
protect lives and property and limit the impact on our economy. While it is our
goal to support the development of NDC-C, we will also use our long-standing
collaborations with key entities such as the National Weather Service, remote
sensing industry, as well as national laboratories like the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR) to share our results and make them broadly
applicable.

Project outcomes will be made publicly available on the Paros Center for
Atmospheric Research website at https://www.umass.edu/paros-atmospheric-center/.
The proposal team is committed to preserving the project website for at least
three years after the completion of funding. In addition, scholarly materials
will be archived at ScholarWorks@UMass Amherst which is administered by the
UMass Amherst libraries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.