* 2335828
* I-Corps: A Framework for Streamlining the Development and Deployment of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Models on Enterprise Data
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Peyman Najafirad, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial intelligence (AI) platform to streamline and enable
data scientists and researchers to deploy AI faster and more easily. Currently,
the development and deployment of these models often require substantial data,
time, and financial resources, which can be challenging for many organizations,
particularly small and medium-sized enterprises. The proposed technology is an
AI framework that integrates advanced AI technologies with practical real-world
applications. It is designed to streamline the creation and deployment of large
language models and is adept at building generative models based on enterprise
data while ensuring stringent safeguards for data protection and generation. In
addition, the proposed platform provides flexible deployment options,
functioning efficiently on public cloud platforms for cost-effectiveness and
scalability, or within private clouds or on-premises servers for organizations
that prioritize data privacy and security. The proposed technology may be used
by data scientists and researchers to simplify model development, including data
acquisition, manipulation, curation, feature generation, hyperparameter tuning,
and deployment, to efficiently build and deploy state-of-the-art AI modeling
based on their custom datasets.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a software platform for
streamlining the deployment of generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) models
including multimodal large language models. The proposed technology leverages
research-based data engineering and machine learning software libraries,
including data-plugins, service application programming interfaces, and
reinforcement learning with human feedback and parameter optimization to
simplify complex data procedures. In addition, reinforcement learning with human
feedback and supervised fine tuning are used to enhance the performance of AI
models and improve the security and safeguards, to make the deployment of these
models safer and more reliable. The proposed technology is designed to operate
on public cloud platforms or private clouds/on-premises servers, which
prioritizes data privacy and security for enterprises. A focus on safeguarding
large language models aligns with societal imperatives for secure and
trustworthy AI applications. The proposed platform uses a user-friendly
interface and data plugins for tasks like data acquisition, annotation,
hyperparameter tuning, fine-tuning trillion parameter models on a single DGX
server for graphics processing unit (GPU) scheduling to conduct model training
and operating deployment on cloud systems or on on-promise cyberinfrastructure.
By automating these tasks and streamlining development workflow, the platform
reduces technical hurdles, saves time, and cuts costs. This enables efficient
data processing and broadens access to advanced AI development for various
professionals and researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.