* 2335795
* EAGER: Cloud Infrastructures for Designing Sustainable Electronics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Udit Gupta, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Information and communication technologies have evolved tremendously over the
past two decades to realize modern day internet services, cloud-scale computing,
and consumer devices at the edge. While computing forms the backbone of our
daily interactions with technology, it also levies a high environmental
footprint. Estimates show computing accounts for 4% of the global carbon
footprint, on par with the aviation industry’s impact. Furthermore, these
emissions are expected to rise given the growing demand for computing devices
and scale of services used on a daily basis. Despite the growing scale and
importance of computing’s environmental impact, there is a lack of commensurate
tools to quantify the footprint. Such tools are prerequisite to effective
sustainability-aware optimization. This project aims to leverage cloud resources
to build shared community infrastructure and tools to quantify the carbon
footprint of computing platforms across their end-to-end lifetimes including
hardware manufacturing and operational use. The tools will enable computer
systems designers to consider the sustainability implications of systems
alongside metrics such as performance, efficiency, power, and energy. The tools
are meant to be used in research, sustainability-aware early hardware design,
and as pedagogical resources in the classroom. The project will incorporate the
tools developed into college courses, as well as in-person and online tutorials
and workshops at academic conferences. The tools developed will be open-source,
including source code and datasets, to enable further research and development
towards a sustainable computing ecosystem.

The project aims to develop shared community infrastructure to quantify the end-
to-end environmental impact of computing systems. The project focuses on
developing methods to consider factors like power and energy, hardware
utilization, and the carbon footprint from manufacturing integrated circuits.
The project has three major tasks. First, developing carbon models for modern
and emerging systems by integrating detailed device characterization,
architectural simulators, and product environmental reports of real systems. The
models will be parameterized to facilitate researchers to easily add new device
characterization of emerging technologies and architectural simulators in the
future. Second, building simulators for renewable energy driven systems. The
task aggregates carbon intensity datasets of power grids and standardizes output
traces from the architectural simulators to enable researchers to consider a
breadth of deployment scenarios based on hardware design, and temporal and
spatial variability of renewable energy availability. Finally, the third task
develops methods to attribute operational and embodied carbon of hardware
systems to individual software applications to open opportunities for
sustainable application design. To demonstrate the efficacy of the
infrastructure, the project includes open-sourcing all software artifacts as
well as task-specific case studies, and organizing tutorial and workshops at
academic conferences. This project is supported by the National Discovery Cloud
for Climate (NDC-C).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.