* 2335891
* Conference: Workshop to Build a Vision and Strategy for Creating a National Network of Academic Cloud and Self-Driving Labs
* TIP,TF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Theresa Mayer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,715.00

The Workshop to Build a Vision and Strategy for Creating a National Network of
Academic Cloud and Self-Driving Labs will support a national-scale workshop
focused on accelerating science through innovations provided by self-driving
labs (SDLs), cloud labs, and automated science. The workshop will bring together
academics, industry representatives, and government partners to understand the
state-of-the-art in cloud labs and SDLs, and develop a roadmap for a national
network of resources. Investing in these technologies can help the US retain its
international leadership in scientific innovation, and can foster a virtuous
cycle of innovation and discovery. A national network of cloud labs and SDLs can
democratize access to advanced scientific equipment, enhance reproducibility,
accelerate the translation of basic research into commercialization, and promote
open science principles.

The workshop will bring together a mixture of academics from multiple types of
universities, from R1 research universities through community colleges,
representatives from foundations, and government and industry leaders to explore
the broad set of issues. Participants with diverse backgrounds and experience
will be recruited for the workshop, including faculty/researchers from HBCU’s
and MSI’s, as well as early and late career faculty, with the goal of building a
roadmap for a national network that is inclusive from the very beginning.

Discussions will focus on the transition from trial-and-error research to
automated research workflows driven by artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML). The workshop will explore integration of computing in scientific
advancements to enable a new model of scientific discovery through continuous
refinement of models within the data generation feedback loop using automated
research workflows. The vision being pursued is the automation of experiments
and utilization of AI/ML methods to fine-tune models in order to much more
quickly understand complex phenomena and guide future experiments towards rapid
refinement and discovery. The workshop will address challenges that one may
encounter in the process including the need for advanced innovations in
instrumentation, incorporation of active learning, fostering collaborations, and
adapting education and training to the use of such remote laboratories.

The workshop includes plenary sessions, breakout tracks, and discussions led by
experts from academia, industry, and national scientific infrastructure
networks. The outcome of the workshop will inform the roadmap for the
development of a national network of academic self-driving labs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.