* 2335910
* Collaborative Research: NSF Workshop on Automated, Programmable and Self Driving Labs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 12,047.00

Laboratory automation increases precision and efficiency of science experiments.
Advances in low-cost sensors, actuators, robotic systems, and control systems
have lowered the barrier to entry to laboratory automation such that fully self-
driving labs will have the potential to enable new practices of science
experiment and to accelerate scientific exploration progress. There is a
critical need to develop the principles and methodologies for self-driving
laboratories. These systems will likely draw from best practices and experiences
learned in data science, human-machine interaction, manufacturing and quality
control, open-source ecosystems, and laboratory science methods.

The proposed workshop will convene leaders in self-driving laboratories and
related areas including data science, robotics, manufacturing, and open-source
ecosystems to define a roadmap for self-driving laboratories. Experts will
discuss on latest advances and current challenges in automated sample
preparation, experiment generation, data collection, and data analysis. The
workshop will help identify major themes and assess on how future,
interconnected goals can be best supported in a research context. By convening
community leader around related topics, the workshop will seed cross-discipline
collaboration on infrastructure that can support a broad range of sciences,
which may include more complex experiments to accelerate scientific discovery
and perform cost effective verification and validation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.