* 2335751
* Education DCL: EAGER: Exploring New Pathways into Cybersecurity Careers for Rural English Learners through XR-enabled Educational Methods
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Evrim Baran Jovanovic, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,240.00

Defending against cybersecurity attacks requires a well-trained cybersecurity
workforce. Yet, worker shortages are increasingly threatening U.S. security and
industrial growth. A potential untapped resource to help fill this shortage is
the 38% of high school students who do not attend a four-year university after
graduation. Many of these students, often from underserved populations, aspire
to higher-skilled careers and postsecondary education, but they struggle to
overcome barriers that limit their participation. This project uses Extended
Reality (XR) technologies to encourage rural English Learner (EL) students to
consider cybersecurity careers. An interdisciplinary team from Iowa State
University leads the project in collaboration with partners in Storm Lake, Iowa,
a growing rural meatpacking town with a large migrant and refugee population.
The project's novelties are designing XR resource prototypes for EL students and
evaluating their potential to increase students' interest in cybersecurity. The
project's broader significance and importance are to assist EL students in
training for higher-skilled, better-paid jobs that can improve conditions for
their households and to bring more women and people from underserved communities
into cybersecurity.

This project considers rural EL students an untapped segment of the future
workforce with significant potential to enter the cybersecurity field through
postsecondary pathways such as certificates and associate degrees. Inspired by
gaps in research on student transitions from high school into postsecondary
education, this project encourages EL students to consider a cybersecurity
career by increasing their interest and knowledge of the field. The project
hypothesis is that using immersive and interactive XR technologies will
significantly improve EL students' engagement and motivation with cybersecurity
topics, which research shows are essential factors in choosing a career. The
project goals are to: 1. Develop prototypes of co-designed XR-enabled
educational resources. 2.Assess if these resources show promise with EL
students. 3. Analyze project findings to guide future research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.