* 2335253
* Regional Conference on Servingness for Hispanic-Serving Institutions in Southern California
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 29,738.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this one-day conference looks to bring together HSIs
from Southern California to discuss promising practices intended to improve
student outcomes. HSIs are key drivers of social mobility for Hispanic and
Latinx students, and the Southern California region houses over 85 2- and 4-year
HSIs that have implemented, studied, and refine many practices that have
resulted in improved student engagement and outcomes. While the number of
Hispanic/Latinx students pursuing undergraduate degrees continues to grow,
graduation rates in this population remains lower than in many of their peer
groups. This conference will allow participants to share successes and lessons
learned and to explore opportunities to implement new ideas or engage in
regional collaboration with the goal of promoting equity for Hispanic/Latinx
students. The conference will include four main activities: a plenary lecture, a
panel discussion with HSI leaders, a poster session, and themed breakouts
focused on areas of interest and need.

The regional focus of this workshop provides an opportunity for participating
institutions to use their geographic proximity as a launching point effort to
strengthen student outcomes. Building from Garcia's notion of institutional
servingness at HSIs, the driving questions for this conference are as follows.
What is servingness in the context of the HSIs in Southern California? What are
indicators of servingness in the context of Southern California? And how are
different institutions in the region addressing servingness? Promising practices
will be compiled into a database that will be widely disseminated, and the
conference will conduct an evaluation using pre- and post-conference surveys
that will explore practices shared and collaborations arising from the
gathering. A database of practices will be compiled and shared broadly to
benefit HSIs within the region and nationwide. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.