* 2335457
* Conference: Community Workshop on Long-term Research Directions in Wired Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Rachit Agarwal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 97,191.00

This Computer networks form one of the most critical infrastructures for our
society, contributing to essentially every component of our daily
lives–communication, businesses, safety-critical services, education, and even
medical practices. Over the past several decades, our community has done a
tremendous job in identifying and resolving important research problems, and in
many cases, translating research outcomes to practice. The result is a robust,
reliable, and efficient Internet infrastructure. However, the computer network
infrastructure has evolved over the last decade partly to accommodate the new
challenges introduced by platforms and applications that have emerged over this
period (e.g., cloud computing, distributed data analytics, etc.). The next
decade is likely to bring similar—if not more significant—challenges; some of
these challenges are already evident: new applications are emerging rapidly,
cloud providers are incorporating new hardware and software infrastructure to
respond to new application requirements, and the Internet structure is already
evolving. This workshop brings together researchers from computer networking,
computer architecture, operating systems, distributed systems, computer
security, and theory to discuss, identify and document the “long-term” research
directions in wired networks. The key goal is to have academic and industry
researchers and practitioners begin a collaborative discussion so as to build a
more reliable, robust, and efficient next-generation computer network
infrastructure. This workshop will have a broad impact both in terms of focused
research progress from the academic community, as well as potential impact via
industry engagement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.