* 2335922
* I-Corps:  Catalytic Artificial Self-Assemblies for the Biocatalytic Production of Small Molecules
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Samanvaya Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a class of synthetic cells that can replace conventional
biocatalytic processes for chemical production. Currently, biocatalysis of small
molecules is implemented by two main methods: whole-cell catalysis and cell-free
catalysis, both of which have their advantages and challenges. Whole-cell
catalysis is limited in production metrics by the accumulation of toxins. In
contrast, cell-free systems can support higher production metrics but suffer
from enzyme degradation, which makes the manufacturing of complex chemicals
difficult and economically unfeasible. The proposed technology provides an
intermediate route to alleviate these challenges, and may be used to produce
small molecules currently manufactured from conventional biocatalytic means,
such as food additives and fragrances, drug precursors, and biofuels. For
example, the proposed technology may be used to produce isobutanol from
lignocellulose, which is considered the next generation of biofuels.
Lignocellulose is the largest naturally available feedstock and is not derived
from food sources, eliminating concerns about biofuel competition with food
production. Compared with conventional ethanol biofuels, isobutanol may be
blended with gasoline at higher concentrations and used directly in the existing
petroleum infrastructure. The proposed technology is expected to achieve a 95%
isobutanol yield from saccharified lignocellulose concentrations due to its
improved tolerance compared to microbes, and lower greenhouse gas emissions by
>70%, which cannot be achieved by conventional methods.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of colloidal materials, called
catalytic artificial self-assemblies (CASA), which are synthetic cells for the
biocatalytic production of small molecules. The proposed technology uses complex
coacervate protocells prepared and stabilized using low-cost, commercially
available polymers. Simplified complex coacervate protocells have been shown to
preserve enzymes in their near-native environments while still providing the
flexibility of cell-free systems. Protocells of complex coacervate microdroplet
emulsions improve enzymatic reaction rates by up to 25-fold and provide long-
term stability (~4 months) to enzymes as well as processing flexibility not
accessible in cells. In addition to showing improved reaction metrics, CASA is
robust to environmental perturbations and overcomes key challenges concerning
cell toxicity in whole cell systems, and enzyme stability in cell-free systems.
This may allow a more flexible and economical bioreactor design and scaling up
of these processes where the proposed platform may be used as a standalone
method or integrated into existing industrial pipelines to reduce the cost of
chemical production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.