* 2335693
* A Workshop to Enhance America's Research Translation for Prosperity and Social Impact
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Maryann Feldman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/29/2024
* USD 99,812.00

This project funds a workshop to explore strategies for accelerating and
increasing the capacity for translational research within a wide range of higher
education institutions. A few universities are performing well, with well-
established and effective tech transfer offices, offering strong incentives for
research translation, engaged faculty, and munificent entrepreneurial support
services. Many institutions with high potential currently underperform. Many of
these institutions are minority-serving, located in geographically remote or
sparse entrepreneurial ecosystems. These institutions are often under-resourced,
lacking internal support for translational activities, and without incentives to
promote technology transfer or value creation to their faculty. The objective of
this workshop is to discuss strategies to increase the translation of research
outputs and increase the benefits to constituents and communities. Realizing the
full potential of research translation requires enhancing the performance and
participation of a broad range institutions of higher education. NSFâ€™s new
Technology Innovation Partnerships (TIP) division and the Accelerating Research
Translation (ART) program offer an opportunity to respond to the societal needs
for more sustainable and inclusive growth across regions, sectors, and
individuals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.