* 2335705
* Conference: 2024 Personalized Learning Ideas Lab
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Joseph Roy, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2024
* USD 435,593.00

This project aims to revolutionize engineering education research by merging
traditional teaching methods with cutting-edge technology to create an inclusive
and personalized learning environment for future engineers. In recent years,
advancements in engineering education research have focused on pedagogy,
problem-solving, and teamwork. However, there is a growing need to explore
personalized learning approaches that cater to individual learning styles and
needs. This project aligns with the National Science Foundation's mission to
invest in transformative research and addresses the pressing need for
personalized learning in engineering education. Today's learning systems often
assume a one-size-fits-all approach, disregarding individual learning
differences. Personalized learning, a concept dating back to the early 20th
century, presents an opportunity to tailor educational curricula to meet the
specific needs of each learner. The integration of advanced technologies such as
machine learning, data mining, and artificial intelligence holds immense
potential to create transformative learning environments. This project will host
a workshop that brings researchers together to create new approaches to
personalizing learning.

The Personalized Learning in Engineering Education Ideas Lab, hosted by the
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) in partnership with
Knowinnovation, Inc. (KI), seeks to generate novel interdisciplinary proposals
for advanced engineering technologies addressing personalized learning systems
in engineering education. The workshop will convene a diverse group of about
forty researchers, including engineers, scientists, and domain experts in
personalized learning systems. The Ideas Lab follows the Creative Problem
Solving (CPS) methodology, incorporating creativity, critical thinking, and
metacognitive skills to facilitate problem-solving and idea generation.
Participants will work in several stages, including data gathering, problem
framing, idea generation, solution creation, and action planning. The workshop
will focus on three primary areas: extending engineering education research into
multiple learning contexts, integrating multimodal sensors to improve physical
tasks in engineering learning, and exploring team-based design and human-machine
co-learning. The broader impacts of this initiative are far-reaching. By
promoting personalized learning in engineering education, this project directly
impacts the quality of education, preparing future engineers for the challenges
of the 21st century. Additionally, personalized learning systems can address
inherent inequities within traditional education systems, fostering diversity,
equity, and inclusion in engineering education. The collaborative nature of the
workshop stimulates cross-disciplinary thinking, fostering an innovative spirit
that can lead to novel research directions and technological innovations.
Through the synergy of experts from multiple disciplines and directorates, this
Ideas Lab will accelerate the transformation of engineering education, creating
a more personalized, inclusive, and effective model that prepares students for
success in an ever-changing world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.