* 2335798
* Education DCL: EAGER: Advancing Secure Coding Education: Empowering Students to Safely Utilize AI-powered Coding Assistant Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Doowon Kim, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The advent of Artificial Intelligence (AI) has transformed the landscape of the
software engineering ecosystem. Particularly, AI-powered coding assistant tools
(e.g., ChatGPT and GitHub Copilot) are believed to potentially revolutionize the
software development landscape. The tools can enhance software developers'
efficiency and productivity in software development by generating boilerplate
code for developers. Unfortunately, the tools can generate (or suggest) insecure
code for developers because (1) the models that the tools rely on can
inadvertently learn from insecure code snippets of untrusted, unverified open-
source projects, or (2) the models are also vulnerable to poisoning attacks. The
project's novelties are to develop new curricular modules and hands-on exercises
for computer science students and the software development workforce to enhance
their secure coding practices when using the tools. The project's broader
significance and importance are to equip students and the workforce with secure
coding practices when using AI-powered coding assistant tools, thereby enabling
them to develop secure programs in the future. Moreover, this project's
activities will be used to attract undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups to cybersecurity.

The main objective of this education project is to help students and the
workforce have secure coding practices. First, this project develops new hands-
on exercises where the students and the workforce can learn how suggested
insecure code can impact their software and how the software can be vulnerable
and exploited by adversaries. This engages them in active security-oriented
learning to cultivate their secure coding practices when using AI-powered coding
assistant tools. The hands-on materials include a real-world programming
environment where the learners are expected to have experience with poisoned
models. Second, this project actively pursues the involvement of
undergraduate/high school students in research, including underrepresented
groups (specifically the Appalachia region). Third, the project team host
workshops in the summer to assist participating faculty in learning how to use
our hands-on lab materials developed through this project

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.