* 2335461
* Travel Grant: Conference on New Frontiers in Networked Dynamical Systems: Assured Learning, Communication, and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

With the advent of ubiquitous connectivity, large-scale data collection, and the
remarkable successes of data driven artificial intelligence (AI) in recent
years, we have come to a turning point. The time is ripe to consider how
advanced data-driven AI technology will impact networked dynamical systems
involving both human and machine agents together with physical infrastructure.
This symposium will bring together leading experts from academia, government and
industry to help identify promising directions in research and education at this
nexus. The symposium will comprise invited talks, panel discussions, and
brainstorming sessions. Striking the right balance between data-driven
innovations and systematic design will be an important part of the conversation.

The outcomes of the symposium will include a meeting report distilled out of the
panel discussions and the brainstorming sessions. The report will help inform
government and industry stewards / stakeholders about new directions and grand
challenges in this important area that will directly impact the nation's
competitiveness and security in the coming decades.

The symposium will help identify new research directions at the crossroads of
key areas of critical interest to NSF and the nation's research enterprise.
NSF's Engineering Directorate has multiple major research programs related to AI
and AI-enabled systems. The panel discussions, talks, brainstorming sessions,
and the final symposium report will inform NSF and other government stakeholders
who sponsor and exploit research and development in these critical areas.

How do we effectively teach both empirical data-driven and “hard-science”
methodology at the same overall number of credit hours? This is one of the key
issues that will be discussed at the Symposium, and one of the most important
questions we face as we redesign engineering curricula to accommodate the data-
driven AI revolution. Bringing together world-class experts to discuss and offer
insights on this and other related issues is of tremendous value for the next
generation of AI-savvy systems and control engineers. In addition, the
organizers will invite select students to participate in the Symposium, paying
particular attention to female and URM representation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.