* 2335041
* I-Corps:  In Vitro Cardiac Platform for Drug Discovery and Cardiotoxicity Screens
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* William Richardson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a drug discovery testing platform for potential heart treatments.
Currently, most drug discovery testing begins with screening a new drug or
therapeutic in traditional cell culture environments (e.g., petri dishes).
However, this does not adequately represent the real biological context inside
the human body. This is especially true for therapies targeting heart disease,
where the cells are normally subjected to dynamic motion from the heart beating
every second. The proposed technology aims to advance the next generation of
heart disease medications using a cardiac tissue screening platform. The
platform is designed to provide a physiologically relevant mechanical
environment using electromagnetic controls and automated video tracking in order
to expose tissues to the mechanical forces experienced within the body. Such a
tool may hold potential for pharmaceutical companies, contract research
organizations, and clinical cardiology practices/hospital systems. Ultimately,
better discovery tools may lead to better therapies for improving human health
and well-being.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of heart tissue culture
technology designed to mimic the mechanical environment of a beating heart for
drug discovery applications. The proposed design of this platform uses computer-
controlled electromagnets to subject 3-dimensional cardiac tissues to dynamic
force-length relationships. The goal is to match the pressure and volume changes
experienced by the heart in various heart disease conditions such as
hypertension and aortic valve stenosis. In addition, the platform can produce
disease-relevant metrics such as tissue stiffness, contractility, stroke work,
and cardiac output curves, which directly translate to clinically relevant
diagnostic metrics and outcome measures. The aim is to provide key merits that
are not provided with existing approaches by subjecting tissues to full
mechanical pressure. A physiologically correct mechanical environment may
improve the success of therapy screens while physiologically relevant output
metrics may help demonstrate clinical translatability. In addition, a dynamic
mechanical environment may provide experimental versatility under desired
testing conditions (e.g., normal vs. pressure-overload vs. volume-overload
mechanics).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.