* 2335570
* Collaborative Research: Planning: FIRE-PLAN:High-Spatiotemporal-Resolution Sensing and Digital Twin to Advance Wildland Fire Science
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Ming Xin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 12/31/2025
* USD 51,998.00

The number of catastrophic wildfires in the United States has been steadily
increasing in recent decades, which generate casualties, large loss of
properties, and dramatic environmental changes. However, it is difficult to make
accurate predictions of wildland fire spread in real time for firefighters and
emergency response teams. Although many fire spread models have been developed,
one of the biggest challenges in their operational use is the lack of ground
truth fire data at high spatiotemporal resolutions, which are indispensable for
model evaluation and improvements. The objective of this planning project is to
bring together wildland fire science researchers, fire sensing and data science
experts, and diverse stakeholders to develop standards and requirements for
high-spatiotemporal-resolution wildland fire sensing and digital twin
construction. An organizing committee will be formed from wildland fire science,
engineering, and stake holder communities including fire ecology and behavior
modeling, pollution monitoring, robotics, cyber physical systems (CPS), wildfire
fighting, indigenous cultural burns, and prescribed fires. A series of physical
and remote workshops will be held focusing on themes such as open fire data for
wildland fire modeling validation, digital twins for prescribed fires, and safe
and efficient wildland fire data collection. Research tasks of this planning
project include: 1) identification of key high-spatiotemporal-resolution fire
metrics and data representations to support fire model validation and fire
operations, 2) proposition of sensing strategies and algorithms for fire sensing
and suppression robots and cyber physical systems that can support safe and
efficient collection of desired high-resolution fire data, 3) development and
evaluation of data assimilation and digital twin construction using high-
resolution data to advance fire behavior modeling, coupled fire-atmosphere
modeling, and smoke modeling, and 4) prototype and initial fire data ecosystem
demonstration including collection of cultural burn data and establishment of
GeoFireData, a benchmark fire data sharing and digital twin website, which can
support different fire operation types such as fire spread model validation and
controlled burn planning. The special attention will be devoted to
interdisciplinary training of the next generation of scientists working with
wildfire risks at the interface of computational sciences, engineering, ecology,
and data sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.