* 2335176
* Conference: DMR-NIBIB Planning Workshop: Leveraging data-driven design and synthetic biology to enable next-generation active biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Danielle Benoit, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2025
* USD 50,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: This award will support a planning workshop at the
University of Oregon entitled “Leveraging data-driven design and synthetic
biology to enable next-generation active biomaterials” as part of a new
collaboration between the National Science Foundation’s Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering (NIBIB). Biomaterials have evolved from ‘off the shelf’ materials
to materials that actively interact with biological systems such as the human
body. This “next generation” of biomaterials have tunable properties for
numerous biological applications, including tissue engineering, integrative
biology, and drug delivery. These scientific contributions have shown great
promise in advancing biology and human health; however, a major gap exists in
converting these exciting advances in materials science into feasible approaches
tailored toward pressing biomedical problems. This workshop will be a forum to
highlight and explore the recent developments in the field and facilitate the
development of a multidisciplinary plan to bridge the gap to clinical
translation. This workshop will focus on 4 topics integral to developing and
translating next-generation biomaterials: data-driven methods for biomaterials
design, synthetic biology-enabled biomaterials, smart/responsive biomaterials,
and biofabrication and biointerfaces. The objectives of the workshop are to: I.
Showcase recent advances in the next generation biomaterials; II. Facilitate a
dialogue between polymer scientists, chemists, bioengineers, and biologists to
further the design and application of biomaterials and to bridge the gap to
clinical translation; and III. Broaden the (1) scope of biomaterials research to
match the diversity of patient populations (ethnicity, gender, etc.) and (2)
participants, especially from historically marginalized groups, to drive
creative and unique approaches to biomaterials research.

Technical Abstract: This award will support a planning workshop at the
University of Oregon entitled “Leveraging data-driven design and synthetic
biology to enable next-generation active biomaterials” as part of a new
collaboration between the National Science Foundation’s Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering (NIBIB). Biomaterials have evolved from implanted ‘off the shelf’
materials to rationally designed materials that interact with and instruct
biological systems to achieve desired biological outcomes. This “next
generation” of biomaterials are currently being developed to meet the growing
demand for materials with tailored and tunable properties for numerous
biological applications, including tissue engineering, integrative biology, and
drug delivery. These scientific contributions have shown great promise in
advancing numerous biomaterials-based applications. However, a major gap exists
in converting these exciting advances in materials science to feasible
approaches tailored toward pressing biomedical problems, including achieving
robust tissue regeneration after injury/disease, tuning localized and on-demand
drug delivery, and enabling real-time biosensing. This workshop will be a forum
to highlight and explore the recent developments in the field and facilitate the
development of a multidisciplinary plan to bridge the gap to clinical
translation. This workshop will focus on 4 integrated science drivers integral
to developing and translating next-generation biomaterials: data-driven methods
for biomaterials design, synthetic biology-enabled biomaterials,
smart/responsive biomaterials, and biofabrication and biointerfaces. The
objectives of the workshop are to: I. Showcase recent advances in the various
science drivers’ topics of next-generation biomaterials; II. Facilitate a
dialogue between polymer scientists, chemists, bioengineers, and biologists to
further the design and application of biomaterials and develop a
multidisciplinary plan to bridge the gap to translation; and III. Broaden the
(1) scope of applications of translational biomaterials to match the diversity
of patient populations (ethnicity, gender, etc.) and (2) participants,
especially from historically marginalized groups, to drive creative and unique
approaches. Highlighting the advances of interdisciplinary investigators from
diverse backgrounds is vital to providing nucleation of these forward-looking
research avenues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.