* 2335659
* Education DCL: EAGER: Taking Law into Our Own Hands: Infusing Law into CS Education, Early and Often
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Mihailis Diamantis, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,994.00

For much of its existence, the field of computing has evolved without the
influence of overarching laws; and computer science (CS) education has mirrored
this reality. However, now, our society is in the midst of introducing
regulations that govern core aspects of computing including data, applications,
and intelligence. Prominent examples include the General Data Protection
Regulation and the AI Act of Europe. This trend has created a critical gap in CS
education, where the status quo of “leave the law to the lawyers” is resulting
in a computing workforce that is untrained about the laws that govern their
work. This project’s novelties lie in investigating if early and continuous
exposure to computing-related laws helps CS students develop a lawful approach
to computing. The project's broader significance and importance are in
motivating changes to the CS curriculum towards training the next generation CS
workforce to be law-aware.

The objective of this project is to integrate the principles and practices of
emerging technology laws into the CS curriculum. To do so, the researchers
propose a layered educational plan that (i) starts with prerequisite-free
foundation lectures and seminar course; then (ii) infuses law into core CS
coursework, and finally (iii) enables hands-on training via law-aware CS
research and competition. The project team will measure students' performance as
well as collect their feedback across all the coursework. This data will help
answer the key research question: does early and continuous exposure to
technology laws help CS undergraduates develop a lawful approach to computing.
Findings from this work including novel approaches to pedagogy, experiences, and
teaching materials are expected to evolve CS education to incorporate laws that
govern computing systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.