* 2335930
* I-Corps:  AI for predicting polymer properties for biopolymer films
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Svafa Gronfeldt, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform to predict the properties of renewable
materials such as biopolymers. Amid rising environmental concerns, e-commerce
leaders such as Amazon, Walmart, and H&M have committed to reducing plastic
waste and carbon emissions by 2030. Achieving this goal may depend on
sustainable packaging solutions that prioritize biodegradability over investment
in recycling processes. In addition, cost considerations necessitate a focus on
cost-effective production of biopolymers for packaging. The proposed technology
provides a tool enabling the customization of the chemical behavior of
biopolymers that may be used to create the technical performance specifications
required for their applications. The proposed software platform may have the
potential to impact multiple industries by enabling the discovery and prediction
of renewable materials' properties including consumer electronics, energy
storage, biofuels, food extraction, and pharmaceutical research.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of simulator tailored to
maximize sampling control, efficiency, and scalability in molecular dynamics
simulations. The proposed model employs reinforcement learning control policies
as an inductive bias, optimizing objective functions like generating specific
conformations, which minimizes computational cost. Applied to the realm of
polymer chains, the proposed technology has shown a 40% improvement in sampling
efficiency over studied chemistry polymer chain conformations with a target
radius of gyration, illustrating the power of machine learning control policies
in optimizing complex simulations. The initial goal is to apply this model to
packaging films made from biopolymers. Unlike similar technologies for property
prediction, this model is physics-based, which means empirical data are not
required, and it runs in conventional computers, making it accessible to a wider
audience. RL-based control policies will be leveraged to explore the
configuration space thoroughly to enhance control over the simulation's
conformations for mechanical property prediction, which is a key aspect in
designing effective packaging materials. The proposed technology may be used to
predict and adjust specific properties of biopolymers, such as mechanical
strength, flexibility, or chemical non-reactivity that are crucial for creating
tailored packaging solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.