* 2335816
* I-Corps: An adjuvant to improve the safety and tolerability of stimulant medications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Morgan James, RUTGERS, THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW JERSEY
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an adjuvant technology that can be chemically combined with
stimulant medications to enhance safety and tolerability. Stimulant drugs, such
as d-amphetamine, are powerful medications that are used to treat a range of
psychiatric and neurological conditions, such as attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), binge eating disorder, and depression. However, the risk of
developing addiction to these compounds limits their utility. This limits
physiciansâ€™ willingness to prescribe these drugs, and the Drug Enforcement
Administration's scheduling of these compounds also limits their prescription.
The proposed technology uses a neuroscience-guided approach to eliminate the
rewarding properties and remove abuse liability of stimulant medications while
enhancing their therapeutic effects. In addition, the proposed technology also
may be applied to opioids to simultaneously enhance their analgesic effects and
protect against addiction. This technology has the potential to improve
treatment adherence and outcomes for those prescribed stimulant medications.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a pharmacological adjuvant
that limits the abuse liability of stimulant medications. The proposed
technology may be used to develop a new class of medications with low or no
abuse liability. Data collected to date indicate that the technology also can
enhance the therapeutic efficacy of stimulant medications for some indications.
In addition, proof-of-concept studies indicate that the proposed adjuvant can be
co-formulated with stimulants and opioids without affecting their stability,
providing a platform technology that may be readily applied to improve the
safety profile of many existing medications. The proposed technology may have
applications to enhance the safety and tolerability for treatment with stimulant
medications for a range of psychiatric and neurological indications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.