* 2335827
* EAGER: Secure Research Impact Metric Data Exchange: Data Supply Chain and Vocabulary Development
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Christina Drummond, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Plato Smith
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Fostering open science requires usage and impact data for publicly accessible
information. This project will advance open science by accomplishing the
following: a) documenting the usage and impact data supply chain for article and
data research outputs, to complement findings for books, and b) engaging
research infrastructure stakeholders to crosswalk usage and impact related
vocabularies across scholarship outputs and disciplines. The usage and impact
data pertaining to a single publicly accessible research output (book, article,
or dataset) are created across a complex array of public and private publishers,
publication distributors and aggregators, repositories, discovery services and
service platforms. Comparable, high-quality information access is vital to
research information management systems, impact reporting, and innovation
policy; and is inherent to the provision of scholarship impact statements
alongside data management plans. Yet, compiling usage and impact metrics for
publicly accessible scholarship across public and private repositories,
services, and publishers is a time and data-science intensive activity
undertaken by individual researchers, universities, libraries, and publishers.
While services provision some usage data, challenges related to secure data
brokerage, automated data access, and auditing by a trusted, neutral
infrastructure complicate the exchange and aggregation of usage data across
commercial and non-commercial competitors. This project aims to inform whether a
national cyberinfrastructure is needed to support the exchange and processing of
sensitive and proprietary usage and impact metrics generated by US-based
research publishers and distributors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.