* 2335821
* CISE Research Expansion Aspiring Investigators Conference: A Workshop on CISE Programs for Minority Serving Institutions in the Southern US Region
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Vladimir Florinski, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 94,968.00

The proposal team would like to organize a workshop for current and potential
investigators in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE)
disciplines who are based at Minority Serving institutions (MSIs) within the
Southeastern US region. Demographic diversity in CISE fields generates more
innovation and has a significant beneficial effect on the nation’s economy. MSIs
have been historically less successful in competing for federal grants than non-
MSI institutions leading to an under utilization of this important national
resource and missed educational opportunities for minority students. The
workshop will invite successful investigators to share their experiences and
build new research partnerships with their aspiring younger colleagues. It is
hoped that the project will improve the rates of proposal submission from the
region’s MSIs resulting in more research in core CISE disciplines.

The workshop is based on a successful model that matches the younger prospective
investigators with more senior researchers who had been successful in competing
for federal grants to form partnerships that would lead to submitting of new
proposals to CISE related programs. This one and a half day meeting will be held
on the campus of the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) bringing together
10-15 senior mentors and twice that number of aspiring PIs from the MSIs within
a 200 mile radius from the city of Huntsville, a geographical area covering four
southeastern US states and 25 MSIs, most of which are Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The project could facilitate Alabama research
programs in aerospace, computer science, chemical engineering, photonics, and
numerous other fields. Broader impacts will include curriculum development,
infrastructure improvement, and new opportunities for student research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.