* 2335773
* EAGER: Scalable Climate Modeling using  Message-Passing Recurrent Neural Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Lakshminarayan Subramanian, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Real-world climate models have often been heavily reliant on large-scale
physics-driven climate models involving millions of unknown parameters and
sparse real-world measurements to accurately calibrate these models. This
proposal aims to develop Message Passing Recurrent Neural Networks (MPRNN), a
deep graph neural framework for accurate, scalable and efficient climate
modeling from sparse spatio-temporal sensor measurements. Unlike fine-grained
physics based climate models that model continuous behavior across space and
time, MPRNNs leverage a discrete, distributed collection of heterogeneous
recurrent neural networks established at different spatial nodes that simulate
the underlying physics-based model and communicate using message passing
algorithms to generate real-time spatio-temporal climate maps. This proposal
makes fundamental contributions across several sub-disciplines including
computer science, complex systems, and climate sciences including: (i) designing
scalable graph machine learning frameworks for modeling complex climate systems,
(ii) simulating underlying partial differential equations based physics-informed
spatio-temporal models using message passing algorithms and graph neural
networks, and (iii) designing a general purpose library for efficiently
implementing MPRNN based simulators for complex climate systems.

This proposal aims to demonstrate the efficacy of MPRNN on multiple climate
modeling efforts including modeling gravity waves, environmental pollution
forecasting and understanding the localized impact of climate variations in
dense urban environments. This proposal builds upon prior work by the
investigators that provides a baseline implementation of MPRNN for pollution
forecasting and gravity wave modeling. This line of work has a broader impact on
various stakeholders of climate research, including climate modeling researchers
and policy experts in tackling important issues like climate change, air
pollution and gravity waves. By incorporating physics-based domain structure
into deep graph models, this proposal can enable climate experts to effectively
emulate the behavior of large physics based simulation models using scalable
deep graph based climate models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.