* 2335839
* Education DCL: EAGER: A Gamified Education Platform for Story-driven Educational Hacking Games to Attract Generation Z to Cyber Workforce
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ersin Dincelli, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,962.00

The global shortage of skilled and diverse cybersecurity workforce is a pressing
issue, jeopardizing individual, organizational, and national security. To
address this concern, this project aims to attract younger generations to
cybersecurity through the development of a gamified education platform. By using
Design Science Research (DSR) approach and gamification techniques, the platform
seeks to make cybersecurity education more engaging, accessible, and enjoyable.
Additionally, it enables educators to design customized educational games,
fostering creativity in teaching. The platform’s customizability and
extensibility create a collaborative ecosystem to develop, refine, and share
content, ensuring its continued effectiveness and broader impact. Ultimately, by
making cybersecurity education more welcoming, this project seeks to establish a
transformative, game-based pedagogical initiative that inspires and engages a
diverse student population, especially underrepresented minorities, to promote
inclusion within the field and contribute to a more skilled and diverse
workforce.

The project utilizes a DSR approach and game-based learning to create an
immersive gamified education platform centered around a story-driven educational
hacking game. Powered by the Unity game engine, the platform offers a dynamic 3D
world map and a storyline that includes quests, progression points, rewards, and
thought-provoking ethical decision-making components. The quests are
meticulously designed to incorporate fundamental cybersecurity concepts,
promoting experiential learning with real-life examples. The platform’s primary
objectives encompass three key aspects: (a) enabling the design of customized
curricula for fundamental cybersecurity courses through a novel taxonomy of
gamification elements and the Community of Inquiry framework, (b) providing
educators with a user-friendly platform to create customized quests that
seamlessly integrate with existing cybersecurity curricula, fostering creativity
and adaptability to diverse teaching styles; and (c) establishing a community of
educators engaged in extending and refining the platform, promoting
collaboration and fostering synergistic impact. The insights gleaned from this
endeavor will extend the project’s impact beyond cybersecurity, benefit other
educational domains, and cultivate a more cyber-aware society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.