* 2335838
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Merging diverse knowledge systems to advance restoration of fire-dependent forests in the Great Lakes region
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2025
* Evan Larson, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 199,765.00

Fire is an important process that reflects the integration of natural and
cultural systems. Fire activity in the Great Lakes Region of North America
abruptly declined in the late 1800s, as seen in a network of tree-ring-based
fire scars from the region. The resulting ecological changes are particularly
evident in forests of Bapakwanegemag- red pine (Pinus resinosa)- an important
tree species for generations of Anishinaabe peoples and a major timber resource.
Red pine is dependent on recurring surface fires to create the necessary
conditions for its regeneration and persistence on the landscape. After a
century of fire exclusion, natural red pine regeneration has become rare, forest
density has increased, and high-severity fire risk has increased dramatically.
It is critical to understand the drivers behind these changes, which requires an
expansive and diverse array of expertise and knowledge. This project establishes
the necessary relationships and collaborations among fire ecologists, fire
practitioners, and Indigenous knowledge practitioners to advance understanding
of Indigenous fire stewardship practices. Fire restoration to red pine forests
will be a key process for promoting the diverse and resilient ecological and
cultural landscapes of the future.

Workshops will be held across the upper Great Lakes Region to establish a
framework to bring Traditional Ecological Knowledge, tree-ring fire history
data, and mechanistic modeling approaches together to better understand the
historical role of fire in shaping pre-colonization forest landscapes while
building capacity to care for fire-adapted systems. The goals of the workshops
are to: 1) connect faculty, instructors, and staff at state and tribal colleges
to lay the foundation for an Indigenous Fire Science degree program that will
enhance training and capacity in fire science and stewardship, 2) cultivate a
network of fire practitioners across the Great Lakes Region to promote
sustainable and diverse landscapes, and 3) weave together multiple types of
knowledge to help restore and maintain red pine ecosystems.

This project was co-funded by NSFâ€™s Geoscience Opportunities for Leadership
Development (GOLDEN) program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.