* 2335783
* CAREER: Using a multilayer plant-pollinator and fruit-frugivore network along a defaunation gradient to understand the combined influence of mutualisms on forest communities
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Haldre Rogers, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2026
* USD 408,990.00

Plants require pollination and seed dispersal for regeneration, and many species
rely on animals for both of these processes. Approximately 90% of plants are
animal-pollinated, and 75-90% of tropical forest trees are animal-dispersed.
However, research often focuses on these two interactions in isolation, even
though global change drivers like invasive species, habitat degradation, and
overharvesting have broad effects on animals. These effects could then cascade
to affect pollination and dispersal of plants. This project identifies the
plant-pollinator and plant-seed disperser interactions in native limestone
forest of the Mariana Islands in the Western Pacific. The project will test
whether joint consideration of pollination and seed dispersal improves
predictions of which plant species are most dependent on animals and which
animals are most critical. In addition, the research takes advantage of a
defaunation gradient across the islands, ranging from a mostly intact animal
community to an extremely degraded community. This gradient allows researcher to
compare predicted impacts on plants of animal extinction to actual changes in
plant communities. These results will be important for guiding conservation and
restoration actions in areas where pollinator and disperser species are in
decline. Finally, the lead researcher will build a mentoring network for Pacific
Islander undergraduate and graduate students, high school teachers, and
postgraduate technicians, develop a high school science module and after-school
program in the Mariana Islands, and share scientific results with land managers
in the Islands to inform management decisions.

The project builds on the recent development of metabarcoding methods, which
facilitate sampling of species interactions at the community-level, and
multilayer species interaction network approaches, to identify the role of
individual species across interaction types (i.e. pollination and seed
dispersal). The research team will sample pollen from invertebrate and
vertebrate pollinators and make observations of pollinator visitation to 15
common forest tree species on the islands of Saipan (fauna intact), Rota
(partially defaunated), and Guam (defaunated) in the Western Pacific. The
researchers will conduct a pollination experiment to determine how much each
plant species depends on pollinators, and use stable isotopes to determine how
much pollinators depend on plants. The plant-pollinator network will be compared
to a fruit-frugivore network for the same forest communities compiled using
previously collected data. Using these two networks, the researcher will compare
species' roles across these two interaction types and identify changes along the
defaunation gradient. Finally, both networks will be combined into a single
multilayer network to identify patterns that emerge only when multiple
interaction types are considered simultaneously. These results will advance
understanding of the impact of population declines and extinctions on forest
communities, and provide actionable recommendations for restoration in the
Mariana Islands.

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Environmental
Biology/Population and Community Ecology program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.