* 2335883
* Conference: NSF Workshop on Crosscutting Research Needs for Digital Twins
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Karen Willcox, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 98,115.00

This two-day workshop will identify research needs for digital twins. A digital
twin is a set of digital constructs that mimic the structure, context, and
behavior of a physical system. Digital twins are coupled to their physical
counterparts; they are characterized by a dynamic, continual, two-way flow of
information between the digital representation and the physical counterpart.
Data streaming from the physical system are integrated into the digital
representation to reduce uncertainties and improve accuracy. The digital
representation may in turn be used to control the physical system, optimize data
acquisition, and prove decision support. Digital twins must execute rapidly
enough to support decisions and control in time scales that are relevant to the
physical system and must manage and quantify uncertainties. Of particular note
is the bi-directional interaction between the virtual and the physical, which is
central to distinguishing a digital twin from a conventional simulation. This
bi-directional interaction brings many new challenges to modeling, data
curation, and decision-making.

The workshop will bring together a diverse community of stakeholders to identify
research gaps common across application domains and that may benefit from
crosscutting interdisciplinary research efforts. The technical program is
organized around four methodological themes: (1) Models; (2) Data; (3)
Decisions; and (4) Verification, Validation & Uncertainty Quantification. To
ensure crosscutting outcomes, these themes will be explored across four
application domains: (1) Engineering, Materials & Manufacturing; (2) Smart
Cities; (3) Biomedicine & Health; and (4) Climate, Natural Hazards &
Environmental Sciences. Workshop speakers will be asked to identify barriers and
enablers for achieving scalable digital twins in the four methodological themes,
giving concrete examples drawn from the application domains. These barriers and
enablers will be collected and organized during interactive workshop sessions.
The objective is to identify, for each of the methodological themes, a “top-
five” list of crosscutting barriers and a “top-five” list of potential
crosscutting enablers, supported with concrete examples from the application
domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.