* 2335748
* Education DCL: EAGER: Developing Sector-specific Cybersecurity Training Programs: What are the Benefits to Students and Employers?
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Jinzhong Niu, Research Foundation d/b/a Stella & Charles Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 204,171.00

Healthcare organizations have a great need for a well-trained cybersecurity
workforce. The healthcare industry continues to experience high numbers of
cyberattacks and data breaches and healthcare organizations have responded by
strengthening their cybersecurity programs, but they continue to face
significant challenges, the biggest of which is a lack of cybersecurity staff.
New York City has a robust, high-paying tech workforce accounting for 7% of the
total jobs in the City. Cybersecurity jobs are expected to grow significantly in
the area. Thus far, African Americans, Latinos, and women have been
underrepresented in the NYC tech workforce. The project team is creating a
pipeline of well-trained, diverse workers prepared for frontline cybersecurity
jobs in healthcare.

The project team is utilizing a sectoral partnership model to contextualize the
College's existing cybersecurity training program to healthcare. Sector
partnerships are regional collaboratives that bring together multiple employers
within an industry to collaborate with community colleges, schools, labor,
workforce agencies, community organizations, and other community stakeholders to
align training with the skills needed for that industry to grow and compete.
Sector partnerships have resulted in improved outcomes when compared to other
forms of workforce development. The project team is documenting their
cybersecurity sectoral approach in form of a how-to guide and is partnering with
other local colleges to contextualize their cybersecurity training programs to
other sectors such as the small business sector, non-profit sector, local
government sector, and more. Thanks to the NIST cybersecurity framework, much
work has already been done to differentiate the cybersecurity workforce by task.
This project is adding a secondary layer of workforce specialization by
industry. This specialized, sector-based training ensures that local employers
have access to the cybersecurity talent they need. It also ensures that
underrepresented populations have access to in-demand and lucrative
cybersecurity careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.