* 2335858
* Conference: 2023 AfroBiotech Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Evan Flach, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 47,250.00

The 2023 AfroBiotech Conference will be held October 22-24, 2023. The conference
highlights the achievements of African Americans in biotechnology, inspires a
new generation of diverse biotechnology professionals and identifies,
communicates, and explores current advancements in various aspects of
Biotechnology. This forum organizes African-American scientific talent from
across the U.S. at a single event and aims to enable the biotech industry to
hire diverse professionals, inspire organizers of other scientific conferences
to invite diverse speakers and inspire the next generation of diverse students
and scholars to join this community. The conference provides forums for
scientific presentations, posters, networking, extended discussions,
presentations and is inclusive of early-career researchers, postdoctoral
associates and graduate students.

Biotechnology continues to be a rapidly developing field, and it is critical to
ensure that innovations are equitable and that they serve all people. An
effective way to stop ongoing marginalization of historically underserved
communities is to empower an inclusive workforce in which diverse personal
experiences and perspectives inform technology development and applications.
Tools continue to improve efficiency and accuracy; new companies are using
biotechnology to solve challenges in therapeutics, health and agriculture; and
government funding of biotechnology and bio-based industries all make it an
important time for members of the community to engage and collaborate, moving
the technology forward as quickly, safely and effectively as possible. The
AfroBiotech conference will creates a forum for African American biological
engineers to become organized to focus on this growing opportunity and at the
same time address advances and prospects in scientific areas pertinent to
biological engineering. The conference has a diverse agenda that is inclusive of
early-career and postdoctoral researchers as well as graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.