* 2335998
* Conference: Workshop on Sparse Tensor Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Edgar Solomonik, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2024
* USD 43,463.00

The Workshop on Sparse Tensor Computations will be held October 18-19, 2023, in
Chicago, IL at the Discovery Partners Institute, a satellite location of the
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. The workshop will consist of
approximately 20 talks over one and a half days, and it will include a poster
session. We expect to attract approximately 80 participants, mostly from the
United States. The project will financially support 20-30 students or junior
researchers from academic institutions in the United States to attend and
present at the workshop. In addition to providing broad dissemination of recent
advances in sparse tensor computations, the workshop promotes vertical
integration by emphasizing the contributions of young scientists. The broad
range of domains that develop and utilize sparse tensor computations is
reflected in the attendees of the workshop, which will lure participants into
exploring questions outside their immediate areas of interest. The Workshop on
Sparse Tensor Computations will help society by promoting the careers of
talented students and early career scientists, encouraging their future
scientific pursuits and pushing the boundaries of computational problems that
can be solved effectively and efficiently.

Tensors provide a data abstraction of high-order interactions and act as an
interface between applications, mathematical models, and computation. They have
proved effective across a variety of application areas, including scientific
computing domains and partial differential equation models, unsupervised machine
learning problem involving multi-parameter observations, and many others. Across
a number of application domains as well as in fields of applied mathematics and
computer science, research on tensor methods has been particularly active and
continues to grow. The workshop is organized to facilitate transfer of ideas
among researchers in tensor computations from various fields, including
scientific and machine learning applications, algorithms, software, compilers,
and architectures. Graduate students, postdoctoral researches, junior faculty,
and senior faculty will present work to one another, attend talks together, and
interact closely during a poster session. The conference website is located at
https://solomonik.cs.illinois.edu/tensor_workshop/index.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.