* 2335692
* CRII:OAC:A Data-Driven Closed-Loop Platform for Optimal Design of Deployable Pin-Jointed Structures
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Sichen Yuan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 127,390.00

Deployable pin-jointed (DPJ) structures, due to their being lightweight,
foldable, and having high stiffness, have shown high research and development
interest in state-of-the-art applications in many fields, such as aerospace and
mechanical engineering, civil engineering, robotics and bio-medical materials. A
DPJ structure is composed of members in compression (usually bars or struts) and
tension (usually cables or tendons), connected by pin joints. In operation,
these DPJ structures have various performance requirements, such as maintaining
a high level of surface accuracy, and achieving desired stiffness and tunable
natural frequencies. Loss of desired performance often yields malfunction or
even breakdown of a DPJ structure. However, optimal design of DPJ structures
with the desired performance is hard to obtain, due to issues related to
constitutive modeling and lack of design tools. This project addresses these
problems by creating a data-driven closed-loop platform for optimal design of
DPJ structures. A series of data-driven tools, that create the proposed closed-
loop platform, will be designed and built: (1) a novel stochastic method for
determining an initial equilibrium configuration of a DJP structure will be
created; and, (2) a new computational modeling technique for DPJ structures,
based on machine learning and advanced nondestructive testing, will be
developed. The project will address an urgent need in structural engineering,
and provide a deeper understanding of the design and computational modeling of
DPJ structures. The results obtained from this project can help enhance the
performance, safety and longevity of a class of structures in various areas,
including architectures, spacecraft, military equipment and high-tech devices.
The project will complement efforts to build the next-generation advanced
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem by developing a series of data-driven tools to
facilitate numerical and high-performance scientific computing, and expand
modeling and simulation capabilities for mechanics of solid and structures. The
project will also help upgrade the curriculum on computational modeling of
structures. Engineering students will be recruited and mentored in this project.
The training for students will include structural design, computational
modeling, algorithm development and experimental testing.

Traditional structural design is an open-loop protocol, in which a design-
modeling-validation procedure is followed. The main objective of this project is
to create a data-driven closed-loop platform for optimal design of DPJ
structures. This frame-invariant platform is new in providing a closed-loop
structural design protocol. In this platform, experimental results will not only
be used for model validation, but also in turn serve to provide training and
testing data to further improve performance of a data-driven computational
model. The loop will then be closed by using the computational model to guide
initial structural design. Toward this goal, two tasks will be carried out. The
first task is to develop a stochastic approach to form finding. Traditional
methods for form finding of DPJ structures require member grouping, which relies
highly on the geometric simplicity of the structure. To resolve this issue, a
new method, called the stochastic fixed nodal position method, will be designed
and investigated. The key benefit of this method is that it does not use member
grouping or require any geometric simplicity. These features will allow the
method to serve as a powerful tool in design of large-scale, complex, and
irregular DPJ structures. The second task is to develop a data-driven
computational modeling technique. Constitutive modeling techniques often over-
simplify a DPJ structure, which results in the failure to reflect important
mechanical properties of the structure. Very few recently developed techniques
for computational modeling are suitable to DPJ structures, due to their special
characteristics that are not commonly seen in other solids or structures. This
project will develop a novel computational modeling technique based on machine
learning and non-destructive testing for DPJ structures. This technique will
bypass traditional constitutive modeling and provide good performance in
handling DPJ structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.