* 2335681
* Education DCL: EAGER: Developing a Cyber-Aerial Computing Curriculum for Improving Sky-of-Privacy-Things Education through a Modular-Based Integrated Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sunho Lim, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,448.00

Low-altitude unmanned aerial vehicles, commercially known as drones, are rapidly
being deployed as a major component to build the next generation of ubiquitous
computing and communication infrastructure. However, drones are frequently
witnessed misbehaving by flying over private properties, restricted areas, and
cyber-critical infrastructures, collecting privacy- and security-sensitive
information illegally. Thus, the project team is building a Cyber-Aerial
Computing curriculum to expose undergraduate engineering students to drone
technology and potential drone-centric cyber and privacy threats and attacks,
developing their domain knowledge, ethics, and hands-on experience. The project
examines the use of Socio-Scientific Inquiry (SSI) and Flipped Learning (FL)
frameworks in developing the cybersecurity workforce's ability to engage in
ethically informed practices with an advanced understanding of drone technology
mechanisms for various personal and societal purposes. A framework for teaching
cybersecurity and privacy from multiple perspectives will also be provided to
other engineering disciplines to educate their students.

The project goal focuses on developing a new research-based curriculum for
undergraduate engineering students to engage in an ethical exploration of drone-
centric cybersecurity and privacy. First, the curriculum features an innovative
drone-based research paradigm that leverages drones for users to protect against
privacy invasion and information leakage using personal drones. Second, the
project team uses design-based research to improve the curriculum's quality
based on the SSI and FL frameworks and promote students' content mastery,
higher-order thinking, and ethical decision-making. Third, the curriculum has
four major learning modules with SSI-based driving questions. Each module spans
four weeks with the same instructional system using SSI activities and hands-on
practices to ensure this intervention performs as intended. Finally, formative
and summative assessments engage students in authentic tasks and ethics
discussions. The project will contribute to improving Sky-of-Privacy-Things
education and the growth of the cybersecurity workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.