* 2335046
* Education DCL: EAGER: Generative AI-based Personalized Cybersecurity Tutor for Fourth Industrial Revolution
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Noel Hennessey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The increasing complexity of Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) systems makes
them highly vulnerable to cyberattacks, justifying cybersecurity training for
the 4IR workforce. Although online programs are highly scalable and ideal for
reskilling and upskilling an existing workforce, currently, they are unsuitable
for 4IR cybersecurity training which requires access to specialized hardware. In
addition, students from different backgrounds have different learning styles
depending on their upbringing, educational backgrounds, and motivations.
Successful program completion is especially challenging for students from
marginalized, underrepresented communities, as a historical lack of access to
high-quality education during their formative years (pre/middle/high schools)
can impede their success. To address these challenges, this project leverages a
Generative AI based Personalized Cybersecurity Tutor (gAI-PCT), a scalable
online learning framework that trains a 4IR security workforce through video
lectures and virtual reality (VR) based cybersecurity labs, personalized to the
students learning needs through generative AI, using sentiment analysis to
evaluate student interest and knowledge comprehension. This research is a
collaboration between cybersecurity and education researchers at the University
of Arizona and Sandia National Labs.

The research team will explore: 1) a Generative AI-based interactive instructor
to assist and guide students through their online coursework; 2) Virtual Reality
based cybersecurity training labs that allow gamified 4IR cybersecurity
training, including training on extreme scenarios without risking expensive
equipment or human life; 3) Transformer-based machine learning approach to gauge
student sentiments and knowledge comprehension during learning activities; 4)
Generative AI-based approach to use student sentiment, and comprehension, in
combination with Bloom's Taxonomy, to personalize coursework according to
student's learning needs; 5) An approach to gauge non-normative outcomes
measuring the effectiveness of students learning interventions while serving
marginalized students; 6) An approach to increasing student's sense of
belonging, academic attainment, and engineering identity that will result in
increased academic persistence through the degrees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.