* 2335936
* Conference: Advancing Statistical Science for our Changing Climate
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Katherine Ensor, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,590.00

The Statistical Science for our Changing Climate workshop series, which will be
take place at the American Statistical Association (ASA) headquarters in
Alexandria VA November 2023, February, 2024, and April 2024, will focus on
moving statistical science forward to meet the challenges faced in the areas of
climate and extreme events, climate and the impact on human and animal health,
and climate and risk management both for the financial industry and the
insurance industry. In the face of our rapidly changing climate, statistics
plays a pivotal role in understanding and mitigating its profound impacts. As
the frequency and intensity of extreme weather and weather-related events
increase, reliable data analysis becomes crucial for identifying patterns,
assessing risks, and formulating effective strategies. The complexity of climate
systems necessitates the development of new statistical methodologies that can
handle intricate datasets, account for uncertainties, and provide accurate
predictions. The workshops will focus the statistics communities’ energies on
mitigating the multi-faceted impacts of a changing climate on our global
structures.

Each workshop will take place over 2 days and will be organized into 4 modules.
The first 3 modules will be focused on the critical statistical content and will
begin with an overview talk presented by a previously identified lead
investigator. Following the overview presentation, the workshop participants
will gather in working groups to address the critical questions and incubate new
ideas. The final module for each workshop will serve as a summary wrap-up and be
open to external virtual participation. Lead investigators identified for each
module will help develop key statistical science questions and take the lead on
the authorship of the vision paper as well as research papers planned for each
workshop. In total, it is expected that nine scholarly research papers will be
produced, including one overarching vision paper from each workshop. In each
case, the vision paper will lay the foundation of what is needed in the
discipline of statistical science to support a resilient society with respect to
the domain of the workshop. Further, ASA will develop key white papers to
communicate to its members and beyond opportunities in curriculum both
undergraduate and graduate, as well as corporate collaborations, with an eye
toward an ASA corporate fellows program for climate resilience. By combining
expertise in statistical modeling, data analysis, and risk assessment with the
insights of climate scientists, researchers can gain a comprehensive
understanding of the complex dynamics driving climate change and contribute to
the development of effective strategies, policies, and solutions that address
the challenges posed by climate change on multiple fronts. For more information
please see website:www.amstatclimate.org

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.