* 2335846
* Collaborative Research: Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Advancing Wildland Fire Analytics for Actuarial Applications and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Yuzhou Chen, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 129,949.00

The impacts of uncontrolled wildland fires range from the destruction of native
vegetation to property damages to long-term health effects and losses of human
lives. Increasing accuracy in projections of wildland fire activity, fire
behavior, and wildland fire weather is the key toward developing more efficient
fire control strategies and reducing the risks of wildfires. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the tools of artificial intelligence (AI) can help in planning
for upcoming prescribed burns by providing higher spatial and temporal fire
weather forecasts and can also assist in developing more efficient strategies
for wildfire risk mitigation. However, the modeling tools that are currently
used to predict fire activity are largely subject to a number of temporal or
spatial constraints. For instance, most deep learning (DL) approaches for
wildfire risk analytics tend to be restricted in their capabilities to
systematically capture the multidimensional information recorded at disparate
spatio-temporal resolutions. Furthermore, such DL architectures are inherently
static and do not explicitly account for complex dynamic phenomena, which is
often the key behind the accurate assessment of wildfire driving factors.
Finally, these models primarily rely on supervised learning approaches where a
large number of task-specific labels (e.g., fire or no fire) are needed. To
address these challenges in wildfire risk analytics, this project will leverage
inherently interdisciplinary approaches at the interface of Earth system
sciences, DL, computational topology, statistics, and actuarial sciences.

The project aims to introduce the concepts of topological data analysis (TDA) to
wildfire predictive modeling, coupling them with such emerging AI machinery as
time-aware graph neural networks. The resulting new methods are expected to
better capture the shape patterns in the wildland fire processes with respect
both to time and space and to assist in a more reliable statistical assessment
of wildfire risks. The new high-fidelity predictive approaches will have the
potential to deliver forecasts of fire behavior, fire activity, and fire weather
at multiple spatial and temporal scales under scenarios of limited, noisy, or
nonexistent labeled information. To enhance the utility of the research
solutions in wildfire analytics, the researchers in this project will work in
close collaboration with stakeholders, particularly, focusing on the insurance
sector. The project will provide multiple interdisciplinary training
opportunities at the nexus of wildfire sciences, AI, and mathematical sciences
at all educational levels, from undergraduate students to practicing actuaries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.