* 2335834
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Empowering Math Teachers with an AI Tool for Auto-Generation of Technology-Enhanced Assessments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Corrin Clarkson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 81,349.00

The proliferation of artificial intelligence (AI) and powerful Large Language
Models (LLMs) has evoked excitement and confusion among K-12 teachers regarding
AI's impact on teaching, assessments, and student work. It is vital for
researchers with expertise in human-centered teaching and learning to share
empirically grounded proofs-of-concept of teacher-AI teaming to enhance teacher
capacities for better learning outcomes for all students. This RAPID project
examines how the use of LLM-powered tools in high school math classes empowers
teachers to create complex technology-enhanced assessments (TEAs) that
formatively measure higher-order thinking skills and facilitate deeper learning.
The task of authoring such TEAs has necessitated programming expertise and
extensive technical skills and thus excluded most K-12 math teachers from
participating. By showcasing an exemplary model of teacher-AI teaming, this
project addresses a crucial, timely need to establish an early, positive
narrative that places teachers at the center of the AI revolution in K-12
education. This proposal was received in response to the Dear Colleague Letter
(DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on Artificial Intelligence in K-12
Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF 23-097) and funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This time-sensitive project will advance research on the use of AI and LLMs for
teaching in high school mathematics classrooms through the use of Edfinity
software that uses the open-source WeBWorK format to generate interactive, auto-
gradable, technology-enhanced formative assessments to support student learning.
Within this context, teachers will describe a math problem with an LLM tool
(ALICE) that is trained to use natural language inputs, generating source code
for TEAs along with hints and student feedback. The project brings together a
multidisciplinary team of math educators, STEM education and learning sciences
researchers, K-12 teacher educators, AI tool developers, and AI experts to
examine the integration of ALICE into high school Finite Mathematics courses
across 34 rural, urban, and suburban schools in Indiana and Illinois. The
project will train high school teachers and gather data to advance and shape our
understanding of teacher-AI teaming and domain-specific LLM prompt engineering.
The research involves gathering log data from the platform on teachers' ALICE
usage and prompt engineering, as well as teacher feedback through surveys and
interviews. These data will be analyzed to understand teachers' experiences in
using an LLM tool, the impacts on teacher attitudes toward and confidence in AI,
and the success of ALICE from teachers' perspectives for the generation of
quality, interactive, formative assessments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.