* 2335995
* EAGER: Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Eric Adolphe, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The Decentralized Autonomous Organization Collaboration Hub (DACH) is a
groundbreaking national collaboration initiative to foster continuous innovation
in the digital asset ecosystem. In an era where digital assets, such as
cryptocurrencies, have attained over a trillion dollars in market value, the
need for public and private collaboration is not just important, but essential.
Recognizing the dynamic nature of the digital asset market, the DACH project
aims to create a robust framework that can adapt to market fluctuations and
maintain relevance. The DACH project's impact extends beyond the financial and
cryptocurrency sectors, reaching into vital areas like healthcare, advanced
manufacturing, supply chain management, energy, transportation, dynamic
contracting/autonomy and Web3.0 related products and services. Additionally,
DACH presents an opportunity for public and private sector innovators to work
together to mitigate and deal with a range of risks, frauds, and scams in this
space. By fostering a public/private partnership with extensive participation,
the DACH project aims to create an inclusive environment that caters to the
diverse needs and interests of society, thereby democratizing financial systems
and reducing inequalities.

Technical challenges DACH will tackle include decentralized notification
attacks, multi-call transaction audits, malevolent submission of multiple
invalid proposals, and the risk associated with on-chain transaction
verifications using multi-sig wallets. The operational value of addressing these
technical risks through a Decentralized Autonomous Organization (DAO) includes
elimination of information silos through a decentralized communications model,
improved access, availability of ethical hacker cybersecurity experts during the
four stages of innovation, frictionless access to prospective customer comments
as an iterative use case feedback mechanism, and reduced participant apathy
through game theory. Managed by US subject matter experts, this “innovation
sandbox” will offer a controlled environment where innovators can collaborate,
build value, and mitigate risk by normalizing broadly diverse inputs. For
example, a Dust Network DAO could encourage adopting sustainable and responsible
space exploration (i.e., creating a standardized debris removal process). The
DAO might include a Space Treaty expert, thereby avoiding unanticipated adverse
effects of governmental actions. A start-up is establishing a DAO to bring
transparency to class action lawsuits. The first use case is related to Camp
Lejeune military veterans suffering from the health effects of contaminated
water. Camp Lejeune victims have fallen prey to predatory lawyers seeking access
to over $6B in funds set aside by Congress. The DAO will enable collaboration
across a wide range of stakeholders including doctors, pathologist, lawyers, and
military services to ensure transparency and accountability of funds intended
for veterans. Another use case is the Battery DAO which links the sale of
sustainable energy generation (i.e., rooftop solar panels) from local
neighborhoods and fairly shares financial gains using DAO-based governance. The
above are just early examples, as the DAO will enable support for a wide range
of innovations and collaborations. Like cloud computing, which now represents
the epitome of IT infrastructure provisioning for any industry, the DACH will
establish a model for innovation within the digital asset ecosystem. Though
considered a high-risk high-reward project, the benefits far outweigh the short-
term risks. As a result, this project has garnered widespread interest from
diverse potential stakeholders, including five (5) federal agencies (two cabinet
level), healthcare providers, Web 3.0 companies, public transportation
operators, investors, and a disparate group of entrepreneurial startups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.