* 2335016
* National Center for Next Generation Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Karen Wosczyna Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 6,513,956.00

Recent studies have highlighted the nation's increasing need for a skilled
workforce in advanced manufacturing. For example, a 2018 study by Deloitte and
the Manufacturing Institute concluded that over the next decade, the U.S. will
need to fill more than 4.6 million manufacturing jobs. The study further
predicts that more than half of these jobs will go unfilled due to gaps in the
skills of potential workers. With this award, Tunxis Community College will work
with partners from industry, business associations, professional organizations,
government agencies, and educators to develop the National Center for Next
Generation Manufacturing, which will help the nation meet its advanced
manufacturing workforce needs. The Center will be organized according to
Industry 4.0 and will include Technology Teams for next generation manufacturing
sub-sectors, such as Design, Fabrication, Processing, Supply Chain, Logistics,
and Quality Control. In addition, the Center will include next generation
manufacturing applications, such as cybersecurity, biomanufacturing, and
resource-efficient manufacturing. The Center will be guided by national leaders
from other Advanced Technological Education Centers and projects, as well as by
national equity associations, such as the National Association for Partnerships
in Equity. Through this guidance, the Center aims to identify successful
strategies for recruiting and retaining people from underrepresented communities
in the next generation manufacturing workforce.

The National Center for Next Generation Manufacturing has four goals: 1) Enhance
and solidify relationships and communication among educators, businesses,
industry, government, military, trade associations, and economic development
agencies to broaden and strengthen efforts to prepare qualified advanced
manufacturing technicians; 2) Implement a repository of educational materials
that integrates industry-driven competencies needed to support Industry 4.0 and
emerging learning technologies including the use of Open Educational Resources
and online methodologies; 3) Support professional development opportunities for
educators to implement promising practices to address current and future next
generation manufacturing technology competencies; and 4) Support a diverse
technician workforce through regional outreach, recruitment, mentoring, and
dissemination initiatives. Detailed activities are planned to support each goal,
including: professional development of educators to ensure that the developed
resources are used effectively; mentoring to support education and industry
partnerships such as the nationally recognized Business & Industry Leadership
Team model; initiating projects with Manufacturing Extension Partnerships and
Manufacturing USA Institutes; pursuing and piloting apprenticeship models by the
Center’s educators; strengthening career pathways between high schools,
community colleges, four-year universities and industry by identification of
industry-recognized credentials and disseminating successful educational models
that include multiple entry and exit points for both certificate and degree
completion; exploring and sharing emerging trends such as the Future of Work to
guide educators as they design industry-driven curriculum; and addressing the
impact of automation, the Internet of Things, and cybersecurity in next
generation manufacturing through webinars, podcasts and professional development
workshops. Center activities are expected to create a national Community of
Practice that is agile, supports innovation, and educates the 21st century
advanced manufacturing workforce needed for companies to be globally
competitive. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation’s economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.