* 2335024
* Conference: North American Indian Sign Language Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Melanie McKay-Cody, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 33,627.00

While a revival of spoken Indigenous languages is underway, this revival is
incomplete without parallel investment in North American Indian Sign Language
(NAISL). NAISL, also known as Indian Sign Language or Hand Talk, comprises
interrelated varieties of sign language spoken by Deaf and hearing Indigenous
Peoples of North America. This award supports a community-led conference on
NAISL that serves as a venue for presentations, dialogues, practical workshops,
and NAISL documentation. This structure enhances the value of the conference in
that it disseminates existing research, resources, and methodologies while also
collecting valuable new NAISL data that are at risk of being lost.

Hosting a conference on NAISL helps to focus attention on its importance and
fosters a community of support, working relationships, and increased investments
of time and effort in the documentation, preservation, and study of NAISL. This
helps to stimulate new projects and research as well as efforts to revitalize
NAISL in communities. Signers in attendance are invited to contribute signs to
an ongoing NAISL video dictionary project directed by the conference organizers.
This takes place in the context of practical workshops where signers are
recorded by the dictionary project leaders, providing attendees with training on
how to conduct sign language documentation in their own communities. This award
is made as part of a funding partnership between the National Science Foundation
and the National Endowment for the Humanities for the NSF Dynamic Language
Infrastructure – NEH Documenting Endangered Languages Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.