* 2335724
* Travel: Group Travel Grant for the PhD Forum in the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision  (WACV 2024)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Enrique Dunn, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the PhD Forum at the 2024 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision (WACV). WACV is the premier annual conference focused on the applications
of computer vision. It is held in the United States and attended by members of
the international research community. The goal of the PhD Forum is to highlight
the work of PhD students working in computer vision and to give these students
an opportunity to discuss their research and career options with senior
researchers in the field. The broader impacts of this project include supporting
the career development of some of the brightest junior researchers in computer
vision, contributing to the research community in general by drawing attention
to an important aspect of graduate student development, potentially increasing
the number of active researchers and educators in STEM, and ensuring that the
computer vision community, through its recent graduates, makes fast advances in
solving problems that will benefit society as a whole. The PhD Forum aims to
have representation from a diverse group of participants in terms of gender,
ethnic background, academic institution, and geographic location.

Support from the National Science Foundation covers some of the costs for 14
selected US-based graduate students to attend the conference. Participants and
recipients of travel support are selected by the 2024 WACV PhD Forum Chair. For
the graduate student participants, this event is an opportunity to receive
advice on their research work and career plans from experts from different
institutions, with potentially different perspectives than their research
supervisor. For the participating senior researchers, this is an opportunity to
have a meaningful discussion with a promising young researcher and to give back
to the community through their mentorship. This year's PhD Forum features a
poster session, one-on-one mentoring, and a panel discussion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.