* 2335477
* Conference/Collaborative Research: Interdisciplinary Workshop on Mechanical Intelligence; Alexandria, Virginia; late 2023/early 2024
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Nicholas Gravish, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yue Wang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 6,800.00

This award supports an Interdisciplinary Workshop on Mechanical Intelligence.
Mechanical intelligence is an umbrella term that is used to refer to all forms
of physical intelligence and morphological computations in biological and
engineered systems. The workshop will bring together 40 participants, covering
expertise in robotics, biomechanics, neuroscience, applied math, physics,
machine learning, mechanics, and materials. The presentations and discussions
will address a path for finding a common language, formulating theory, and
developing quantifiable metrics for mechanically intelligent systems that
translate across disciplines, with an additional underlying goal of facilitating
an interdisciplinary approach to mechanical intelligence. After the workshop, a
report will be generated to summarize the findings, which will be shared with
the general research community.

Despite ample evidence of the application of mechanical intelligence in
biological and robotic systems, this topic has received less attention in the
current era of cognitive and electronic intelligence. The activities of the
workshop are designed to bring together researchers with expertise in
mathematics, physics, computational science, materials science, robotics and
biology to discuss plans to develop (1) a shared vocabulary that facilitates
fruitful interaction and exchange of perspectives and ideas on mechanical
intelligence across disciplines, and (2) theory, methods, and quantifiable
metrics of mechanical intelligence to enable comparison across diverse
instantiations of mechanical intelligence. Addressing both of these gaps is
expected to catalyze advancement in the field of mechanical intelligence and
moving it forward.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.