* 2335077
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Fault rock and spring sampling of the 2023 Kahramanmaras, Turkey, earthquake sequence ruptures
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Dennis Newell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 13,307.00

This project involves sampling rock, sediment, water, and gas associated with
the catastrophic MW 7.8 and MW 7.5 Kahramanmaras earthquake ruptures in Turkey.
These samples are critical for addressing how the physical and chemical
properties of the near-surface environment influence how earthquake ruptures
propagate or stop, and how earthquakes change groundwater migration along
faults. Because scientists working on seismically active faults that have not
experienced recent earthquakes commonly have to infer whether rocks observed in
the field formed and deformed during an earthquake, these new samples will
benchmark characteristics that are unique to earthquake deformation. Thus, these
samples will inform on-going and future studies of large-magnitude earthquake-
generating faults world-wide. The US PIs, including a female STEM researcher,
will work closely with Turkish colleagues and expand research, education, and
training opportunities by mentoring a Turkish undergraduate from Istanbul
Technical University in field work.

This projects centers on the recent MW 7.8 and MW 7.5 Kahramanmaras earthquake
sequence and associated surface rupture in Turkey and is an unprecedented and
time-sensitive opportunity to sample Earth materials and fluids that directly
participated in surface ruptures during these catastrophic events. The PIs will
leverage new mapping of both surface ruptures to sample (1) fault rocks,
sediments, and soils from discrete scarps and new fault surfaces produced by
these earthquake ruptures, (2) fault damage created and deformed during multiple
past earthquake cycles that subsequently participated in these ruptures, (3)
waters and gases from new bubbling springs along the ruptures and existing
thermal springs proximal to these faults, and (4) in situ CO2 flux measurements
along the ruptures at all sample locations

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.