* 2335687
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: MedAn: A Framework for Investigating Live Medical Data against Privacy Laws
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Indrakshi Ray, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 09/30/2025
* USD 61,332.00

This research project aims to develop a framework to assess and improve the
privacy and security of mobile health applications (apps) that collect and use
personal health data. These apps, commonly used on smartphones and smart
devices, have the potential to greatly improve access to healthcare. However,
there are concerns about the privacy and protection of the sensitive user data
they collect and generate. The research project recognizes the need for a user-
centered approach that ensures compliance with privacy regulations, enhances
clarity in legal documents and app descriptions, and incorporates privacy and
security measures during the app design process. The goal is to provide users
with more control over their personal data while using health apps and to
establish a framework that guides app developers in creating safe and
transparent applications. The project's novelties include the development of (i)
models to bridge the gap between regulatory requirements and technical
specifications for handling personal medical data, and (ii) a framework for
privacy-focused analysis of mobile health apps that provides users with fine-
grained transparency and control over their personal data. The project's broader
significance and importance lie in safeguarding user privacy and security in the
increasingly prevalent use of health apps, which handle sensitive personal data.
By addressing regulatory compliance, improving clarity in legal documents, and
enhancing app design processes, this research ensures that users have control
over their data and can make informed decisions. Ultimately, it promotes trust
in health apps, encourages responsible development, and contributes to the
advancement of privacy protection in the digital healthcare landscape.

The technical approach of this research involves developing natural language
processing models capable of cross-genre entailment and inference, connecting
the semantics of legal language to technical specifications in software design
and development. These models help in identifying privacy vulnerabilities, from
which the research derives privacy constraints and develops a formal privacy
model with three key properties: completeness, minimality, and consistency.
Finally, the research analyzes mobile health apps to check for conformity with
the policy model. To ensure this analysis is performed for the entire data life
cycle, a combination of advanced language models and domain-specific models of
semantic similarity is used. These models help the framework to analyze mobile
health apps in terms of privacy laws and empower users by providing them fine-
grained control and transparency over their personal data. The expected advances
due to this research include better comprehension of legal language by non-
specialists and engineers, enhanced privacy-focused analysis of mobile apps, and
enable users with clear information about data collections, necessity, and the
ability to gain more control over their real-time personal data. Overall, it
promotes user safety and privacy in the use of health applications. A project
website will be hosted by the Department of Computer Science at Stony Brook
University and regularly maintained and updated by the principal investigator.
This website will provide access to publicly releasable data, research papers,
conference and lecture material, and software products. The software products of
this research will also be publicly available on development repositories (e.g.,
GitHub or Bitbucket).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.