* 2335417
* I-Corps: Blockchain-powered hybrid platform for seamless and interoperable medical image sharing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Rahul Simha, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a medical image sharing platform empowered by blockchain.
Healthcare institutions, including hospitals, clinics, and medical imaging
centers, often encounter difficulties in sharing medical images across different
systems and facilities. Further, most healthcare systems face concerns related
to data security and patient privacy. Consequently, many organizations resort to
antiquated CD-based methods for medical image sharing, incurring high costs,
inefficiencies, and security vulnerabilities. The proposed platform enables
standardized and secure sharing of medical images, eliminating the need for
physical media for medical image sharing. The goal for the proposed technology
is to facilitate faster, secure, and interoperable medical image sharing. By
streamlining medical image sharing, healthcare professionals may collaborate
more effectively, leading to improved patient care and outcomes. In addition,
rapid and secure access to medical images across different healthcare settings
may expedite diagnoses, enable timely treatment decisions, and reduce medical
errors.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a blockchain-powered medical
image storage and sharing platform. The platform's architecture includes
components such as smart contracts, encryption mechanisms, and decentralized
storage systems, which collectively enable seamless and trustworthy medical
image sharing. The use of smart contracts provides a reliable framework for
access control and data sharing permissions. The encryption mechanisms safeguard
sensitive patient information during transmission and storage, bolstering data
security and privacy. Additionally, the utilization of decentralized storage
systems ensures redundant and distributed data storage, mitigating the risk of
data loss, manipulation, or security threats. The research underlying this
project involves leveraging blockchain's inherent properties of
decentralization, immutability, and transparency to establish a secure and
interoperable infrastructure for medical image exchange. By harnessing the
potential of distributed ledger technology, the proposed platform addresses the
existing challenges of fragmented systems, limited interoperability, and data
silos in medical image sharing. Blockchain technology addresses critical
challenges in medical image sharing, paving the way for enhanced collaboration,
improved patient care, and increased efficiency in healthcare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.