* 2336310
* SBE-UKRI: Cumulative Civilian Harm
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Anna Cave, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan F. Hirsch
* 10/31/2026
* USD 298,566.00

This project will illuminate and seek to rectify a critical blindspot in
international humanitarian law governing armed conflict. International
humanitarian law focuses on whether civilian harms are “excessive” in each
individual attack, but fails to account for cumulative civilian harm over the
course of a conflict both with respect to civilian harm across many attacks, as
well as the aggregate and emergent effects of prolonged exposure to armed
conflict. One of the key anticipated intellectual merits of this project is the
development of a new standard of “strategic proportionality” that should apply
in addition to current international humanitarian law requirements, according to
which belligerents must balance cumulative civilian harm against their clearly
defined strategic objectives. In addition, the research will illuminate how
decision-makers and conflict-affected populations currently think about
cumulative civilian harm. Through this research, the project will deepen
understanding of how those who use force and are affected by it view civilian
protection under international humanitarian law. The research ideally will
culminate in the articulation of a civilian-centered, action-guiding legal and
policy framework to govern cumulative civilian harm.

Excessive civilian harm in war is often a result of non-compliance with the laws
of war, yet it can also stem from international law’s failure to account for
cumulative civilian harm. Legal experts have argued that total civilian casualty
numbers do not determine whether military operations are lawful and that many
harmful effects of war are beyond the reach of law. This project is animated by
a belief that international law should not be silent on these issues. It
responds to requests from senior political and military practitioners from
different countries who have reached out to stress the urgent need for action-
guiding rules on cumulative civilian harm. The research will focus on four key
work products: (1) desk research into case, treaty law, and military manuals,
along with a systematic review of existing scholarship; (2) interviews with
former and current senior military and political decision-makers to determine if
and how cumulative civilian harm is considered in decision-making; (3) field
research via survey experiments in conflict zones to determine attitudes towards
cumulative civilian harm; and (4) development of a legal and policy framework to
enable political decision-makers to account for cumulative civilian harm.

This proposal is awarded under the SBE-UKRI Lead Agency Opportunity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.