* 2336852
* I-Corps:  A Low-cost and Non-contact Respiration Monitoring Method for COVID-19 Screening and Prognosis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Sabit Ekin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 42,684.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to monitor respiration using a low-cost and non-contact sensing method. Studies
show that real-time health monitoring devices will reach a market value of over
$65 billion by 2022. Given the high prevalence of lifestyle-associated
disorders, long-term continuous monitoring of physiological parameters becomes
important for many healthcare cases such as apnea and for human-computer-
interaction applications. The anticipated benefits of the technology in the
current COVID-19 outbreak include, but are not limited to, helping to reduce the
load of current (expensive and limited) respiration monitoring medical
equipment, being deployable in open-spaces and being highly desirable for the
drastically increasing numbers of COVID-19 patients. Further, since respiration
monitoring is a ubiquitous element of medicine, this work may also impact the
entire health care community, from patients in their homes, to doctor’s offices,
to large medical institutions and industries.

This I-Corps project involves the technological advancement required to enable
the proposed low-cost and non-contact respiration sensing method. This method
represents a substantial departure from traditional approaches to wireless
respiration monitoring and is poised to make significant contributions in this
area. The proposed technology is timely given the critical worldwide impact of
COVID-19. The proposed solution is adequately deployable in home environments
(e.g. living rooms) and hospitals, etc. to remotely monitor respiration for
COVID-19 screening and prognosis. The proposed approach allows very low-cost,
safe, easy, continuous, and non-obtrusive gathering of respiration data — a
critical input for cost-effective and proactive treatment and management of
subjects with COVID-19 and other chronic respiratory conditions. This project
will allow the team to better understand the unmet needs by conducting customer
discoveries and interviews, develop a viable business model, and learn the
desired features for developing a compelling minimum viable product.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.