* 2336217
* RAPID: Sources and Fluxes of CO2 during the 2023 Fagradsfjall Eruption using drone- and ground- based sampling and measurement techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 14,503.00

Fagradsfjall Volcano or more specifically Litli Hrútur, located in southwest
Iceland erupted on July 10, 2023 at about 6 PM local time. The volcano built up
activity over the past few months. The most recent activity began with ground
inflation, a common occurrence before eruptions, in April 2023 in the western
Reykjanes Peninsula. Ground swelling occurred at rates up to about 1 cm per
month and indicated that magma was accumulating at 15 km depth beneath the
volcano. Accumulating magma at volcanoes emits gases that are dominated by water
vapor, carbon dioxide and sulfur gases. These gases rise from depth and escape
through vents and cracks at the surface. Previous eruptions from Fagradalsfjall
volcano have produced lava flows that came from up to 24 km below the surface.
Researchers on this project will collect samples and measure gases at the
beginning and throughout the current eruption to investigate whether the gas
sources are from deep in the Earth’s crust and mantle. The work compares gas
compositions including sulfur and carbon as well as carbon isotopes to pinpoint
the origin of magmatic gas and the depths to its source. Researchers will also
quantify the total amount of gases emitted per day. The results can be used to
evaluate how much magma may still be beneath the volcano and ready to erupt. The
work will also determine whether the currently erupting magma is fed by deeper
magma that may erupt in the near future. The information gained at Litli Hrútur
eruption will provide valuable insights into processes that may also occur at
other hazardous volcanoes.

This project will provide access for scientists to examine the current eruption
of Fagradsfjall or more specifically Litli Hrútur, located in southwest Iceland.
The purpose of this request is to collect gas samples from the eruption plume as
well as measure the SO2 flux and CO2/SO2 ratio during the ongoing eruption
utilizing UAVs. The samples will be analyzed utilizing an instrument that
University of New Mexico has had running in at the University of Iceland to
obtain carbon isotope values of the erupting CO2. The data obtained will provide
constraints on the sources of CO2 and the dynamics of magma degassing during the
eruption. The previous eruption at Fagradsfjall which occurred in 2021 tapped
into a magma reservoir that was located at about 20 km depth just at or below
the Moho. As the eruption evolved the lavas erupting at the surface were sourced
from greater and greater depth. The current eruption may progress in the same
manner and allow sampling of CO2 that originates from great depth and is
transferred rapidly to the surface. This transfer will provide a unique
opportunity to constrain the carbon isotope composition of the deep Icelandic
mantle and constrain any contribution of recycled carbon into the Icelandic
Plume Source region. In addition, time-series data collection of CO2/SO2 ratios
combined with SO2 flux measurements will allow researcher to compute the CO2
flux from the eruption and evaluate how much magma is degassing during the
eruption and from what depth this magma is sourced. That combination of
information (CO2 flux, magma degassing depth, amount of magma involved in
degassing and CO2 source) during the ongoing eruption will provide unprecedented
details on the processes of degassing at such a dynamic basaltic eruption. The
resulting data has applications to other basaltic eruptions at hot spot
volcanoes such as Kīlauea, Hawaiʻi.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.