* 2336019
* I-Corps:   Iron supplementation hydrogel plant substrate for aquaponics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Kevin Neves, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a nitrate removal and iron supplement system to improve the
growth of plants in aquaponic agriculture system. Aquaponics is the combination
of aquaculture and hydroponics into one closed-loop system that recycles water,
employs natural fertilizer from aquaculture (fish) waste, and utilizes less
space to produce more food year-round compared to conventional agriculture.
Currently, aquaponic systems use synthetic iron chelate and non-biodegradable
plant substrates. Aquaponic systems are commonly deficient in iron, an essential
plant nutrient required to synthesize chloroplasts and other essential metabolic
processes. When deficient in iron, aquaponic growers lose profits because plant
growth is stunted, and the water is not cleaned fully by the plants for the fish
due to inefficient nutrient uptake. The proposed technology integrates with
aquaponic systems to enrich plants with essential iron, may be used in both
commercial- or home-scale systems, and may provide biodegradable materials to
improve aquaponic systems.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an iron-containing hydrogel
for aquaponic agricultural applications. The proposed technology is designed to
remove nitrogen and phosphorus from water and acts like a sponge. The
aquaculture industry uses aquaponics to prevent polluting local waterways with
excess nitrogenous waste generated during aquaculture production. However,
aquaponic growers are required to supplement essential nutrients required by
plants that are not supplied from fish waste. Aquaponic systems are deficient in
iron, an essential plant nutrient required to synthesize chloroplasts and
several other essential metabolic processes. The most common iron supplement is
chelated iron (Fe-EDTA, Fe-DTPA, Fe-EDDHA) to allow the iron to dissolve in
water. However, iron chelates are synthetic compounds not found in nature, and
organic growers want to avoid adding any synthetic chemicals. The proposed
technology is an iron supplement method that employs a material that provides
iron to the plant roots. In addition, the hydrogel is made from recycled by-
products from the agriculture industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.