* 2336463
* EAGER: Development of Novel Chemical Ionization Detection of Peroxy Radicals for Fundamental Kinetics Experiments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2025
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 259,132.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Neil Donahue and his team at Carnegie Mellon University
will investigate highly reactive organic molecules known as peroxy radicals that
lie at the heart of chemistry and air pollution in the lower atmosphere as well
as combustion chemistry. Peroxy radicals are formed when any organic compound
starts to oxidize, and they then react with many different species, including
other peroxy radicals. Further, peroxy radicals can react with themselves in the
presence of molecular oxygen in a process known as autoxidation. This project
aims to develop a new and better way to measure this very reactive but very
important chemical species. This has been a long-standing challenge in the
atmospheric and combustion chemistry communities. The award will provide
interdisciplinary student training at the interface of atmospheric science and
analytical chemistry with an emphasis on advanced mass spectrometry technique
development.

The chemistry of the peroxy radical is very rich, and it plays a critical role
in determining the consequences of organic oxidation for pollution and even for
climate effects since oxidation products help to form or grow atmospheric
particles. There are few methods to measure peroxy radicals and to constrain the
rates of their reactions, and this project focuses on refining chemical
ionization mass spectrometry approaches to provide highly sensitive and accurate
measurements. This will be done either by direct detection of ions formed when
specific "reagent" ions form clusters with the radicals or when other gases are
added to the instrument inlet to convert the peroxy radicals into other species
that can also be measured via chemical ionization mass spectrometry. The
complexity of the chemistry makes this a high-risk but highly important project.
If successful, it will provide the foundation for detailed measurements to
provide better constraints on the fate and reaction products of organic
compounds in the atmosphere and in combustion systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.