* 2336224
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for IFIP WG 7.3 Performance 2023
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Andrew Daw, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

The 41st International Symposium on Computer Performance, Modeling, Measurements
and Evaluation (IFIP WG 7.3 Performance 2023) brings together researchers at the
intersection of computer science and applied probability, with the aim to
understand and improve the performance of computing and communication systems by
means of state-of-the-art quantitative models and solution techniques.
Attracting scholars from around the world, this selective, single-track
conference series features cutting-edge research on the performance evaluation
of computing systems. The conference also includes several half- and full-day
workshops for in-depth coverage of topics such as mathematical modelling and
performance analysis, learning and optimization in networks, blockchain, cloud
computing, and applications in transport, energy and service systems.

This student travel grant will fully support approximately 25 students’
attendance (airfare/ground transportation, lodging, and registration) to
participate in the conference, potentially share their own research, and
interact with leading researchers in the field. Mentoring is a core tenet of the
Performance conference, and attendees will have several dedicated opportunities
to meet and interact with senior members of the community. In the goal to
broaden participation in computing, student attendees will be recruited from
under-represented groups both locally and across the country, and there are
portions of the funding dedicated to this initiative. Furthermore, this funding
support also offers student attendees of Performance 2023 the opportunity to
meet one another, fostering a peer group at an early stage that can benefit them
throughout their careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.