* 2336054
* CISE Research Expansion Aspiring Investigators Conference: Mobilizing Equity-centered Research in Cyber-Human Systems and Informatics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Vignesh Subbian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 99,800.00

Mobilizing Equity-centered Research in Cyber-Human Systems and Informatics:
Sociotechnical systems play a vital role in our society, encompassing everything
from smart homes and workplaces to online platforms, healthcare, and education
systems. These complex systems involve the interaction of social and technical
elements, shaping their functioning and impact. Addressing these challenges
requires interdisciplinary research and collaboration across fields such as
sociology, psychology, computer and information science and engineering (CISE),
and organizational studies. This project will advance equity-centered research
in cyber-human systems and informatics, focusing on institutions in the
Southwest United States. Through a regional conference, it will bring together
aspiring researchers from Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) and research-
intensive institutions to identify strengths, needs, and strategies for
promoting equity-centered research. By exploring regional insights and building
collaborative models, the project aims to strengthen research capacity at MSIs
in the Southwest and advance the goals of the National Science Foundation CISE-
MSI program.

The project will leverage principles and strategies from team science to
organize community building activities and a regional conference for aspiring
and early-career researchers from four southwestern states: Arizona, California,
New Mexico, and Texas. The two-day working conference will focus on (1)
identifying institutional and individual strengths and needs related to
computing and informatics research, (2) equity-centered topics including
fairness, ethics, accountability, transparency, and social justice, and (3)
strategies for promoting undergraduate research. In addition to potentially
increasing the number and quality of research proposals from MSIs to the
National Science Foundation, the project will demonstrate the practical
application of team science principles for community building and identify
models of inter- and intra-institutional collaboration that support research
expansion and innovation at MSIs in the Southwest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.