* 2336072
* RAPID: Impacts of Deposition from Smoke-derived Black Carbon on the Greenland Ice Sheet and the Greater Arctic Cryosphere due to Transport from Record Setting Canadian Wildfires
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Alia Khan, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

High latitude wildfires are increasing in frequency and intensity. Smoke and
black carbon from Canadian wildfires is often transported to and deposited on
the Greenland Ice Sheet, which then forces these ice-covered areas to absorb
more solar energy, making them melt faster. Historically, wildfire intensity
peaks later in summer, however 2023 has been marked by unprecedented early-
season fires across Canada, although these events are projected to become more
likely in future climate warming scenarios. Capturing data on black carbon
deposition, as well as quantifying the impacts of this deposition on snow
reflectance and melt, will lead to a better understanding of localized impacts
of the early season smoke deposition on seasonal snowmelt. These valuable data
will also help reduce uncertainty in future climate model projections of the
effects a warming climate has on the Greenland Ice Sheet.

This research will explore the impacts of the early onset, record-setting
wildfires across Canada and quantify the wildfire-derived black carbon
deposition on the Greenland Ice Sheet and the greater Arctic cryosphere. The
radiative forcing attributable to the presence of black carbon on the cryosphere
is one of the least constrained variables of global climate models, so a high
level of uncertainty exists among modelled smoke deposition, concentrations of
black carbon in snow, and the weathering crust on the surface of the ice sheet.
This unique wildfire season provides an opportunity for model verification. The
study will provide the first verification of the 1/3rd degree smoke deposition
output from the Navy Aerosol Analysis Prediction System (NAAPS) global aerosol
model, which provides high-resolution black carbon deposition as an output. The
output has yet to be verified with ground observations of snow, so the project
team will collect and analyze snow and water samples for refractory black
carbon. The modelled black carbon deposition on the Greenland Ice Sheet from
this year will also be compared to the previous 23-years of the model record.
Darkening of snow and ice surfaces will also be explored with satellite remote
sensing, as well as the role of the increased deposition of black carbon on snow
albedo reduction, radiative forcing, the timing of seasonal snowmelt, as well as
overall seasonal meltwater yield.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.