* 2336145
* I-Corps: A Battery-enabled Vehicle Immobilizer
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Liang He, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial is based on the development of a vehicle
immobilization device to prevent a vehicle from being stolen by someone who does
not have the key to turn the engine. Currently, auto thefts primarily are caused
by the limitations of key/keyfob-based vehicle immobilizers, such as wireless
keyfobs, physical locks, after-market vehicle alarms, which often rely on
vulnerable external wireless communications and in-vehicle networks. The
proposed technology aims to address this problem by providing anti-theft
protection that is physically isolated from these common cyber-attack vectors.
Unlike other systems, this technology does not require car owners to carry any
additional token, making it more convenient to use. In addition, this technology
may be installed in all existing and new gasoline, hybrid, and electric
vehicles, providing a universal solution. This proposed device potentially may
address the critical issue of vehicle security and benefit all stakeholders
within the auto industry ecosystem.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an anti-theft device for
vehicle theft protection. The proposed technology is designed to leverage
automotive batteries to authenticate drivers and immobilize vehicles using the
authentication results. The disruptive nature of technology lies in its
utilization of the battery as a sensing and control channel, effectively
safeguarding vehicles against common cyber-attack vectors such as external
wireless communication and internal in-vehicle networks. The proposed device
consists of three key components: two authentication systems to authorize each
legitimate driver using battery voltage/current as the identity carrier, an
adaptive and thermally-robust power control module to reduce/restore the
battery’s power capacity to dis/enable vehicle access, and four important
functions to enable an end-to-end vehicle immobilizer that is compliant with
current standards, including estimation of vehicle status, detection of
weak/faulty vehicle batteries, detection of illegitimate vehicle accesses, and
automatic recharging power supplies to relieve drivers from maintenance burden.
This technology has the potential for widespread application in various
battery/AC-powered systems, offering physical security in an increasingly
interconnected world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.