* 2336471
* Spectrum Management for the Protection of Radio Astronomy
* MPS,OMA
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2025
* Sarah Marie Bruno, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Williams
* 07/31/2025
* USD 226,740.00

This proposal contains two areas of work, one in pursuing understanding of the
impact from radio frequency interference (RFI) to cosmological experiments,
especially RFI from spaceborne communication platforms such as satellites, and
second to engage in spectrum management activities domestically and
internationally.

This two-year project focuses on the pursuit of coexistence between active and
passive uses of the electromagnetic spectrum, including two main aspects. The
first is a research thrust focused on measurements and analysis of impact of
satellite downlinks to cosmic microwave background (CMB) astronomy, especially
related to the single-dish CMB experiment, CLASS. The other main thrust is
domestic and international spectrum management, to perform technical studies and
to participate in work for the protection of radio astronomy, especially the CMB
experiments. The technical study will include a pilot portion with a frequency
generator to transmit signals at expected satellite downlink frequencies to
observe the impact on the CLASS data pipeline. This pilot would be followed up
by actual observations of satellites, utilizing telemetry to coordinate the
observations. The international spectrum management work would focus on
provision of technical expertise to three main study groups at the International
Telecommunications Union: Study Group 7 (Science Services), Study Group 3
(Propagation Models), and Study Group 4 (Satellites). The PI would evaluate
whether radio quiet zone rules could be amended to improve protection for radio
astronomy (both in the U.S. and in Chile) and participate in the numerous
international telecommunications meetings and conferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.