* 2336842
* CAREER: Resilient and Scalable Framework for Control of Mutli-agent Systems: Ensemble Control of Network Motifs
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Xudong Chen, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2026
* USD 494,903.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to develop a novel framework for control of multi-
agent systems that is by nature resilient and scalable. The idea behind the
framework is simple to state: instead of controlling a large network, one
controls a large population of small ones. The project will bring transformative
change for controlling large-scale complex systems by enabling the use of a
single control input to simultaneously steer an arbitrarily large number of
networked control systems. This will be achieved by integrating both ensemble
control theory and networked control theory. The intellectual merits of the
project include developing an original set of methodologies and establishing
novel control-theoretical results for controlling infinite ensembles of
networked systems. The broader impacts of the project include establishing new
connections between mathematics and the study of multi-agent systems, enabling
the use of the proposed framework across various domains such as quantum
systems, unmanned aerial systems, and robotics, and developing new courses that
prepare the next generation of students with advanced mathematical tools and
engineering methods.

To establish the proposed control framework, the PI will investigate ensemble
systems that are composed of infinitely many networked control systems. The
individual networked systems in the ensemble may share common information flow
topologies, but show variations in system parameters which are indexed by points
in a continuum parameterization space. A major technical challenge is that one
can only use a finite-dimensional, common control input to steer a continuum
ensemble of individual control systems. Moreover, these individual systems are
constrained by information flow topologies. Such a challenge has not yet been
tackled in the literature. Thus, to develop the proposed control framework, the
PI will: (1) establish new concepts, such as ensembles of motifs, and formulate
new problems, such as structural ensemble controllability; (2) establish
necessary and/or sufficient conditions for information flow topologies of
individual networked systems that can comprise a controllable ensemble; (3)
establish a deep understanding of the fundamental relation between physical
dynamics of individual systems, information flow topology, and geometry of
parameterization space for ensemble controllability and for various types of
output controllability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.