* 2336387
* Conference: STUDENT PROGRAM OF THE SIXTH CONFERENCE ON AI, ETHICS AND SOCIETY (AIES 2023)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Wenbin Zhang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,552.00

This project supports a select group of United States-based doctoral students to
participate in the Sixth and Seventh AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and
Society (AIES’23, and potentially AIES’24). The growing presence of artificial
intelligence in various aspects of human life, from our homes to how we access
information and engage in political processes, underscores its significance. The
decisions made by technologists today will significantly influence the future,
shaping what becomes normal and possible. To comprehensively and responsibly
address the current and future implications of AI, it is essential for
technologists to engage not only with their peers but also with thinkers and
experts in the humanities and social sciences.

This conference will bring doctoral students together with experts across fields
to network and present their research. Since its establishment in 2018, AIES has
been a highly successful platform for such interdisciplinary conversations. A
pivotal aspect of this conference is the student track, providing students with
an entry point to actively participate. By offering structured opportunities to
interact with the diverse group of scholars attending AIES, the student track
aims to be a stimulating experience. Additionally, by making this conference
accessible to students, especially those from underrepresented backgrounds, the
student program aims to cultivate long-term interest in pursuing research-
oriented careers related to AI. In summary, this grant facilitates the
involvement of US-based Ph.D. students in the AIES conference, fostering crucial
interdisciplinary discussions on AI's impact on society and encouraging diverse
students to engage in AI research for the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.