* 2336773
* Third International Workshop on Waves, Storm Surges, and Coastal Hazards, Incorporating the Seventeenth (17th) International Waves Workshop; Notre Dame, Indiana; October 1-6, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Joannes Westerink, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 19,575.00

The International Workshop on Waves, Storm Surges and Coastal Hazards is a
continuing series of international workshops on all aspects of ocean and coastal
ocean waves, water levels and currents. Interrelated applications span from
offshore energy infrastructure (wave and current forces against offshore oil/gas
structures and wind turbines), navigation (waves and currents interacting with
ships in open water, through inlets and into harbors), coastal floodplain
inundation (due to hurricane storm surge, tsunamis and coastal riverine
flooding), coastal morphology (sediment transport impacting the depth of
navigation channels and estuarine/river to ocean exchanges), to coastal
ecosystems including impacts on water quality, fauna and flora (e.g. community
water supplies, industrial pollution, water temperature and salinity, algal
blooms, fish larval exchanges, available oxygen in the water). Understanding the
underlying physics and enabling prediction through models is becoming
increasingly important as world populations continue to grow and migrate to
coastal areas and as global and regional ocean and atmospheric climatology
change. These increasing coastal populations are drastically modifying the
coastal ocean and floodplain through deforestation, land development, dredging,
levee construction, and intensive aquaculture, fundamentally changing the wind
wave, tide, storm surge and hydrologic response to a specific event. In
addition, anthropogenic induced global atmospheric and oceanic climatology
change is driving more powerful and larger storms that are trending to move more
slowly and producing more intense rainfall rates and larger total rainfall
volumes.

The workshopâ€™s topics include field observations, laboratory studies,
theoretical foundations to improve physical process descriptions, model
implementation from computational algorithms to code architecture, data
assimilation, artificial intelligence, process interaction (wave/storm surge,
ice/wave, ice/storm surge, hydrology/tide/surge),
verification/validation/uncertainty quantification, and operational applications
in short- and long-term forecasting and statistical hazard analysis. Specific
topics in the wave arena include improved methods for wave prediction in complex
conditions and environments, ocean wave climate and wave measurements, user
requirements, best practices and evaluation to improve the physics of wave
generation, extreme seas, wave generation in complex geometries, near-coast
applications, and unique waves such as rogue waves, solitons, and infragravity
waves. Topics for the surge and coastal hazards arena include developing tools
for quantifying future coastal and offshore risks and resiliency by predicting
storms and storm effects associated with waves, currents, surges and other
processes that affect communities in coastal areas. Coastal inundation
forecasting from multiple sources is of particular interest. Storm surge topics
include operational forecasting; global and regional hindcasts; storm surge
climatology; data collection and instrumentation; data assimilation into
numerical models; wave-current interaction; surge-ice interaction; compound
flooding; shallow water and nearshore effects; wind fields for wave hindcasting
or forecasting: extremal analysis; case studies, past and future climate trends
and variability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.