* 2336743
* Conference: Recent advances in the mechanistic understanding of avian responses to environmental challenges
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Alexander Gerson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 14,785.00

This conference award supports participants in a symposium and associated poster
session on understanding avian responses to environmental challenges, at the
annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) in
January 2024. Birds inhabit some of the most variable and extreme environments
on the planet, and recent advances in the lab and field have led to discoveries
about the mechanisms that enable birds to overcome physiological challenges of
all kinds, including extreme long-distance flight, heat and cold, osmotic
challenges, low oxygen, and immune challenges. The symposium will advance the
collective understanding of the physiological strategies that birds use to
survive in challenging environments, and to promote discussion among the
participants in an attempt to establish new and strengthen existing connections,
find common themes, and discuss future directions in the field. By bringing
together physiologists with disparate expertise from various career stages and
backgrounds, including undergraduate and graduate students in the poster
session, common themes will be identified and new approaches that promote future
innovation and collaborations will be discussed. Participants will prepare a
synthetic, forward-looking paper to be published in the SICB journal,
Integrative and Comparative Biology. The individual symposium presentations will
also be published and disseminated in the same journal issue.

Birds are among the most widely distributed endotherms on the planet, living in
many types of inhospitable environments. In the face of environmental
challenges, the basic principles that allow for survival can be similar among
species, even in response to very different challenges. However, the underlying
mechanisms, suite of physiological responses, and selection on those traits
differ significantly, and their influence and impact from an ecological or
evolutionary perspective can vary as well. It is the goal of the supported
symposium to highlight physiological mechanisms underlying avian responses to
environmental challenges and to facilitate the synthesis of new discoveries with
established findings in order to provide an informed understanding of the
current state of the art in the field, to highlight new tools, and to identify
future research opportunities and collaborations. Furthermore, one of the many
enduring impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic is that early-career researchers have
not had as many opportunities to network, develop professional relationships, or
present their research in a way that maximizes exposure to the research
community. Therefore, the symposium specifically highlights the excellent
research being conducted by early-career scientists, with an emphasis on
promoting women in science. The symposium also includes a number of more senior
avian researchers to develop and broaden mentoring networks among the speakers.
In addition, the participation of five or more undergraduate and graduate
students in a complementary poster session will provide current students the
opportunity to build important professional relationships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.