* 2336813
* Travel: Workshop on Clusters, Clouds, and Data Analytics for Scientific Computing 2024
* CSE,OAC
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 09/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

The research areas of cluster, cloud, and data-analytics computing are
undergoing significant transformation due to two major trends. The first trend
is the emergence of multicore and hybrid microprocessor designs, which require
system designers to prioritize energy usage and application designers to
leverage parallelism and data locality. However, the traditional high-
performance computing (HPC) software stack is not well-suited for these new
architectures with numerous nodes, cores, accelerators, and reduced memory per
core. The second trend is the exponential growth in data generated and analyzed
by cutting-edge scientific applications and their user communities. This poses
challenges not only in processing and managing vast amounts of data but also in
making the data accessible to participants in large national and international
collaborations, spread across various administrative domains and utilizing
different resources like clusters, clouds, and data analysis tools. These new
conditions present several complex design and deployment challenges for the
cyberinfrastructure research community. They must address issues related to
scalability, programmability, performance, interoperability, resilience,
resource virtualization, data logistics, and system management. The Workshop on
Clusters, Clouds, and Data Analytics in Scientific Computing (CCDASC) will be
held to tackle these challenges and facilitate fruitful discussions. This
workshop aims to bring together leading-edge researchers to collaboratively
review, analyze, and gain new insights into these developments, and translate
these advancements into significant benefits for the scientific community. Â  The
workshop aims to achieve its goal by focusing on the commonalities and
interactions between clusters, clouds, and data analytics and how they can
support data and compute-intensive collaborations. These computational
infrastructures share architectural similarities, and addressing issues related
to cloud computing encompasses those concerning clusters. The growing importance
of data-driven research and cross-domain collaboration underscores the need for
solutions to data interoperability and logistics challenges. Key topics to be
explored in the workshop include overcoming scalability challenges for high
performance and computational efficiency, developing portable software for
various platforms (clusters, grids, clouds), creating common protocols and APIs
for seamless data movement and analysis across resource domains, designing
easier programming paradigms for parallel systems, and solving system management
problems arising from multicore architectures, resource virtualization, and
data-intensive applications. The workshop format fosters synergistic effects
among researchers from different focus areas, facilitating coordination for
high-impact research that spans multiple domains. The workshop's tasks include
surveying and analyzing deployment, operational, and usage issues for clusters,
clouds, and data analytics, documenting the current state-of-the-art in each
area, sharing experiences of research communities and science domains benefiting
from these technologies, exploring interoperability among clouds and grids, and
identifying future research directions in light of disruptive trends and
technological gaps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.