* 2336583
* I-Corps:  Early-stage cancer diagnostic platform using cell-free expression systems and liposomal nanotechnology
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Kate Adamala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an early-stage cancer diagnostic to improve detection of cancer.
In the US, 1.9 million people are diagnosed with cancer annually, with an
average of 609,000 deaths. Currently, the healthcare reimbursement system mostly
relies on patients presenting symptoms, except for cancers of the breast or
colon where there is proactive screening. However, detecting cancer early is
critical to improving quality of life, decreasing patient morbidity, and
reducing healthcare costs but available blood tests and imaging methods are not
specific enough to elucidate most early cancer occurrences. The proposed
technology is a blood-based cancer diagnostic that may be administered to
patients during annual checkups as well as to enhance imaging tests for cancer.
It uses an array of antibodies conjugated to liposomes, a tiny bubble made from
cell membrane-like materials, enabling them to bind to cancer cells with high
specificity. By detecting cancers earlier with the proposed liposomal-antibody
technology, there is the potential to improve patientsâ€™ quality of life,
decrease patient morbidity, and reduce costs related to healthcare.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of cancer screening technology
for the detection of early-stage cancers. The proposed technology is a
liposomal-antibody platform envisioned as for imaging assistance that may be
given to patients before magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission
tomography (PET) or computed tomography (CT) scans similar to the way general
MRI contrast dye or tracers are administered to patients currently. The
liposomes are designed to have antibodies attached to the outer membrane that
will enable them to congregate around tumor cells and will encapsulate imaging
dyes to assist radiologists in detecting cancerous growth. In addition, the
proposed blood-based detection system may be administered to patients during
annual checkups. An array of engineered antibodies may be embedded into
liposomes enabling them to bind to diseased cells with high specificity and
avoid attachment to healthy cells. The liposomes are designed to contain cell-
free expression systems for multiple, unique peptides that encode signaling
molecules. This combination may enable screening for many different cancers at
the microscopic level and monitoring their growth over time. The proposed
technology also may be used to monitor and quantify treatment efficacy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.