* 2336329
* Conference: Workshop for Rigorous and Reproducible Scientific Reasoning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Sriram Sankaranarayanan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2024
* USD 92,114.00

The workshop explores a rigorous and reproducible approach to the specification,
analysis, and validation of scientific workflows by assembling diverse
scientists from scientific disciplines such as biology, physics and climate
science, along with researchers from formal methods focusing on logic, theorem
proving and constraint solving. Fundamental scientific breakthroughs are key to
human advancement in diverse areas including agriculture, vaccines, climate
prediction and next-generation computers. At the same time, science increasingly
relies on enormous volumes of data that are processed through software to
provide evidence supporting scientific conclusions. Failure to maintain the
highest levels of scientific rigor and reproducibility can lead to a lot of
confusion and wasted resources. Above all, this can lead to loss of trust in
science and scientists among the public, when this is crucial for making
informed policies. The recent spate of high-profile retractions suggests that
the process of ensuring rigor and reproducibility is failing to keep pace with
the volume of new scientific research. Formal methods, as an area, has
successfully tackled the problems of specification and verification in areas
including hardware, software, and cyber-physical systems. The workshop, to be
held in-person in Boulder, CO, will enable robust conversations to help formal
methods experts understand the nature of scientific research workflows while
simultaneously exposing scientists to ideas from formal specification, modeling,
and verification. In addition, the workshop will include editors from major
journals in these areas and participants from government, as they are critical
part in the chain of scientific endeavor.

The workshop’s novelties include a first of its kind meeting between scientists,
formal methods experts, and other stakeholders in a bid to spark new ideas and
collaborations between participants that address the issue of rigor and
reproducibility for scientific workflows. The workshop’s impacts include new
ideas that could revolutionize how scientists present the entire scientific
workflow from data gathering to the final conclusions in a way that is easy to
verify and reproduce. The workshop is an important step towards ensuring that
the scientific discoveries of the future are clearly rigorous in a manner that
is easy to comprehend, validate and reproduce independently. This will benefit
the scientific community and society by building confidence in our basic
scientific research. The workshop celebrates diversity in science by involving
people from many different backgrounds including under-represented groups in the
conversation to shape the future of the scientific research methodology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.