* 2336229
* RAPID: Connecting Early Stage Capital to the Deep Tech Innovation Ecosystem
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Margaret Bacheler, ANGEL CAPITAL ASSOCIATION
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 09/30/2024
* USD 123,310.00

The technologies under development in the deep tech space have the potential to
radically transform and disrupt a wide variety of industries. The outcome of
this project would be to promote discovery and understanding of technologies
related to the defined ten technology focus areas. These advancements, with the
assistance of angel investor capital, will lead to new products and services in
fields as varied as artificial intelligence, astronomy, biotechnology, climate
modeling, cybersecurity, drug discovery and development, energy storage and
conversion, genomics, materials science, quantum computing, space exploration,
and drug development, etc.

This project is designed to better educate the angel investor community on the
benefits of deep tech investments with the intention of increasing the amount of
private capital available for deployment in the deep tech sector. To achieve
this, the following three project activities will be undertaken: (1) Data
Collection: Engage in a data collection effort to better understand how angel
investors are currently investing in Deep Tech. (2) Investor Education: Develop
a series of educational programs to expose angel investors to the technology and
commercialization potential of Deep Tech. (3) Investor Activation: Introduce
angel investors to Deep Tech start-ups through regional convenings, the ACA
annual Summit, and the ACA's national syndication effort.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.