* 2336233
* Student Support for Magnetic Technologies and Clinical Applications in Neuroscience 2023 Conference
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Ravi Hadimani, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

The 1st Conference of Magnetic Technologies and Clinical Applications in
Neuroscience (MagCAN Conference) will be held on August 24 - August 25, 2023, at
the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. The conference will cover research
areas on the latest developments in magnetic devices and systems, with a
particular emphasis on their potential applications in brain stimulation and
sensing, diagnosis and treatment of neurological disorders, and brain-inspired
technologies. Poster sessions will also be held following the oral sessions and
will feature posters from the invited speakers and accepted contributing
posters. The organization committee consists of notable people in the field of
magnetism and neural engineering. This is a travel request is to support US
students to participate in the conference. Students will be able to present
posters and improve their presentation skills. There will also be opportunities
to interact with the leading experts in the field of neurostimulation and
magnetics through various sessions. The organizers of the conference are
particularly encouraging women and underrepresented minorities to participate.
MagCAN 2023 will play an important role in the education of young scientists and
researchers in a fast-moving and high impact fields of brain disorders. The
students will learn both fundamental as well as highly advanced concepts in
neurostimulation and magnetics related technologies through talks delivered by
the leading experts and poster presentations. This proposal will help US
graduate and undergraduate students to present and participate in the conference
and broaden their perspective in an interdisciplinary field.

The technical topics for Magnetic Technologies and Clinical Applications in
Neuroscience (MagCAN Conference) include: Neurostimulation based on Magnetic and
Related Technologies addressing Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS), Micromagnetic and
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (MMS & amp TMS), Transcranial Direct Current
Stimulation (tDCS), Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS), Spinal Cord Stimulation
(SCS), Neuromodulation for chronic pain management, Neuromodulation for movement
disorders, Closed-Loop Neuromodulation; Neuron Sensing based on Spintronics and
Related Technologies addressing Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs), Implantable
Neuroelectronic Devices, Electroencephalography (EEG), Magnetoencephalography
(MEG), Neural Decoding, Neural Signal Processing, Neuron Networks; and Brain
Inspired Technologies based on Magnetic and Spintronic Materials addressing
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Neuromorphic Computing, Cognitive Computing,
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs), Biomimetic Sensors. The goal is to leverage
the knowledge gained from these advances in magnetic and spintronic research and
their related principles to develop innovative and novel concepts in neuro-
electronics and neuro-technologies that mimic the workings of the brain. Invited
talks, contributed talks and posters will be presented in the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.