* 2336094
* Conference: Windows on the Universe: Establishing the Infrastructure for a Collaborative Multi-messenger Ecosystem
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Charles Mattias Mountain, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 01/31/2024
* USD 99,453.00

The proposed conference, to be held on October 16-18 in Tucson AZ, will bring
together government agencies and expert scientists in the field of Multi-
Messenger Astronomy (MMA) electromagnetic follow-up. Sessions will focus on
identifying pathways that increase the coordination of follow-up MMA campaigns,
reducing operational redundancy across the network of ground- and space-based
observatories, and fostering collaboration in the MMA community. The community
will be invited to review the current state of follow-up resources, report on
existing collaborations and partnerships, and identify potential obstacles to
success. The conference will develop concrete ideas that will be disseminated
within a public white paper. The findings of the conference will help develop
the scope of an FY2024 NSF solicitation dedicated to funding coordination
infrastructure and efforts among the follow-up community. This proposal requests
funding to host the workshop and to support participant attendance across
multiple fields in the MMA community. All conference participants are required
to read and agree to the ISEE code of conduct that outlines expectations for
behavior and confidential and non-confidential reporting options for anyone who
experiences misconduct.

With gravitational-wave and particle detectors now routinely observing events
through new windows upon our dynamic Universe, we have entered the era of Multi-
Messenger Astronomy. We have advanced resources to both identify the
electromagnetic counterparts of Multi-Messenger events and then monitor and
characterize their evolution. This activity requires coordination of the full
range of available telescopes and their capabilities. While the scientific
potential is staggering, future campaigns will be resource-intensive, expensive,
and require considerable coordination, collaboration, and communication among
the communities in order to deliver effective science. Motivated to foster
effective Multi-Messenger follow-up, Organizers will invite the international
observing community to participate in an open workshop. Organizers will ask the
workshop participants to conceptualize community strategies and methods of
tackling data sharing - i.e., telescope pointing plans, both planned and
executed, observation outcomes, and calibrated data etc. Furthermore, we ask the
workshop participants to identify pathways which will incentivize coordination,
collaboration, partnership, and collegiality within the MMA community. This
proposal requests funding to host a three-day workshop, limited in number to no
more than 90 people. The requested funding would support the costs of a meeting
venue (including hybrid capability, provide travel support for a subset of the
participants, and meals for all attendees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.