* 2336226
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Planning the future of the Fire and Smoke Model Evaluation Experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2025
* Timothy Brown, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 10/31/2025
* USD 181,218.00

Fire is a critical component of many natural systems and responds to and impacts
human activities in multiple ways. The Fire and Smoke Model Evaluation
Experiment (FASMEE) is a multi-agency effort designed to provide the
observations necessary to evaluate and advance fire and smoke modeling systems.
Field experiments will continue to be conducted using large prescribed fires
targeting thick forest and brush environments burned to produce high-intensity
fires with large smoke plumes, while also achieving a positive ecological
outcome. To conduct these experiments, a comprehensive scientific study and data
management plan is needed. This project will support two scientific workshops to
allow the development of up-to-date study and data plans for future years of
FASMEE. This project will 1) update the study design, data and work plans,
including the incorporation of recent modeling developments; 2) broaden the
participation of under-represented groups in all aspects of FASMEE; and 3)
invite scientists from allied fields of study not previously engaged to develop
hypotheses and questions that participants can investigate with a coordinated,
interdisciplinary approach.

Prior multi-agency workshops identified the need for integrated observational
datasets to drive improvements across the range of tools used to forecast fire
behavior, movement, and effects (including post-fire), as well as smoke
chemistry, movement, and impacts. Following these workshops, in consultation
with the Joint Fire Science Program and multiple agencies, FASMEE was
established with the objective of evaluating and advancing operational fire and
smoke models, derived tools, and underlying scientific understanding through a
coordinated library of fire observations. The selection of FASMEE as a US Forest
Service Research and Development Priority Project in 2021, and the development
of a partnership with NASA in 2022 to refine suborbital measurements for fire
science and management has advanced the prospect for achieving the scope of
impacts originally envisioned in FASMEE. This project builds on those successes
to update and potentially expand the FASMEE study plan through two planned
workshops. The primary purpose of the first workshop is to ensure that the
suites of activities encompassed by FASMEE address current questions of
importance to cooperating agencies and the science and modeling communities. The
workshop participant list will include current and prospective FASMEE
cooperating researchers representing universities, federal and state agencies,
and non-governmental organizations. The second workshop will be focused on
architecture for dataset integration, delivery, and archiving. Participants will
include a FASMEE data management team and input from the FASMEE science
discipline leadership group. Output from these workshops will include detailed
study and data plans that will scientifically guide the field experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.