* 2336404
* Conference: NSF EPSCoR National Conference: Connecting and Collaborating to Keep Science Flowing
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Matthew Andrews, University of Nebraska
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 765,465.00

Nebraska EPSCoR will host the 28th NSF EPSCoR National Conference in Omaha,
Nebraska. The conference theme is "Know. Grow. Flow. Connect and Collaborate to
Keep Science Flowing," where the conference will focus on engaging participants
to gain a better understanding of scientific innovation, economic development,
and stakeholder engagement in research capacity building. Conference sessions
will include topics on applying convergence science to protect resources,
developing collaborations for broadening participation in STEM, overcoming
research challenges, advancing jurisdictions' economic development via research,
and growing professional development of project participants. The conference
will also serve as a platform for attendees to learn more about NSF EPSCoR and
other NSF funding opportunities.

The 28th NSF EPSCoR National Conference will engage audiences from different
research areas and geographic jurisdictions. Target audiences will include state
legislators, congressional representatives, federal employees, jurisdictional
project directors and administrators from the 28 EPSCoR states and territories,
members of state EPSCoR committees, and scientists, junior faculty members, and
students. The conference program will include platform and poster sessions. The
University of Nebraska Lincoln Bureau of Sociological Research will conduct
evaluation on behalf of Nebraska EPSCoR. This conference will explore new ideas,
build collaborations, and gain new skills will result in increased research and
education capacity in EPSCoR jurisdictions across the nation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.