* 2336000
* Lattice Reduction in Cryptography and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Daniel Martin, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2026
* USD 219,148.00

Modern cryptography allows us to send private information online by rendering it
unreadable except to those who can solve some underlying hard math problem (for
which the intended receiver has a helpful "secret key"). But now there is a
concern that many commonly used hard problems can be solved efficiently by
rapidly developing quantum computers. This has prompted a search for problems
that resist quantum attacks, and one promising candidate is that of finding
short vectors in a lattice from a given basis. Indeed, there are many newly
proposed cryptosystems whose security hinges upon the hardness of lattice
reduction, specifically ideal lattice reduction, where the lattice corresponds
to the so-called Minkowski embedding of an ideal in a number field. It is at
this intersection between cryptography and number theory where a large part of
this project lies. The PI is investigating a new algorithm for finding short
vectors in ideal lattices as well as a separate family of lattices that might be
efficient to work with (like ideal lattices) yet possess a hardness guarantee
(unlike ideal lattices). These pursuits have the potential to further our
progress toward a post-quantum secure cyberspace, and they come with many coding
and computational components that provide opportunities for student involvement.
The new algorithm under investigation generalizes a complex continued fraction
algorithm recently introduced by the PI, which is novel in that it functions
over non-Euclidean imaginary quadratic rings. The generalized (to arbitrary
number fields) version finds nonzero elements of an input ideal that have a
relatively small absolute field norm. This reduces the task of finding short
ideal lattice vectors to the task of approximating with Dirichlet's log unit
lattice, which is independent of the input ideal. Both the speed and output
quality of the PI's algorithm depend crucially on an initial choice of some
finite set of integers from the associated number field. The existence of a
"good" initial set likely depends on the field, and the PI intends to determine
which fields are more amenable to the algorithm than others. Multiquadratic and
cyclotomic fields are of particular interest. (It is already known that a
theoretical quantum computer can efficiently find ideal elements that are small
with respect to the field norm; the PI's algorithm is classical, not quantum.)
Another main goal of this project is to scrutinize the potential use of
"simultaneous approximation lattices" for cryptography. The PI has shown that
the problem of finding short vectors in an arbitrary lattice reduces to finding
short vectors in simultaneous approximation lattices. That is a hardness
guarantee not currently possessed by ideal lattices. The benefit of simultaneous
approximation versus generic lattices is the number of integers needed to define
them: just one more than the dimension of the lattice. This may lead to
increased efficiency for lattice-based cryptosystems, but the PI must first
determine how much larger the integers defining a simultaneous approximation
lattice must be in order to maintain the same level of security as one of its
generic counterparts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.