* 2336354
* RAPID: Is Biomass Mobilization at Ice-covered Lake Fryxell, Antarctica reaching a Critical Threshold?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Tyler Mackey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 159,765.00

Perennially ice-covered lakes in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica contain
abundant microbial mats, and the export of this mat material can fertilize the
surrounding polar desert ecosystems. These desert soils are one of the most
organic-poor on earth yet host a community of microorganisms. Microbial mat
material is exported from the shallow, gas-supersaturated regions of the lakes
when gas bubbles form in the mats, lifting them to the ice cover; the perennial
ice cover maintains gas supersaturation. These mats freeze in and are exported
to the surrounding soils through ice ablation. The largest seasonal decrease and
thinnest ice cover in the history of Lake Fryxell was recorded during the
2022-2023 Austral summer. In this thin ice year, the water column dissolved
oxygen increased over prior observations, and the lake bottom surface area with
bubble-disrupted mat was more than double that observed in 1980-1981 and
2006-2007. This work will constrain mat mobilization within and out of Lake
Fryxell in the McMurdo Dry Valleys during a period of unprecedented ice thinning
to understand how future changing regional climate and predicted seasonal loss
of lake ice cover will affect nutrient transport in the McMurdo Dry Valleys.
Exceptional years of mat export are hypothesized to have the most significant
impact on nutrient export to soil communities; variability in mat liftoff may
thus play a role in the McMurdo Dry Valleys ecosystem response to changing
climate.

The perennial ice cover of lakes in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica
modulates the transfer of gasses, organic and inorganic material, between the
lakes and surrounding soils. The export of biomass in these lakes is driven by
the supersaturation of atmospheric gasses in the shallow regions under perennial
ice cover. Gas bubbles nucleate in the mats, producing buoyancy that lifts them
to the bottom of the ice, where they freeze in and are exported to the
surrounding soils through ice ablation. These mats represent a significant
source of biomass and nutrients to the McMurdo Dry Valleys soils, which are
among the most organic-poor on earth. Nevertheless, this biomass remains
unaccounted for in organic carbon cycling models for the McMurdo Dry Valleys.
Ice cover data from the McMurdo Dry Valleys Long Term Ecological Research
Project shows that the ice thickness has undergone cyclical variation over the
last 40 years, reaching the largest seasonal decrease and thinnest ice-cover in
the recorded history of Lake Fryxell during the 2022-2023 austral summer.
Preliminary work shows that the surface area with mat liftoff at Lake Fryxell is
more than double that observed in 1980-1981 and 2006-2007, coinciding with this
unprecedented thinning of the ice-cover and an increase in the water column
dissolved O2. This research will constrain biomass mobilization within and out
of Lake Fryxell in the McMurdo Dry Valleys during a period of unprecedented ice
thinning. The researchers hypothesize that a thinner ice cover promotes more
biomass mobilization by 1) stimulating additional production of gas bubbles from
the existing gas-supersaturated waters during summertime photosynthesis to
create microbial mat liftoff and 2) promoting mat liftoff in deeper, thicker
microbial mats, and 3) that this biomass can be traced into the soils by
characterizing its chemistry and modeling the most likely depositional settings.
This work will use microbial mat samples, lake dissolved oxygen and
photosynthetically active radiation data and underwater drone footage
documenting the depth distribution of liftoff mats in January 2023, and long-
term ice cover thickness, photosynthetically active radiation, and lake level
change data collected by the McMurdo Dry Valleys Long Term Ecological Research
Project to test hypotheses 1-3. The dispersal of the liftoff mat exposed at Lake
Fryxell surface will be modeled using a Hybrid Single-Particle Lagrangian
Integrated Trajectory (HYSPLIT) model. Exceptional liftoff years like the
present are hypothesized to have the most significant impact on the soil
communities as the rates of soil respiration increase with the addition of
carbon. However, continued warming in the next 10 - 40 years may result in
seasonal loss of the ice cover and cessation of liftoff mat export.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.