* 2336793
* Conference: Fourth Biennial Meeting of the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics (PNW Section)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Donna Calhoun, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 12,916.00

Western Washington University (Bellingham, Washington) will host the Pacific
Northwest Section of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM)
meeting October 13-15, 2023, the conference website is:
https://sites.google.com/view/siampnw23/home. This vertically integrated meeting
brings together individuals from undergraduates to distinguished researchers at
universities, national labs, and industry, mainly from the Pacific Northwest.
These conference participants, working at the forefront of applied and
computational mathematics have expertise in many of the key priority areas of
the Division of Mathematical Sciences. This meeting will (1) provide a forum for
the exchange of recent advances in applied and computational mathematics and
their interdisciplinary applications in the applied sciences and engineering,
(2) foster new, and reinforce existing collaborations between applied and
computational mathematicians working in the Pacific Northwest region, (3)
inspire undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers to pursue careers
in applied and computational mathematics, and (4) encourage participation from
individuals from under-represented groups and smaller regional colleges. Talks
during the three day meeting will be organized into parallel blocks of thematic
sessions (e.g. “mini-symposium”) consisting of four-five 20-minute talks. A
total of about 80 talks are expected. Four distinguished plenary speakers will
deliver hour-long talks on broader timely topics. Coffee breaks, catered lunch
and a poster session and reception will facilitate an active exchange of ideas
between conference attendees. This year, we expect thematic topics on many
traditional areas of applied and computational mathematics as well as topics in
emerging areas of large scale optimization, machine learning, artificial
intelligence, data science, energy sustainability, and challenges of big-data.
This award will support student travel and local expenses to the meeting,
partially support plenary speaker travel and the poster reception.

SIAM is the largest US national organization representing applied mathematicians
from both academics and industry. Like the SIAM Annual meeting, and its
international counterpart the International Congress on Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (ICIAM), our upcoming Pacific Northwest SIAM Section Biennial
Meeting will be interdisciplinary and will have thematic sessions on a wide
range of topics showcasing the diversity of research areas in applied math in
the Pacific Northwest. The SIAM-PNW section reflects the larger SIAM
organization in that computational mathematics is well-represented in the
research areas of its members. Moreover, because the SIAM-PNW has such as large
overlap with the Pacific Northwest Numerical Analysis Seminar (held in alternate
years), and the Pacific Northwest has such a high concentration of high-tech
industry that relies on advanced computational methods, we expect to have a
significant number of thematic sessions on topics of particular interest to the
computational mathematics communities. Gauging from scientific content of
previous meetings, we can expect to have talks and mini-symposium sessions on
numerical linear algebra, optimization, novel numerical methods for solving
partial differential equations, image processing, statistics, inverse methods
and data assimilation, high performance computing, computational algebra and
geometry, and numerical modeling and simulation in the geosciences. The plenary
speakers for this year's meeting have experise in these areas, as well as in
emerging areas of convex optimization, online algorithms, adversarial robustness
and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.