* 2336057
* RAISE: AraOptical 2.0: MISO Free-Space Optical Communications for Long-Distance, High-Capacity X-Haul Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ozdal Boyraz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Rural towns are usually tens of miles or even farther away from one another, and
many rural towns and agriculture farms are far away from their nearest Internet
backbone connection points. Thus high-capacity, long-distance wireless x-haul
networks serve as important middle-mile solutions for connecting rural towns and
agriculture farms with one another and with the Internet backbone. However, the
existing practice has been mostly limited to microwave bands, and these
microwave x-haul systems tends to have limited communication capacity. Free-
space optical communications (FSOC) have been explored for high-capacity
wireless x-haul networks. However, the existing practice in long-distance FSOC
has been limited to inter-satellite data transfers, and terrestrial FSOC has
been limited to short-distance communications between close-by buildings. To
enable FSOC-based long-distance, high-capacity terrestrial x-haul networking,
this project will develop robust Multi Input Single Output (MISO) FSOC
prototypes that are expected to become foundational components of rural
broadband solutions. The enabled real-time data-intensive rural applications,
such as agriculture automation and XR-based rural education, are expected to
have transformative impact on rural industries and communities.

The proposed MISO FSOC prototype will leverage spatial, polarization, and
wavelength diversity to mitigate the impact of beam wandering and scintillation
in long-distance terrestrial FSOC, and it will be tested for transmission
distances from 1km to 10km and beyond by using different aperture sizes, spatial
distances, and polarization states. This project will also develop the
AraOptical 2.0 programmable networking system whose controller manages the
control, monitoring, and data planes of the MISO FSOC system to optimize its
operation and to integrate it into a holistic x-haul architecture. An AraOptical
2.0 link will be deployed in ARA PAWR (one of NSFâ€™s advanced wireless testbeds),
and, leveraging the four-season weather in Central Iowa, this project will
conduct extensive measurement campaigns to investigate the behavior of MISO FSOC
links together with co-located mmWave and microwave links, and it will develop
machine learning models and optimal controls for MISO FSOC systems and long-
distance, high-capacity x-haul networks in general. This project will generate
first-of-its-kind real-world measurement data and models of long-distance FSOC
systems under different weather conditions and experiment profiles, and they
will serve as important tools for the broader research and education community.
This project will create exciting opportunities for broadening participation in
computing, and it will help enrich undergraduate and graduate research and
education as well as K-12 outreach.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.