* 2336183
* Conference: Broadening Access to Research Opportunities in South Central EPSCoR States
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Andrea Duina, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 83,387.00

This project supports holding a conference that will broaden the reach of NSF-
funded research across five states located in the south-central region of the
United States that have historically received less than average NSF funding.
Principal Investigators (PIs) from different types of institutions across the
states of Kansas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana, and Mississippi will be invited
to participate and will be given the opportunity to gain new knowledge on how to
develop well-designed research projects and craft strong research proposals that
will enhance their competitiveness in securing NSF grants. NSF officers
representing the four different clusters within the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) will also attend the conference and will provide
information on the different types of funding opportunities available at the NSF
and insights into the grant proposal application process.

The conference will be held at Hendrix College, a small liberal arts college and
predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI) located in Conway, Arkansas.
Invitations will be extended to PIs from other PUIs as well as Minority-Serving
Institutions (MSIs), Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and
Research Institutions (R1s, R2s). A particular focus will be placed on ensuring
strong representation of women investigators and investigators from groups
historically under-represented in STEM. During the conference, participants will
have ample opportunities to interact with each other and will be encouraged to
explore possible collaborations that could enhance cross-institutional
connections and lead to stronger grant proposal applications. The overall impact
of the conference will be quite extensive as it will not only directly benefit
the participants, but it will be further amplified as PIs will likely share
their newly acquired knowledge with colleagues at their home institutions and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.