* 2336001
* Travel Grant: Urban Tech Academy meeting on electrified multimodal transportation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/15/2023,09/30/2024
* Anna Scaglione, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal funding will support travel grants for graduate students from US
universities to attend the Urban Tech Academy & Summit, taking place from
November 13th to 15th, 2023, at the Cornell Tech campus in New York City. The
summit aims to address urban issues through technology and engineering ventures,
with a specific focus on "sustainable cities" this year. In the new format for
the meeting, one day will be added to the program (called the Urban Tech Academy
Day) to expand its educational outreach and scope. The Urban Tech Academy Day
will include talks and discussions on emerging problems that the research
community needs to address from leading experts. The specific Intellectual Merit
of the discussion will be on multi-modal transportation and its electrification,
critical for sustainable cities. Current research fails to holistically address
the coupling between various transportation modes and their dependence on
electric power infrastructure. Researchers will discuss how cyber-physical
system models can help optimize and operate these heterogeneous charging systems
effectively in different urban environments, promoting resilience, fairness,
efficiency, and rapid decarbonization.

The Broader Impacts section emphasizes the significance of solutions to urban
challenges, including housing costs, decarbonization, climate change, and
resource distribution. The Urban Tech Academy Day's synergy with the summit is
expected to broaden its impact. While the NSF funding primarily supports student
participation, the involvement of top researchers in the electrified multi-modal
transportation field and the co-occurrence of the two meetings will naturally
attract industry stakeholders, startups, and institutional players in New York
City. The goal is to foster innovation, engage various stakeholders, and provide
solutions for pressing urban challenges.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.