* 2337184
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: CET: The Dissolution of Li-ion Batteries and Recycling of their Precious Components.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Douglas Genna, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 149,684.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Battery technology is essential to our modern way of life: it powers everything
from cellphones to pacemakers to, more recently, vehicles. The rapidly growing
demand for batteries has led to a dramatic increase in battery waste.
Furthermore, increasing demand has necessitated an increase in mining minerals
important for batteries, often from politically unstable locations. Battery
recycling holds promise to address both problems: recycled battery waste reduces
the extent of battery waste and recovers the raw materials needed to make new
batteries. However, current battery recycling methods use harsh chemicals and
designer processes to recover the most valuable components of battery waste,
limiting both scalability and environmental sustainability. With this Clean
Energy Technology (CET) EAGER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, investigators at SUNY
at Albany and Youngstown State University study a new method for battery
recycling that is more sustainable and more efficient. The method takes
advantage of liquids that interact strongly with the materials to pull them out
of battery waste, regardless of the original battery design. Those materials can
then be purified using a combination of adsorption – a process by which the
targeted elements selectively stick to a high-surface area powder – and
electrodeposition, a process by which the remaining elements are individually
removed from the initial liquid using an electric current. One challenge of the
project is that the liquids need to strongly interact with the battery waste
materials, but not break down the material that purifies the waste stream. The
outcome of this project will significantly impact the battery industry, the
environment, and the national security of the United States. It offers a way to
reduce our dependence on unreliable sources for battery materials, protect the
environment from excessive battery waste, and help to ensure the continued
growth of the domestic battery industry and, additionally, provides state-of-
the-art research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The rapid rise of battery technology has led to a critical need for new
approaches to battery recycling in order to both recover precious battery metals
and reduce battery waste. The long-term goal of this Clean Energy Technology
(CET) EAGER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, is to develop a system capable of
isolating all individual metallic components of spent lithium ion batteries
(LIBs) from a common waste stream. Researchers at SUNY at Albany and Youngstown
State University take advantage of solvents capable of oxidizing and
coordinating to these metal components to remove them from mechanically
processed battery waste (black mass). After dissolution, the metal components
are separated by a combination of adsorption and electrodeposition. For
adsorption, new metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are design specifically to
isolate alkali metals (e.g., Li) through reversible and selective interactions.
Individual transition metals are collected by electrodeposition, which allows
isolation of each transition metal based on the redox characteristics of the
parent transition metal complex in solution. This investigation is expected to
lead to significant scientific insights and advances: first, mechanisms for
metal dissolution in coordinating solvents are elucidated, enabling the
discovery of solvents more environmentally benign than those currently used for
this purpose. Second, knowledge about reversible adsorption processes for cation
adsorption in MOFs is advanced. Third, selective transition metal
electrodeposition, in combination with the other results from this work, enable
the collection of the most valuable components of batteries of any composition.
The study is expected to have broader impacts in the areas of mineral mining and
extraction, recycling of rare-earth-containing materials, and energy efficient
metal ion separation and purification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.