* 2337766
* CAREER: Understanding Early Language: Evidence from Blind Infants &amp; Deaf Infants
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Elika Bergelson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 55,847.00

Language learning is a robust process that relies on a child's capacity for
learning from the sights, sounds, and experiences in the environment. However,
for the roughly 200,000 young children in the US with a visual or hearing
disability, language learning proceeds differently, and there are basic
questions about the roles of hearing and seeing in language development for
which we have no answers. Discovering answers to these questions is critical for
supporting individuals with hearing or vision impairments, and those with
language delays or deficits, and also for improving the health and educational
outcomes of all children. Children who are deaf or hard of hearing and do not
receive sign language input or assistive technology (e.g., cochlear implants)
show large delays in acquiring language skills. When such children learn sign
language through normal visual modality, though, they appear to develop normal
language abilities. This suggests that vision can provide a "path" to language.
At the same time, other evidence indicates that vision is not strictly necessary
for learners with normal hearing, as blind adults have largely normal language.
Indeed, these individuals learn color and vision-related words ("see") similarly
to sighted peers. Neurologically, their 'language' brain areas work quite
similarly, whereas 'vision' areas reorganize. Unlike deaf infants who receive
cochlear implants or sign language input, individuals who are blind do not
generally receive (nor appear to require) additional input to support language.
This is despite the fact that, in typical development, visual experiences have
been linked to language learning (e.g. seeing where parents are looking or
pointing). This project seeks to provide critical evidence concerning how the
brain rewires when infants are born unable to hear or to see, and how early
brain development enables language acquisition. This project also has two
educational objectives that will increase science knowledge among the lay public
and schoolchildren, while building the communication, research, and pedagogical
skills of tomorrow's scientists. Across five studies, this project will examine
the knowledge and processing of language in infants who are blind, deaf/hard of
hearing, or typically-developing. Given that infants understand words months
before producing them, this work focuses on early word comprehension,
particularly on words' sounds and meanings, using behavioral, neural, and
observational approaches. Real-time language processing will be measured by
tracking eye movements and brain waves in response to language stimuli. In
another studies, word learning will be tracked through the analysis of
naturalistic recordings of parent-child interactions. Together, the results of
these approaches will provide critical insights into how children learn and grow
with the types of language input they receive, as well as how to improve
language learning in special populations. The educational component of this
project includes a multi-tiered research communication plan, along with a set of
after-school enrichment activities for local K-2nd graders. These activities
will focus on teaching students about sensory organs in an engaging,
experiential format, with simple demonstrations to facilitate STEM excitement
and learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.