* 2337356
* I-Corps: A conductive scaffold with a tunable mechanical and biochemical environment for spinal cord injury repair
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Peter Galie, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a therapeutic technology to repair spinal cord injury. Currently,
there is no treatment capable of fully restoring function following spinal cord
injury. Bioengineered scaffolds to repair the spinal cord are currently being
evaluated in human patients in ongoing clinical trials. However, achieving
sufficient neural tissue growth to facilitate functional recovery has yet to be
achieved in scaffolds implanted in small animal models. The proposed technology
is designed to address the challenges of current scaffold designs by using a
3D-printed (prefabricated) scaffold surgically delivered to the site of the
injury that may restore function in patients of spinal cord injury. Spinal cord
injury is a devastating problem that affects thousands of patients each year in
the United States with annual healthcare costs of nearly $10 billion per year.
The proposed scaffold technology may advance both scientific and technological
understanding related to spinal cord injury as well as improve spinal injury
outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a conductive bioink that
enables the fabrication of scaffolds for repairing spinal cord injury. Current
scaffolds are limited in their ability to tune material properties to increase
infiltration and outgrowth of host axons. The proposed scaffold is 3D-printed
using digital light processing and features channels oriented in the rostral-
caudal direction lined with neurogenic peptides, providing orthogonal control
over topological features and cell-matrix interactions to foster axon
infiltration and outgrowth to overcome previous limitations. In addition, the
bioink material exhibits conductive properties that may enhance the efficacy of
exercise-based rehabilitation to potentially restore function in patients.
Preliminary studies in a rat model of spinal cord injury demonstrate substantial
infiltration of host axons from these scaffolds. The overall goal for the
proposed scaffolds is to replace the regenerative strategies currently under
evaluation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.