* 2337595
* RUI: Unilateral Lasing in Underwater Animals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Nathan Dawson, Florida Polytechnic University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2026
* USD 60,523.00

Nontechnical Description: Some of the most brilliant colors in nature are not
caused by light-absorbing dyes or pigments, but rather from the very microscopic
structure of objects. Many tropical fish display beautiful iridescent colors
through the interference of reflected light waves from small planar structures
inside specialized cells called iridophores. These reflective structures have
similarities to modern microscopic laser technologies. Instead of reflecting
light, iridophore cells can be infused with fluorescent molecules and emit
light. The structures inside the iridophores cause light to bounce around for
long periods of time which causes the feedback necessary for laser emission at
the microscopic scale. The project’s goals are to better understand laser light
scattering and emission from iridescent biological structures and use this
information as a tool to gain new insights surrounding the microscopic
structures found in some specialized cells. To this end, the underlying physics
of laser light emitted from the iridophores found in two different fish species
will be probed using light-based experimental methods as well as atom-scale
tipped cantilevers and beams of electrons. Models will be developed to gain a
deeper understanding of the observed phenomena. Understanding laser emission
from biological media can potentially impact the fields of biology, laser
physics, materials science, and medicine. Research opportunities, critical to
training future scientists and engineers, will be created specifically for
undergraduate and high school students through this proposal.

Technical Description: The freshwater fish, Paracheirodon innesi, and the marine
fish invasive to Hawaiian reefs, Cephalopholis argus, have specialized
chromatophore cells called iridophores that exhibit iridescent colors caused by
the interference of reflected light. The scientifically verified multilayer
guanine/cytoplasm structures in Paracheirodon innesi that cause the colorful
appearance can act as a multilayer distributed feedback laser architecture. Gain
will be introduced into the cytoplasm layers through diffusion of fluorescent
chromophores with high quantum yields that are passed across the lipid bilayer
membrane through various methods. The laser threshold behavior and slope
efficiencies will be studied in the iridophores of both species as well as the
laser emission’s tunability from induced physical changes in the photonic
crystal structures. The guanine platelet dimensions will determine the structure
of individual guanine crystal platelets, and transmission electron microscopy
techniques will image cross sections of the photonic crystal structures.
Physics-based phenomenological models will be developed from physical, electron
beam, linear optical, and laser measurements. The laser emission results will be
tested against finite-difference time-domain simulations using cavity
information gained from atomic force microscopy and transmission electron
microscopy studies. The emission characteristics in both fish species will be
compared with established results for inorganic, organic, and biological lasers.
From a fundamental perspective, new laser architectures for tunable lasers could
result from this study of lasing in complex biological architectures. From a
systems perspective, the investigation will further our understanding of the
production and manipulation of coherent light in animals. From an engineering
perspective, new biocompatible and/or biogenic designs for microscopic lasers
will be realized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.