* 2337074
* EAGER: Flexible and compressible e-Skin integrated with soft magnetic coil based ultra-thin actuator and touch sensor for robotics applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Ravinder Dahiya, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2025
* USD 229,680.00

Replication of Natural Skin characteristics is critically important for smooth
operations of Robots. The touch sensory feedback from skin can allow robots to
help elderly with daily tasks, and to safely interact with real world objects
(e.g., grasping of fragile objects). Likewise, skin on surgical tools can allow
clinicians to remotely feel the body parts to enable new research directions in
digital health. To address the need various electronic skins (e-Skin) have been
developed in recent years by integrating different types of touch sensors on
flexible substrates. However, the e-Skin variants thus far have neglected the
fact that natural skin has receptors/sensors embedded in soft tissues that are
tightly coupled with muscles. With touch sensors alone, it is not possible for
e-Skin to match the functionalities of natural skin and therefore seamless
coupling between the receptors (sensors) and muscles (actuators) is much needed.
To address this longstanding shortcoming in the e-Skin research, this project
will evaluate the feasibility of a soft and compressible e-Skin that will have
touch sensor integrated with soft electromagnetic coil-based flexible ultra-thin
actuator. While advancing the research, this project will train graduate
students in the interdisciplinary area of robotics, materials science,
electromagnetics, sensing, and advanced manufacturing. Outreach efforts will
include participation of community college students during summer to enrich
their education and careers by leveraging the existing Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) site through Pathways program. The impact of this
multidisciplinary research will be seen in the near term in academia, industry,
and social enterprises.

The project will evaluate the feasibility of novel device that will have touch
sensor integrated with soft electromagnetic coil underneath to have both sensing
and actuation functions. Various designs and shapes of coils, materials for soft
sensors, and the fabrications approach will be evaluated for potential scale up
for large area e-Skin. The proposed devices will be characterized for controlled
or programmed thickness mode expansion and compression by allowing suitable
current to flow through the soft electromagnetic coil to obtain magnetic field
of desired intensity and polarity. The project plans to demonstrate a
challenging aspect of controlled variation of e-Skin thickness by identifying a
structure that allows the same while also having sensors for touch feedback.
Further the project will demonstrate the feasibility of seamless integration of
multiple devices, in soft and flexible form factors with tunable
stiffness/softness and shape morphing capability in e-skin. The proposed
foundational work will lead to a new generation of smart and complex systems
such as soft robots with human-like emotions and physical abilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.