* 2337930
* EAGER-QAC-QSA: Quantum Algorithms for Correlated Electron-Phonon System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Yao Wang, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 108,042.00

Non-Technical Summary

In the past few decades, many unconventional quantum phenomena have been
discovered in materials and molecules. These quantum many-body phenomena are
expected to have revolutionary applications in functional materials, quantum
information, drug discovery, and catalyst design. However, due to the complexity
originating from interacting particles, a comprehensive theoretical
understanding of the physics behind these phenomena is impractical even with the
help of state-of-the-art supercomputers. That lack of profound understanding, in
turn, hinders the design and application of these phenomena.

This EAGER award supports research and education on developing algorithms to
address these quantum phenomena, with a focus on materials with strong
interactions between the electrons and the vibrations of the atoms in the solid.
Motivated by recent theoretical progress on this type of interaction, this
project aims to develop a hybrid algorithm that takes advantage of both
classical computers and existing quantum computers. In addition, the research
team will also apply this new algorithm to address several specific open
questions in quantum materials, including superconductivity and nonequilibrium
states. This project will provide both a new class of hybrid algorithms
extensible for various quantum many-body phenomena and a theoretical guideline
for designing functional materials.

This project will contribute to the education and professional development of a
broad pipeline of students and scholars. As a subject related to physics,
computer science, chemistry, and materials science, the research outcomes will
be incorporated into interdisciplinary courses. The collaboration between
Clemson University and Harvard University will allow for the exchange of
educational experiences with cultural and geographical diversity. Undergraduate
students will be involved in the research project through summer internships or
workshops, with the particular involvement of underrepresented minorities.

Technical Summary

The quantitative understanding of quantum many-body systems, especially systems
with both strong electron-electron and electron-phonon interactions, is the key
to many areas of science and technology. Due to the exponential growth of their
Hilbert space sizes with the number of particles, a satisfactory solution for
correlated systems is not accessible in classical computers and requires quantum
computing techniques. Recent progress in hybrid quantum-classical algorithms
constitutes a promising new direction, but the existing framework restricts
their application to quantum magnets or pure fermionic systems. Therefore, the
demands and difficulties motivate the development of new quantum algorithms.

This EAGER award supports research and education on developing a hybrid quantum-
classical algorithm applicable to correlated electron-phonon systems, based on
recent progress in the variational quantum eigensolver and the variational non-
Gaussian approach. This project includes two specific goals: (i) to develop a
high-accuracy quantum algorithm suitable for the ground-state calculation of
electron-phonon systems; (ii) to extend the algorithm for the evaluation of
dynamics and excitation spectrum. In addition to algorithm development, both
goals include applications for solving cutting-edge problems in condensed matter
physics, such as superconductivity and nonequilibrium states of matter.

This research will advance quantum algorithms and enable applications for
systems with infinitely large Hilbert spaces. It will provide a unique tool to
simulate the equilibrium and nonequilibrium properties of relevant quantum many-
body systems. Moreover, the simulations based on the new algorithm will provide
physical insights into understanding a few experimental phenomena, including
high-Tc superconductivity and photoinduced emergent phases. These insights are
crucial for the engineering and design of functional materials.

This collaborative research will provide a novel educational experience for
undergraduate and graduate students at Clemson University and Harvard
University. By incorporating the latest research into courses and seminars, the
impact will also extend to students who are not directly involved in this
project. The postdoc partially supported by this grant will receive career
training in both scientific and practical skills. Through summer research and
workshop activities, this project will improve science education among diverse
students, particularly underrepresented minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.