* 2337221
* EAGER: CET: Functionalized Graphene for Sustainable Rare Earth Metal Separation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Robin Macaluso, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

1 NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Rare-earth (RE) metals are critical components to past,
present and future technologies and industries. RE metals are pervasive in
society and pivotal in the growth and development of clean energy, defense, and
even information technology applications, including electric vehicles, wind
turbines, or communication devices (smartphones, satellites). As of today, only
a handful countries around the world control the supply for these critical
resources. Furthermore, current RE separation processes are environmentally
damaging and highly energy intensive. It is therefore crucial and urgent to
secure US leadership and autonomy in RE supply in a sustainable manner. With
this Clean Energy Technology (CET) EAGER award, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, researchers
at the University of Texas Arlington address these challenges through
fundamental investigations to create new materials to extract and separate RE
metals using nanomaterials, including graphene. They prepare novel, versatile
graphene-organic ligand hybrid materials to sustainably separate RE metals,
thereby diversifying the RE supply chain and meeting national and global demands
for RE. The multidisciplinary team comprises chemists and materials scientists
that work in synergy to effectively advance the field of RE metal separation.
The project also trains undergraduate and graduate students to contribute to the
development of a future STEM workforce.

2 TECHNICAL SUMMARY Rare Earth (RE) elements (Sc, Y, Lanthanides) are critical
components in emerging technologies ranging from wind turbines and electric
vehicle motors to defense applications. However, current industrial mining and
separation processes rely on decades-old technologies that do not meet today’s
standards in terms of efficiency and sustainability, and therefore, cannot
sustain the growing global demand for RE elements. With this Clean Energy
Technology (CET) EAGER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, researchers at the
University of Texas Arlington leverage the chemical reactivity and mechanical
strength of graphene with the separation capabilities of organic ligands (e.g.
Diglycolamides) to design innovative hybrid nanomaterials that effectively
extract RE metals through environmentally sustainable processes. The
researchers’ synergistic activities combine theoretical modeling efforts with
synthetic chemistry and analytical characterization techniques to functionalize
various forms of graphene, creating hybrid materials that selectively separate
RE metals. Moreover, this project contributes to developing a scientific
workforce through the education and training. Undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral researchers, learn to tackle complex
technological challenges preparing them for their future careers in STEM.
Ultimately, this project will deliver fundamental chemical insights and
engineering applications for novel RE metal separation to promote US autonomy
for these critical resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.