* 2337236
* Conference: Growing Research Through Innovative Collaborations for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Susan Renoe, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 458,411.00

This project will broaden participation in the federal funding landscape by
providing support for participating Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) to identify partner institutions and resources that complement their
research strengths. Additionally, the project will provide a mechanism for
utilizing knowledge gained during a workshop to benefit all HBCUs as they seek
to grow research funding through impactful relationships. Project outcomes are
intended to lead to a more equitable distribution of research funds and
affordance of greater access and ability for HBCU researchers to meaningfully
contribute to the research enterprise. The workshop will surface, seed, and
brainstorm effective strategies for building sustainable and impactful research
infrastructure at HBCUs.

The goal of this project is to address systemic barriers to inclusion in the
research landscape for HBCUs through the development and implementation of an
Ideas Lab Workshop. The Ideas Lab format is designed to support the development
of innovative and creative solutions to complex issues. Additionally, this
format, affords participants support, time, and space to create new and expand
existing collaborations among HBCUs that can lead to the sustainable growth of
research infrastructure and drive research and innovation. This project will
implement an Ideas Lab with 30 leaders from public and private, two-year and
four-year HBCUs to to facilitate ideation of potentially transformative
solutions for expanding research infrastructure and capacity at their
institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.