* 2337430
* I-Corps: Advanced All-Terrain Robot Navigating Cluttered Environments with Tensegrity-Based Locomotion
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Jianguo Zhao, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an all-terrain robot capable of navigating indoor and outdoor
environments effectively. Law enforcement officers, including police officers,
SWAT teams, and Bomb Squads, frequently rely on mobile robots to gain
situational awareness in various environments such as buildings and residential
areas. However, current mobile robots often get stuck on everyday household
objects (e.g., door sills, toys, and stairs), compromising the safety of these
officers. The proposed technology is an all-terrain robot that is designed to
traverse cluttered environments and is capable of navigating indoor and outdoor
environments effectively. Equipping first responder teams with advanced robotic
capabilities may strengthen their ability to handle critical situations,
including terrorism, hostage scenarios, and other threats to public safety. The
proposed robot may offer a safe and remote solution, enhancing the safety of
team members, while improving the efficiency and effectiveness of law
enforcement officers.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an all-terrain robot with a
unique shape-changing capability, designed specifically to traverse cluttered
environments. The proposed technology uses an icosahedron tensegrity structure
as a wheel, allowing for the wheel's shape to switch between an expanded state
for larger footprints and a collapsed disc-like state for tighter areas. The
proposed tensegrity structure is a lightweight yet stable system made up of
rigid components (often rods or beams) connected by tensioned elements (usually
cables or tendons). This wheel structure substantially enhances the robot's
ability to navigate large obstacles, access narrow regions through shape
modification, and absorb impacts due to its inherent compliance. The versatility
of the robot has been tested in a wide range of terrains, from concrete and
rocks to sand, vegetation, snow, and water. The proposed robot may have
potential in areas such as emergency management, military surveillance, search
and rescue, agriculture, and photography, among others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.