* 2337688
* Enhancing NSF's Impact on STEM Translation and Commercialization Success
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Joseph Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2026
* USD 4,985,809.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a
comprehensive entrepreneurship training program to equip participants with the
knowledge and skill set needed for science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) translation and commercialization success. As global economic competition
becomes increasingly innovation-driven, governments at all levels are intensely
searching for ways to increase innovation across industry and societal sectors.
Among those being actively pursued is promoting high-growth startups based on
early-stage technologies developed at universities and research institutions.
However, faculty and student researchers at universities often lack the
knowledge and skill set to launch a startup business to commercialize their
technology. Programs such as the I-Corps Program have proven to be an excellent
starting point to determine commercial interest and commercial viability of the
technology, but data show that I-Corps participants lack fundamental knowledge
and confidence on starting a business, which may inhibit startup formation and
future startup success. Startups are inherently high-risk, and failure rates
among deep technology startups are even higher. The proposed program will
provide researchers with entrepreneurial training and mentoring that goes beyond
I-Corps training to give academic researchers the information and confidence
they need to launch a startup to commercialize their technology. In addition,
the proposed program may help reduce startup failure rates. The initial goal is
to facilitate translation and commercialization of university-developed
technologies, especially in regions of the country that lack these resources,
and to expand the program to government-funded Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) companies, and to
others in the community developing technologies for commercial applications,
strengthening U.S. economic competitiveness.

The intellectual merit of this project is based on the development of an
entrepreneurial training program to enhance and supplement NSF’s current I-Corps
Program. The proposed program builds on and extends the I-Corps Program, which
uses the customer discovery process to validate customer segments and value
propositions as well as introduces other aspects of the Business Model Canvas,
to provide the knowledge and skills needed to launch a startup business to
commercialize the technology. The proposed program is designed to provide
additional entrepreneurial training both before and after I-Corps training. The
topics covered will include validating the business model, founding team
formation, business registration, intellectual property licensing and
protection, sources of capital, pitching to investors, and preparing for startup
growth and exit strategies. In addition, the project will include an accelerator
component to provide embryonic-stage companies that have successfully completed
training with additional support services including industry-specific mentoring
and funds for additional research to develop and test a minimum viable product.
The proposed plan includes a proof-of-concept study that will be conducted to
field test the program’s effectiveness using a quasi-experimental design on
multiple comparison groups and impact outcome indicators using both objective
and subjective measures at short, medium, and longer-term intervals. This
program may help to increase translation and commercialization of university-
developed technologies as well as advance future research on entrepreneurship
training and contribute to the development of an evidence-based understanding of
the antecedents of startup success.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.