* 2337286
* CISE Research Expansion Investigators Conference: Growing the pool of Aspiring Investigators for NSF CISE in Alaska and Neighboring Jurisdictions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Kenrick Mock, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 98,631.00

Workshop to Grow Aspiring PIs in the Computer and Information Sciences in Alaska
and Neighboring Regions: This one-day workshop will bring together researchers
in Alaska and adjacent regions to grow aspiring PIs in Computing and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE). The long-term goal is to grow core CISE research
from Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). This will broaden research
participation and ultimately produce stronger research by bringing together
different perspectives that can spark innovation, is more generalizable and
inclusive with respect to society, and helps grow the field in terms of research
products and the pipeline of students from undergraduate to graduate programs to
industry.

The workshop will be held in Anchorage, Alaska in early 2024, by invitation only
with approximately 40 participants. About 1/3 of the participants will consist
of senior researchers who will help mentor the aspiring PIs. The workshop’s
objective is to train and mentor the aspiring PIs about NSF’s Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Minority-Serving Institution (CISE-MSI)
program, how to submit a competitive proposal, and begin the planning process to
submit a proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.