* 2337772
* RAPID: DRL AI: Scaffolding Automated Feedback for Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Janet Carlson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

While Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to improve both science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) teaching practice and students'
overall classroom experiences, it is critical to better understand how teachers
can more easily adapt it within their classrooms. In particular, supporting AI-
driven tool adoption in resource-poor schools is crucial to address educational
inequities. This RAPID project addresses an urgent need to facilitate
integration of AI technologies into schools to maximize benefits while reducing
the burden on teachers’ time. Specifically, the goal of this project is to
understand how instructional coaches can implement AI teacher feedback tools,
leveraging the advantages of such tools (cost effectiveness, scalability,
customizability, data-based and privacy) and mitigating technical and time
barriers to adoption. The findings and products of this project will support
professional learning organizations as well as district-based coaches and
teachers interested in automated feedback, and has the potential to
significantly increase the quality of instruction at various types of
institutions.

The time-sensitive research will involve interviewing highly-skilled coaches to
develop scaffolding resources by leveraging existing collaborations with two
teacher professional learning programs. Working with coaches and teachers who
serve grade 4-8 math classrooms with a large percentage of marginalized
students, the project will design generalizable coaching cycles and
conversational routines that take advantage of information from automated
feedback, while designing for different coaching models, different coaching
contexts, and teachers with varying aptitudes for technology. The study
incorporates an interview phase, a design phase for coaching cycles and
routines, and a pilot phase, with room for iteration and emphasis on
dissemination of the findings. Overall, the study will provide insights into how
AI-driven feedback can be integrated into teacher coaching, contributing to
knowledge about the challenges and opportunities of implementing AI within
existing instructional processes. Ultimately, this project will help uncover how
AI can be harnessed to enhance teacher effectiveness and student learning in
real-world educational settings in a scalable way. This proposal was received in
response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on
Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF
23-097) and funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.