* 2337969
* RAPID: DRL AI: The Development of a Digital Platform for Evaluating and Using AI-Generated Content for Academic Purposes
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Amy Hutchison, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,603.00

The recent development of artificial intelligence (AI) tools such as ChatGPT and
Bard present new opportunities and challenges for learners in the elementary and
middle grades. Despite their potential for facilitating and supporting
scientific reading and writing, there are pressing concerns about how AI tools
can produce harmful, biased, and false content, which then gets reproduced by
users who lack sufficient critical evaluation skills or do not understand the
importance of evaluating AI-generated content. Thus, there is an urgent need to
develop instructional materials and strategies to support students’ development
of these important critical thinking skills. The purpose of this time-sensitive
project is to develop a web-based platform, called Compose With AI, aimed at
guiding students to evaluate AI-generated content and use factual information to
compose common types of science-focused writing (e.g., composing arguments,
claims or solutions related to science topics). The Compose with AI platform
will: 1) guide students to gather and critically evaluate content produced by
AI, 2) guide students on beneficial and ethical uses of content produced by AI,
and 3) scaffold students’ use of AI-generated content as a model and resource
for composing science-focused texts. Project researchers will use gathered data
to determine what critical evaluation approaches and strategies inhibit and
enhance students’ abilities to use and critically evaluate content generated
with AI, including when using the Compose With AI platform.

The project team will follow a design-based implementation research approach to
evaluate the usefulness and usability of the Compose With AI. Data to address
the address the research questions will be collected as participants engage in a
guided task where they use Compose With AI to evaluate AI-generated content and
generate a response to a prompt. A verbal reporting methodology will be used to
understand students’ cognitive processes as they think aloud during the task
(concurrently) and as they reflect on their work after the task
(retrospectively). Verbal protocol analysis will focus on which approaches and
strategies students selected from the list presented in the platform, how they
used the strategies, which strategies were successful, and which uses of AI were
most useful for integrating AI-generated content into their responses. Teacher
participants will also provide feedback on the platform design and the student
think-aloud tasks. All data will be combined and analyzed qualitatively to
answer the research questions. Findings will be used to refine and publicly
share the Compose With AI platform for classroom use. This proposal was received
in response to the Dear Colleague Letter (DCL): Rapidly Accelerating Research on
Artificial Intelligence in K-12 Education in Formal and Informal Settings (NSF
23-097) and funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.