* 2337241
* Travel: Overview of Environmental and Engineering Geology and Geohazards with a Virtual Field Trip to Landslides Near Pittsburg, PA
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 47,894.00

This project will provide travel support for student participation in a
professional development and skills-training workshop that aids their progress
toward environmental geology/engineering geology careers, an area of significant
national need. The Association of Environmental and Engineering Geologists (AEG)
is the acknowledged international leader in environmental and engineering
geology and is greatly respected for its stewardship of the profession. AEG
offers information on environmental and engineering geology useful to
practitioners, scientists, students, and the public. To increase awareness of
AEG and the career pathways AEG supports, a 1-day, pre-meeting workshop and
virtual field trip will be convened at the Geological Society of America - GSA
Connects 2023 annual meeting in Pittsburgh, PA. The effort will target student-
scholars of GSAâ€™s On To the Future program. OTF student-scholars will learn
about the benefits of AEG membership with respect to professional skills
training, acquiring professional capital, developing professional networks, and
advancing altruistic environmental geology/engineering geology careers. The
Association of Environmental and Engineering Geologists (AEG), a member of the
NSF-sponsored Geosciences ASCEND Research Coordination Network, is hosting an
Applied Geosciences Career Discussion and Virtual Field Trip (VFT) during the
Geological Society of America GSA Connects 2023 annual meeting in Pittsburgh, PA
on Saturday, 14 October 2023. The focus of the workshop is investigating and
understanding landslides and mitigating landslide hazards. This event is an
accessible, day-long pre-meeting workshop developed for GSA On To the Future
(OTF) student-scholars to introduce them to career opportunities in applied
geosciences. The workshop provides career information and skills-oriented
professional development via a virtual field trip to examine prominent
landslides in the Pittsburgh area. AEG facilitators will share career advice
with OTF scholars and develop research skills by exploring the notable
geological sites in and around Pittsburgh.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.