* 2337277
* FW-HTF-RM: Collaborative Research: Assistive Intelligence for Cooperative Robot and Inspector Survey of Infrastructure Systems (AI-CRISIS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,09/30/2024
* David Nembhard, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2024
* USD 222,600.00

The U.S. civil infrastructure faces the prospect of rapid future deterioration.
For example, 39% of the over 600,000 highway bridges in the U.S. have exceeded
their design life of 50 years. To ensure the safety and welfare of citizens,
state Departments of Transportation are required to inspect bridges every two
years. To make inspection and reporting objective and consistent, robots such as
unmanned aerial vehicles have recently been introduced to perform autonomous
surveys of bridges. These robots, equipped with cameras, will rapidly provide a
large set of survey data that can be used to aid inspectors in assessing the
condition of bridges. To transform these multidisciplinary topics into a new
integrated bridge inspection capability, this multi-university team will develop
and implement a cooperative robot-inspector system with assistive intelligence
(AI) in order to make the future bridge inspection significantly faster,
cheaper, safer, and more consistent. A robotic platform equipped with infrared
cameras and a central processing unit with intelligent algorithms will operate
in both flying and crawling modes, travel in proximity to various parts/elements
of a bridge, and collect high-fidelity images of the entire bridge. Inspectors
will be instrumented and monitored with a suite of wearable sensors to enable
optimal robot-inspector cooperation during each bridge inspection. AI algorithms
will be developed in modules to analyze the big data from human sensors and
cameras in support of the pre-inspection workforce training, during-inspection
element defect detection, and post-inspection condition evaluation of bridges.
The robot-inspector-AI system will be integrated and validated at six bridge
sites in collaboration with stakeholders.

This multidisciplinary project aims to explore and develop the scientific
knowledge and underling methods of AI for a cooperative inspector-robot survey
of bridges. The scope of work includes: (1) to develop an optimal screening-to-
probing inspection strategy using fast and accurate detection of both surface
and internal defects in reinforced concrete slabs (representative bridge
elements) from active thermal and visible light imaging; (2) to create a causal
model of inspectors’ task performance to support an optimal job design,
effective training, and onsite operation; (3) to develop adaptive AI algorithms
with human inspectors in the loop for a rapid adaptation to future work
contexts, and efficient and reliable data analyses; and (4) to enable a spatial
correlation among the elements of an entire bridge with a maximum use of domain
expertise, and thus improve the effectiveness and applicability of adaptive AI.
The methods and technologies developed in this study will be transferred into
the hands of stakeholders, researchers, policy makers, and end users (bridge
inspectors) through publications, presentations, field demonstrations, and
training. In particular, the world’s first bridge benchmark dataset of videos,
labeled objects, and metadata established from real-world bridges, upon approval
by stakeholders, will be shared with the international community via an AI-
enabled bridge inspection competition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.