* 2337454
* NSF Workshop on Algorithm-Hardware Co-design for Medical Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Peipei Zhou, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Medical applications play a pivotal role in healthcare, bridging the gap between
in-depth academic research and everyday clinical practice. Their purpose is
dual-faceted: they aim to enhance health at an individual level while also
striving to foster societal wellbeing. In the realm of medical applications, the
role of electronic design automation (EDA) is crucial. EDA enables high accuracy
in the development of algorithms, software, and hardware, ensuring that they not
only function effectively but also meet vital safety requirements. Despite
significant progress, there's a notable lack of comprehensive discussions on the
co-design of algorithms and hardware in the medical field. This project will
fund a workshop that assembles healthcare practitioners, academic researchers,
industry experts, and government officials. The focus will be a collaborative
dialogue on the needs, challenges, and solutions in the realm of
algorithm/hardware co-design for medical applications. Additionally, the
workshop aims to sketch out a roadmap for future initiatives. The workshop will
be attended by a diverse group of participants, including individuals from
underrepresented communities and women. A summary report of the workshop will be
prepared and made publicly accessible to ensure widespread dissemination of the
information discussed.

The main aim of this workshop is to strategize ways to overcome obstacles and
accelerate advancements in both algorithmic and hardware design technologies for
the development of computer-assisted medical applications. The workshop agenda
includes discussions on a variety of topics. These include: 1. Grasping the life
cycle of medical data, from its acquisition and processing, to sharing and
management. 2. Comprehending the specific requirements of health practitioners
for algorithms, systems, and hardware. 3. Evaluating the efficiency, robustness,
privacy, explainability, and fairness of algorithm/hardware co-design in medical
applications. 4. Envisioning the future of AI algorithm and hardware design, as
well as design automation, within the context of medical applications. 5.
Fostering collaboration among academia, industry, and government. 6. Ensuring
the long-term sustainability of medical infrastructure and devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.