* 2337647
* Conference: NSF Meta-Workshop on AI to Accelerate Scientific and Engineering Discovery (AI2ASED)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Aidong Zhang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 100,000.00

In recent years, foundational research in artificial intelligence (AI), machine
learning (ML) and data science, have drawn incredible interest. Some of the
research has focused on using these data-driven approaches to enhance scientific
and engineering discoveries in other disciplines. While workshops and meetings
have been held around the world by the to discuss cutting-edge breakthroughs and
emerging trends, the majority of events are structured for siloed scientific
fields. A paradigm-shifting scientific revolution might be made possible by
integrating important discoveries across these events (i.e., a meta-workshop) to
develop cogent novel insights. This project supports a meta-workshop on AI to
accelerate science and engineering discovery. The workshop will provide the
scientific community with information on the state of complementary research in
AI, machine learning and other data analytic approaches across the science and
engineering domains. The topics of interest include identifying specific subject
areas with high potential for data-driven approaches to discovery.

This meta-workshop will bring together leaders of AI, ML, data science and
science and engineering (e.g., biology, biological engineering, chemistry,
chemical engineering, physics, material science, etc). The majority of attendees
will be core organizers from recent workshops and meetings around the heart of
data-intensive discoveries. They will include the most important findings from
their events and collaborate with other participants to generate new insights.
The ultimate goal of the meta-workshop is to work with the leaders of diverse
disciplines to develop a coherent and far-reaching research program agenda.
Data-intensive AI/ML techniques with broad applicability across domains can lead
to transformative discovery in domain sciences and engineering and address the
biggest global societal challenges (such as promoting human health, using
renewable energy, containing and managing climate change, feeding the expanding
population without damaging the environment, and establishing a just and
sustainable society). For the economic growth and general well-being of our
nation, this workshop will also target ways to create the industries and
workforce of the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.