* 2338108
* Travel: FLAIRS Conference Experience for Workforce Development in Artificial Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Doug Talbert, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 35,816.00

Artificial Intelligence (A.I.) permeates many aspects of our lives. With this
growth - accelerated in the last year through the popularity of platforms such
as ChatGPT - industry and academia have put a premium on recruiting students and
employees that can design, implement, test, and use A.I. models and approaches.
Unfortunately, tied somewhat to the need for more students in the general field
of computer science, there is a lack of skilled workers in the field of A.I. In
addition, the lack of diversity in the computational fields, especially when it
comes to women and minorities, has led to a lack of diversity in the thought and
design of A.I. systems, introducing bias into models and systems. However,
providing exposure to A.I. can be problematic, especially for students from
economically disadvantaged or rural communities and institutions. In short,
there is a need for concerted efforts to recruit a diverse set of students and
workers to the growing field of artificial intelligence. This project will
support the participation of a diverse set of students to attend the second
oldest artificial intelligence conference in the United States, the Florida
Artificial Intelligence Research Society (FLAIRS) conference, in May 2024.

The objective of this proposal is to serve the NSF’s interest in advancing
science through increasing interest and workforce development in artificial
intelligence. The plan is to host 15 who represent a diverse demographic,
especially among women, minorities, and persons with disabilities, from multiple
universities, including those that consist primarily of economically
disadvantaged students. The students can participate in a range of tutorials and
engage with researchers and others in the field. A clear plan focuses on
universities and colleges in the southeast region of the US. Clear evaluation is
provided.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.