* 2338194
* I-Corps:  Remote wearable technology for mental health and treatment monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Colin Depp, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of wearable technology to monitor symptoms and treatment responses
in individuals with mental health conditions such as depression or stress
disorders. Currently, subjective symptom monitoring through periodic
questionnaires is the standard of practice in diagnosing and monitoring mental
health conditions. However, these tools are prone to biases and inaccuracies,
leading to misdiagnosis and ineffective treatment. The proposed technology is a
wearable sensor that offers an alternative by monitoring physical, biological,
and digital markers. By collecting and analyzing multiple biometric data points,
the proposed technology provides a comprehensive assessment, monitoring, and
analysis of treatment responses, which may improve mental health monitoring and
treatment.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a sensor for gathering
diverse biometric data using physiological and biological biomarkers to monitor
mental health. The proposed technology is designed as a wearable technology that
uses spectroscopy and machine learning to collect physiological characteristics
such as heart rate, breathing rate, and body temperature. The technology detects
and quantifies specific biomarkers without the need for additional labeling
agents or probes using optical sensing. The optical detection system measures
changes in light properties, including absorption, scattering, or fluorescence,
in the presence of target biomarkers. By collecting and analyzing multiple
biometric data points, the technology enables comprehensive assessment,
monitoring, and analysis of treatment responses. The goal is to predict
depression and stress levels and to advance personalized, data-driven approaches
to treatment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.