* 2338025
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Subsurface Characterization of Liquefaction Case Histories from the 2023 Kahramanmaras Earthquake Sequence
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Diane Moug, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,289.00

This Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will provide well-
documented case histories on building and ground performance during earthquakes.
The US has not experienced a large, widely-damaging earthquake for nearly 30
years. However, advancements can be made by understanding earthquake damage in
countries with similar seismic risks and infrastructure, such as Turkey. The
2023 Kahramanmaras, Turkey earthquake sequence provides a unique opportunity to
evaluate the effects of earthquake shaking on diverse infrastructure in varied
geologic environments subjected to a wide range of shaking intensities. The
post-earthquake observations enable the study of the effects of near-fault
ground motions, liquefaction-induced infrastructure damage, and the cyclic
behavior of silt and clay soils. Characterization of the ground at key sites
allows to develop insights that are directly applicable to US cities such as San
Francisco, Seattle, and Memphis. The work will proceed collaboratively with
Turkish researchers to learn as much as possible from these earthquakes. The
goal of the project is to benefit society through increased resiliency,
sustainability, and affordability of civil infrastructure considering seismic
impacts. The award will help train the next generation of US earthquake
engineering leaders by supporting the interaction of a senior researcher with
three early-career researchers from four institutions across the US, as well as
the mentorship of a graduate student.

This project focuses on obtaining subsurface data at key sites, which is
essential to developing well-documented case histories of building and ground
performance during earthquakes. The subsurface information will be collected
primarily through seismic piezocone penetration tests to characterize the ground
conditions, including shear wave velocity, and to detect critical soil layers.
Additionally, exploratory soil borings will be performed to obtain samples for
soil index testing. The subsurface data collected in this project will provide
critical information to significantly expand the number of comprehensive case
histories of liquefaction-infrastructure interactions, focusing on (1)
infrastructure affected by ground shaking and ground failure in the near-fault
region, (2) liquefaction-induced building damage, and (3) liquefaction of silts
and clays. These three topics represent areas of earthquake engineering with
knowledge gaps due to a dearth of case histories. Additionally, the subsurface
data will provide insights regarding climate change and earthquake multi-hazards
by contributing to evaluations of the frequent coastal flooding of Iskenderun,
presumably due to liquefaction-induced ground movements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.