* 2338936
* Conference: Reinforcing the future of BPE research through a poster session for BPE NSF Awardees
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,647.00

The purpose of the CoNECD (pronounced, “connected”) Conference is to provide a
forum for exploring current research and practices to enhance diversity and
inclusion of all underrepresented populations in the engineering and computing
professions including gender identity and expression, race and ethnicity,
disability, veteran, LGBTQIA+, 1st generation and socio-economic status. The
CoNECD Conference is dedicated to all the diverse groups that comprise our
engineering and computing workforce. The purpose of this project is to provide a
forum for research exchange and collaboration. The Broadening Participation in
Engineering program of the Engineering Education and Centers Division of the
National Science Foundation (EECD) has supported transformative research,
conferences, and planning to address the underrepresentation of marginalized
groups in engineering. Funding has supported all regions of the United States,
including thirty-two states. Awards have supported public and private
universities, organizations, and Minority-Serving Institutions. The potential
span of impact is apparent. This will be achieved through a poster session to
provide travel allowance for NSF PI awardees whose research is in broadening
participation; and to provide a venue for presenting their research in a poster
session, including exposure to graduate student attendees, to help further
develop a community of BPE researchers with a transferable communication
skillset to reach practitioners in the space.

This conference project will enable cross-sharing of recent BPE research
developments by faculty, with engagement from graduate students and
practitioners in the space. Engagement of this kind will be critical to continue
to foster community and support in the BPE research space. We aim to gain
feedback on this type of engagement strategy from participants to determine what
continued communication and collaboration is possible, and further any strategic
support that is necessary at future venues related to CoNECD. The Poster Session
will take place on the first full day of the CoNECD conference. There will be no
other concurrent sessions during this time. This provides a formal time to
facilitate interactions between the BPE awardees and the broader community,
including graduate students, practitioners, and other researchers. The intent is
twofold: to broaden the numbers of individuals who learn about innovative
research in broadening participation, and increase everyone’s research and
professional network, particularly graduate students. Research results in this
area must be broadly shared with practitioners and other researchers to reap the
full benefits of the research outcomes that have been supported through the BPE
Program. NSF PI awardees, BPE practitioners, and junior professionals in
graduate programs represent key actors in the goal of full participation in the
engineering enterprise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.