* 2338198
* EAGER: Preserving Privacy in the Use of Digital Currencies
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Neha Narula, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this EAGER project will be on the $3
trillion digital asset market. The project will consider whether new
technologies can afford a consumer or business greater privacy in a digital
currency payment in order to support the development of this rapidly growing
market. The proosed work includes core software and infrastructure development
that balances users’ preferences with regulatory requirements and strives to
build a more efficient digital payment system. Through collaborative, multi-
disciplinary technical research, the project will evaluate digital currency
design choices under different assumptions and requirements, evaluate tradeoffs,
and ultimately learn how digital currency systems can be designed to best
advance privacy, user agency, innovation, and financial equity. The latter
objective includes improved financial access for low income and other vulnerable
populations, an important global challenge. Because the project intends to
release research papers and code, this work may catalyze others’ efforts in the
public and private sectors to build on our research. This work will thereby
provide critical insight for central bankers, policymakers, and the financial
services industry as they contemplate the design and potential issuance of
digital assets for use in the economy.

This EAGER project proposes to preserve privacy in the use of a central bank
digital currency (CBDC). The project will estimate the speed and storage
implications of cryptographic approaches including pseudonymization, zero-
knowledge proofs, and private information retrieval, to limit the information
that each provider sees about participants in a transaction while complying with
regulation. The test platform will be on OpenCBDC, a payments model in which the
central transaction processor authenticates and stores unspent funds (called
unspent transaction outputs, or UTXO) as cryptographic hashes. The project will
address one of the most latency-intensive parts of a privacy-preserving design,
namely range proof verification, using two architectures. One is batch proof
creation, in which the prover must show that multiple values fall below a
specified range. The second is batch proof verification, in which the verifier
considers whether multiple proofs are all valid. This project presents high
risks because it is unknown whether this technology can safeguard privacy
adequately, at scale, and in a manner that is sensitive to legal, regulatory,
and political concerns. It presents potentially high returns because
demonstrating that well designed digital money can safeguard privacy at a level
similar to cash could influence the design of payments instruments for decades.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.