* 2338266
* Conference: Gateways 2023
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Sandra Gesing, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 29,660.00

Science gateways are a key part of NSF funded Cyberinfrastructure, and they are
used by hundreds of thousands of researchers and students, supporting both
publication-quality science and at-scale education. Science gateways involve a
comprehensive set of research domains that has a broad impact on society,
addressing considerable challenges such as pandemics, climate change, global
sustainability on food, water, and land use driven by the growing population,
rising per capita incomes, to name a few. In recognition of their importance,
NSF has funded the Science Gateways Community Institute (SGCI) and more recently
the SGX3 Science Gateways Center of Excellence to provide leadership for the
science gateways community. The Gateways conference series is one of the of
flagships of SGCI and SGX3 and the major event in the US to bring the science
gateways community together. The conference series has existed since 2016 and
has attracted each year between 100-170 participants. This year it has moved
from an SGCI-organized conference to a community-driven conference with the
first time the general chair being selected by a newly established advisory
board for the conference and who is not part of the SGCI/SGX3 team. The goal is
to attract additional research domains and tap into the chair's networks that
are not already in contact with SGCI/SGX3. SGX3 continues to guide the
conference. Gateways 2023 features different program formats such as keynotes,
presentations, tutorials, demos, posters and this year the first time Bring Your
Own Portal. Accepted submissions are published in open-access proceedings and
accepted papers are invited to a special issue in a journal. SGCI/SGX3 has an
impressive record of underrepresented minority involvement within the science
gateway community. The travel grant allows to involve more students at Gateways
2023 and they are selected under consideration of diversity, equity and
inclusion.

Gateways 2023 is the major event for the science gateway community in the US to
discuss challenges and solutions in the area, to identify new issues, to shape
future directions for research, foster the exchange of ideas, standards and
common requirements and push towards the wider adoption of science gateways. The
topics covered by the Gateways conference series range from technical topics to
use cases to related content such as usability or sustainability of science
gateways. The knowledge transfer can be transformative between different
research domains and technical content. The building blocks of science gateway
frameworks are re-usable in diverse research areas evident in widely used
frameworks such as Hubzero and Tapis. The Gateways conference series sets the
stage for learning, engaging and empowering the different stakeholders in the
community who are science gateway users, developers and providers as well as
funders and decision makers. Providing travel grants for students allows to
include a diverse audience and support underrepresented minorities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.