* 2338640
* Conference: NSF Workshop on Hardware-Software Co-design for Neuro-Symbolic Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,848.00

Despite the impressive advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) systems,
there still exist significant challenges, such as enabling high-level reasoning
in real-world contexts and dynamic compositionality within resource-constrained
environments. Neuro-symbolic computation represents the convergence of two
prominent AI methodologies: traditional symbolic and neural networks. By
integrating symbolic and statistical methods, neuro-symbolic computation
unleashes essential features of modularity for explainability and
compositionality. However, the approach introduces significant computational
complexity. The purpose of this project is to organize a National Science
Foundation (NSF) sponsored workshop named "Hardware-Software Co-design for
Neuro-Symbolic Computation."

The primary objective of this workshop is to gather leading experts in relevant
research domains to explore and identify the scientific and technological
challenges associated with high-performance, integrated neuro-symbolic AI
computing systems, and provide valuable guidance to the broader research
community. To ensure comprehensive coverage of the topic, the team will extend
invitations to prominent researchers from academia, industry, government
laboratories, and funding agencies with diverse backgrounds, including circuit
design, computer architecture, design automation, system development,
algorithms, and applications. Underrepresented groups will be particularly
encouraged to attend the workshop and receive priority in the considerations.
This project aims to identify the critical strategies for semiconductor and AI
workforce development and technology transfer.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.