* 2340995
* Metabolomics of stomatal immunity in the disease triangle
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Sixue Chen, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 161,088.00

Crops are continually exposed to microbial pathogens, which cause plant disease,
leading to severe yield loss. A major route of pathogen entry into plants is
through microscopic pores formed by pairs of guard cells on leaf surfaces. The
pores are called stomata, through which plants release oxygen and water vapor
and take up carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. The CO2 is used for
synthesizing carbohydrates and other biomaterials/metabolites. The goal of this
research is to understand how metabolites in guard cells play regulatory roles
in pathogen-triggered stomatal movements in the context of other environmental
conditions, such as drought and rising CO2 in the atmosphere. The investigations
will improve understanding of the mechanisms that link stomatal aperture to
environmental conditions and diseases. Because guard cells dynamically control
the size of the stomatal pore and thus control pathogen entry, CO2 uptake and
plant water loss, their function impacts plant growth and yield. A better
understanding of plant stomatal movements should foster rational crop breeding
and engineering for enhanced disease resistance and yield. Since metabolite
regulation is ubiquitous in biology the research will have broad impact. The
project will enable cross-disciplinary training of students (including women and
underrepresented groups). Since plant metabolites are tightly related to our
daily lives, the “Plant Metabolites” outreach activities will extend to the
general public. Exposing students and the public to modern scientific research
will contribute to preparing highly qualified future scientists and citizens,
who will contribute to building a prosperous society and a sustainable world.

The research team will apply molecular genetics and omics approaches to assess
the functions of metabolites in regulating guard cell and mesophyll processes
and stomatal movements during pathogen response. The central hypothesis is that
changes in guard cell metabolites play important regulatory roles in pathogen-
triggered stomatal movements in the context of different environmental
conditions, particularly drought and rising CO2. The hypotheses will be
evaluated with three objectives: A) Quantify metabolite changes during pathogen-
triggered stomatal closing and re-opening using LC-MS and GC-MS approaches. B)
Verify roles of pathogen-related guard cell metabolites in stomatal aperture
regulation and characterize interactions in different environmental conditions
using reverse genetics and pharmacology. C) Elucidate guard cell networks of
pathogen-induced stomatal closure and re-opening. The experiments will identify
metabolites essential for stomatal movement in the context of bacterial disease
and different environmental factors. The project will reveal novel regulatory
mechanisms underlying pathogen-induced stomatal movements and will contribute to
the emerging concept of metabolite regulation as a versatile mechanism by which
cells regulate important signaling and metabolic processes. The knowledge that
will be generated can inform rational crop breeding/engineering to improve
stomatal defense without disruption of other pathways that impact crop yield.
This award is co-funded by the Plant Biotic Interactions program and the
Cellular Dynamics and Function cluster in the divisions of Integrative
Organismal Systems and Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, respectively.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.