* 2340870
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Towards a Community-Driven Framework for the Creation and Impact Analysis of Digital Accessibility Maps with Persons with Disabilities
* TIP,ITE
* 08/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Vinod Namboodiri, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2023
* USD 219,642.00

As a means to address national health, prosperity and welfare and to promote the
advancement of science, the proposed project has the long-term goal of improving
accessibility for persons with disabilities (PWDs) within and around indoor
built environments through the creation of MABLE (Mapping for Accessibility in
BuiLt Environments). MABLE will provide digital accessibility maps of indoor
environments with an interface for assessing, planning, and navigating within
them based on the affordances and capabilities of the user. It will also permit
map augmentation by users based on their experiences or observations. Envisioned
users include those with visual or mobility impairments (blind, low vision,
wheelchair users, cane users, etc.) as well as other categories of PWDs with
planning and navigation assistance needs. MABLE will enhance the ability of PWDs
to navigate within mapped work environments so that they may feel more at ease
within them quickly and accomplish navigation-based tasks easily, especially in
large companies spanning multiple floors or buildings. Being a universal need,
MABLE applies to public spaces (shopping centers, event venues, sports venues,
etc.) for which there is a positive economic benefit to increased accessibility,
just as much as it does to private or access controlled indoor spaces (company
campuses, commercial multi-story buildings). The project will create new
knowledge in the areas of collection, processing, and evaluation of
accessibility information from built environments. The project will also create
new frameworks for quantifying economic benefits from accessible built
environments encompassing perspectives of future economic growth potential, cost
savings, and return on investments. Long term outcomes from this project will
impact both the quality of life and employability of PWDs. Detailed built
environment information gathered and made available from this project will not
only enhance mobility for PWDs, but also provide economic benefits to others,
regardless of disability. Greater participation of PWDs in society promises to
change entire social structures of families that include PWDs. Activities within
the proposed project to realize these societal impacts include workshops and
webinars with stakeholders from the disability community, educational and
curricular offerings, and tech transfer activities.

Recent advances in indoor localization technology provides opportunities to
enable real-time navigation and wayfinding within built environments, but this
progress is being held back by the lack of detailed and usable accessibility
information. Commercially available maps require voluntary contributions from
the general population and often do not include accessibility information, with
contributions from persons with disabilities (PWDs) being limited or non-
existent. Open source or crowdsourced initiatives for indoor mapping have
similar properties, though their open nature means they can be extended by
interested developers. However, for this approach to be scalable, usable, and
more widespread, mechanisms are required to automate the mapping process and to
augment the maps through crowdsourced or user contributions in a universal
manner. The goals for the proposed project are to create a community-driven
framework and prototypes for information collection, processing, analysis, and
use towards accessible maps, navigating, and wayfinding for PWDs within indoor
environments, as embodied by the product MABLE (Mapping for Accessibility in
BuiLt Environments). The creation of MABLE will involve specification and
development of five core components: (i) an accessibility meta-data schema for
indoor maps and the back-end mapping database server, (ii) a robotic system for
semi-autonomously exploring a given space and establishing the baseline
accessibility meta-data, (iii) a web-based interface for querying, exploring,
and planning with the augmented maps of known indoor spaces on standard
computers, (iv) an interface for contributing accessibility meta-data to an
existing digital accessibility map, and (v) mobile device applications for in
situ use of the digital accessibility maps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.