* 2340946
* Travel Grant: Workshop on Impacts of Unusual Weather Events and Climate Anomalies on a Tropical Rainforest
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2024,02/28/2025
* Jose Fuentes, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 50,000.00

Tropical forests around the world play a significant role in the regulation of
regional and global climate systems. The Amazon rainforest is the greatest land-
based global sink of greenhouse gases and the massive thunderstorm complexes
that develop over the region transport moisture and energy that affect global
circulation. Due to these factors, it is important to understand how the
rainforest is changing in response to warmer conditions and extreme weather
events. This travel award provides funding for US scientists to attend a meeting
to collaborate with regional scientists on the current state and next steps for
research projects aimed at better understanding the impact of climate on the
Amazon rainforest and the subsequent global impacts. Included in the meeting
will be Indigenous residents of the region who will share their traditional
knowledge of observing and anticipating changes in weather and climate. Early
career scientists from diverse backgrounds will assume leadership roles in
organizing and prioritizing the workshop deliberations.

The Amazon rainforest is experiencing unprecedented transformations in response
to extreme climate change features such as accelerated warming, prolonged
droughts, and biomass burning. The goals of the collaborative US/Brazil workshop
are to summarize the state of the science, identify future research topics and
methods, and forge partnerships between US and Brazilian scientists. The
workshop will be planned around the following session topics:

• Summarizing the occurrences of unusual weather events and extreme climate
anomalies in the Amazon during the last 50 years and projected climate through
2050. • Examining the extent that climate change and land use shifts have
recently contributed to modifying the water cycling in the Amazon Basin. •
Discussing future field and numerical modeling studies to develop unified
approaches to determine net ecosystem exchange for Amazonian regions with
variable topography and for all relevant atmospheric stability conditions. •
Identifying the emerging data assimilation methods for in-situ and satellite
observations to generate improved analysis fields over the region and
identifying the most suitable AI techniques to process large amounts of data
related to the condition of the rainforest and its responses to climate-related
events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.