* 2341679
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Stakeholder-driven Challenges and Opportunities for Wildfire Mitigation and Preparedness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* James Tate, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,812.00

Wildland fire events have particularly significant impacts on communities and
ecosystems in rural areas. Many residents in these areas lack the financial
resources to cope with and mitigate the impacts of wildland fire events. This
context is particularly the case in much of the Southern United States where
social and cultural contexts present unique challenges for disaster response and
mitigation. This project develops plans to investigate the impacts of wildland
fire in the growing wildland-urban interface (WUI) in the Southern United States
and contributes to the understanding of the unique dynamics in this critical
zone. This research provides both scientific and practical insight to advance
the discourse on wildland fire events as a mechanism to enhance community
resilience. The project uses a stakeholder driven approach to collate data and
resources as a foundation for continued scientific investigation of increasingly
prominent yet still insufficiently understood issues surrounding wildfire
hazards and human settlement.

This project involves convening and moderating conversations among a range of
researchers, practitioners, and other stakeholders to discuss wildland fire risk
and explore key issues for successfully mitigating, managing, and living with
wildland fire hazards in the Southern U.S. The research team gathers information
on current wildfire plans, regulations, and administrative and communications
structures in the region to better understand governance as related to wildland
fire risk and investigate potential risks of wildfire to the built environment,
response systems, and the health of responders and local communities. The
research objectives are to: (1) identify key challenges to wildland fire
mitigation in the South through practitioner and academic discussions; (2)
assess the integration of wildland fire risk management in plans and regulations
in the Southern United States; and (3) understand community resilience through
preparedness and response planning and coordination of public-private
stakeholders to enhance healthcare access before, during and after a wildfire.
The geographic focus on the U.S. South reflects the researcher teamâ€™s broader
intent to augment wildfire-related knowledge and capabilities of understudied
and potentially underprepared regions as climate change amplifies risk and
uncertainty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.