* 2341561
* Conference: Travel Grant for Nona Works Fall 23 Hackathon
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Radhakrishna Sanka, Nona Research Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2024
* USD 19,999.00

The 14th International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) 2023 takes
place in Boston, MA USA from September 11th to September 15th. The event brings
together researchers from electronic design automation (the practice of using
computer software to build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the
forward design of novel biological systems using engineering principles). The
goal of IWBDA is to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and
predictably engineered and therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine,
leading to advances in disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention. This award
provides travel assistance for ten undergraduate and graduate students to attend
this workshop to present research, participate in a computer programming
competition, and network with a large community of industrial and academic
researchers. These participants are expected to go on to form the foundation of
the field in the future. This award supports students to attend The 14th
International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) 2023 which takes place
in Boston, MA USA from September 11th to September 15th. Specifically, these
students join more than 120 researchers from electronic design automation and
synthetic biology in a unique context which does not exist elsewhere. They have
access to between twelve and fifteen technical talks over two days, two invited
lectures, ten to twenty posters, multiple group discussion sessions, and a
featured student programming competition (BDAthlon). This award covers the
registration for the workshop as well as partial support for travel and housing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.