* 2341551
* EAGER: SCH: AI in Sleep for Rural and Aging Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Felicia Jefferson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,323.00

Although artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning have become
commonplace, vulnerable populations often do not have input to the design,
development, and application of key AI tools that improve the well-being and
safety of communities. Reduced variety in the data input of AI tools diminishes
the overall power of the technologies and the resulting output. This project
uses AI technology to connect patients with sleep research professionals and
specialists to obtain sleep health information in a longitudinal fashion. This
approach provides support to populations who do not have regular access to sleep
specialists, particularly rural and hard to reach populations such as shift
workers and aging adults. The project also provides unique patient data to the
AI tools to increase the patient population groups involved in optimizing this
technology, which will mitigate input bias of the AI tools. This EAGER research
effort is a unique opportunity for AI-based technologies for healthcare by
having additional variation in population input, and by improving healthcare
access to rural and vulnerable populations with a need for sustained access to
sleep specialists. Individuals from these groups will be recruited, contributing
to the technology’s overall input data producing broadly applicable output
results.

This project uses a newly synthesized and verified AI technology that uses the
frequencies of physiological characteristics during sleep stages as inputs and
analyzes resulting outputs for accuracy. The goals of the project are to: 1)
optimize the data processing and algorithmic analysis of AI technologies by
broadening the input data collected, improving the sensitivity, precision, and
applicability of the output from deep learning algorithms for the public, 2)
determine the accuracy of the AI technology’s data processing and interpretation
and adaptability from unique population groups by comparing collected
information with that of participants with similar backgrounds (for example,
age, sex, and race) as the rural and other participant groups, and 3) increase
access to needed population services through successful adaptability of
specialized AI technologies. The project will explore the effectiveness using
artificial neural networks in deep learning algorithms to interpret the raw data
collected from participants as they sleep. Output produced from the AI tool and
scoring of sleep studies (polysomnography) will be comparatively analyzed. The
PIs will collaborate with sleep specialists, some who are located more than four
hours from the participants’ home or work locations, for baseline
polysomnography scoring and raw data analysis. Outputs will be compared with
cohort data from similar groups. The outcomes of this project include providing
more broad-based input for an AI analysis output function that is more
predictable and accurate in analysis. Further, improvement in the health and
well-being of the study group and the general population will result from better
access to specialist care and use of precision tools for analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.