* 2341178
* CAREER: Simulating Mesoscale Quantum Dynamics and Non-linear Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2027
* Doran Raccah, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 01/31/2027
* USD 629,867.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Doran Bennett of Southern Methodist University is
working to uncover the quantum mechanical processes by which molecular materials
conduct energy. Next generation technology development stems from advances in
our ability to control, manipulate, and redirect energy. Dr Bennett’s group will
extend computer simulations of quantum process from the traditional molecular-
scale to the nanometer-to-micron scale, (i.e. the ‘mesoscale’) that is relevant
to molecular materials. These rigorous computational models are expected to
establish how specific materials absorb and deploy energy from light, providing
essential information to those looking to engineer novel materials. This
research will combine chemistry, computation, and advanced mathematics, STEM
fields with severe levels of gender and race disparities. In conjunction with
his research, Dr. Bennett will launch an intensive, wrap-around summer research
program to reach greater numbers of science majors from underserved groups in an
effort to achieve greater excellence through diversity.

Doran Bennett’s research under this award will address the pressing need for new
computational tools to support an emerging scientific frontier studying
mesoscale (10 nm – 1 μm) excited-state dynamics in molecular materials. Rapidly
developing synthetic and spectroscopic toolboxes are expected to enable
structural control and the establishment of spatially-resolved probes of
mesoscale processes. Dr. Bennett and his group will leverage the locality of
electronic excited-states to simulate the photophysics of molecular materials
within a formally exact (spin-boson) equation-of-motion called the adaptive
hierarchy of pure states (adHOPS). Dr. Bennett will extend adHOPS to simulate
excited state dynamics in the presence of complex vibrational environments of
realistic molecular materials (e.g. involving many frequencies of vibration and
timescales of relaxation). He and his team will also endeavor to develop the
corresponding computational methods for simulating spatially resolved non-linear
spectroscopy. These efforts are expected provide the community with new
theoretical tools for interpreting spectroscopic measurements and predicting
excited state dynamics in synthetic molecular materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.