* 2341846
* CRII: NeTS: RUI: Fundamentals of Wireless Networking using Battery-Free Devices in Inhomogeneous Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Hongzhi Guo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 85,662.00

Precision agriculture is a transformative technology that consumes fewer
resources and generates more yields by using recently developed technologies
such as wireless sensor networks and autonomous robots. Wireless underground
sensors that are buried in the soil to provide rich information about soil
nutrition will play an important role in precision agriculture. Although they
can significantly improve farm yields, wireless underground sensors are costly
and hard to maintain since they are deployed in the inaccessible soil medium,
which may reduce farmers' profits. This project is expected to radically change
the wireless underground sensor network by significantly reducing its cost and
complexity. The idea of employing low-cost battery-free wireless sensors with
magnetic induction backscatter communications is transformative since these
sensors do not require battery replacement and consume negligible energy. The
proposed research contributes to a much wider vision of providing ubiquitous
connectivity for in-situ sensors in inhomogeneous media such as concrete walls,
underwater, and intra-body, which can enable a large number of civilian and
military applications. This project also includes a plan to create various
educational and research experiences for underrepresented minority students to
promote diversity in the workforce.

This project aims to develop adaptable and scalable wireless underground sensor
networks using low-cost battery-free sensors with magnetic induction backscatter
communications. The ultimate goal is to replace today’s bulky battery-powered
wireless sensors with battery-free ones for in-situ sensing applications in
inhomogeneous environments. Since the inhomogeneous media destroy existing
wireless communication and networking solutions that are based on geometric
principles, new theories and algorithms will be developed to overcome this
problem and advance our knowledge of wireless network design in complex
inhomogeneous environments. This project will develop physical layer solutions
for magnetic induction backscatter communications, including channel estimation,
blind beamforming, and energy harvesting. A reconfigurable testbed will be built
to verify the proposed solutions, upon which channel measurement campaigns will
be performed to derive a comprehensive channel model. Soil dynamics can
dramatically change network connectivity and throughput. To this end, adaptive
network control algorithms based on machine learning will be used to provide
ubiquitous coverage, maintain network integrity, and prolong the system’s
lifetime. This project will also develop localization algorithms using magnetic
induction backscatter communications to track the locations of invisible
underground sensors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.