* 2341716
* Conference: Access to Justice Research as a Tool for Advancing Federal Priorities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Sandefur, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,382.00

The United States faces an access to justice crisis of extraordinary scale. It
affects every group in society, entrenching poverty and inequality. While all
groups in America face civil justice problems, these problems disproportionately
impact people of color. Each year, Americans experience 150 million to 250
million new civil justice issues, many involving basic human needs like having a
safe place to live, making a dignified living, and caring for those who depend
on them. As many as 120 million of those problems go unresolved, with
consequences like eviction, homelessness, lost wages and benefits, separated
families, and impaired health. These issue areas not only affect core areas of
daily life, they are also critical targets of federal decision making.

This project is a one-day convening that will bring together researchers working
on a range of topic areas in access to civil justice that intersect with
critical federal goals, including those relating to housing, veterans’ affairs,
immigration, and indigenous access to justice. The convening will connect
researchers investigating the role of access to justice in critical policy areas
with federal agency actors who can use that knowledge to inform funding
priorities and programming. This will help to increase transparency around
existing government data and increase utilization of government data by academic
researchers. It will create conditions conducive to prioritizing shared goals
and connecting them to more robust and collaborative research agendas, helping
to develop an active and engaged community of research and practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.