* 2341123
* Collaborative Research: Cell-free glycoprotein synthesis technology for point-of-care vaccine biomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Michael Jewett, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 219,067.00

Drug-resistant bacteria are a growing threat to human health. By the year 2050,
up to 10 million lives per year could be at risk. New strategies will be needed
to counter this threat. Vaccines have been developed to safely and effectively
prevent dangerous bacterial infections. This project seeks to address current
limitations in vaccine production. Cell-free technology for vaccine production
that can be easily scaled up will be developed. This could lead to portable, on-
demand vaccine development and production. The project will advance the
biomanufacturing of conjugate vaccines. This would improve their availability to
resource-poor communities. In parallel, hands-on learning modules will be
developed and delivered to underrepresented high school students, and to
undergraduate and graduate students.

The bacterial cell surface is decorated with complex sugar structures. These
include capsular polysaccharides (CPS) and O-polysaccharides (O-PS). These
structures are important virulence factors, adhesion mediators, and
immunomodulators. CPS and O-PS structures are typically absent from the surfaces
of host cells. These polysaccharides can, therefore, be formulated as vaccine
subunits and used to protect humans against life-threatening bacterial
infections. Conjugate vaccines are a type of subunit vaccine whereby
polysaccharide antigens are linked to a protein carrier. They are among the
safest and most effective methods for inducing immunity against pathogenic
bacteria. Current production technology is technically complex and relies on
living cells. Refrigeration is necessary at every step along the distribution
chain. As a result, manufacturing is centralized, capital intensive, and
requires highly skilled labor. This project will create a scalable, cell-free
biosynthesis technology for generating conjugate vaccine candidates.
Experimental and computational approaches will be combined to develop and
optimize a one-pot cell-free glycoprotein synthesis system. These
glycoconjugates can be stored in freeze-dried formats and reconstituted simply
by adding water. A complementary technology, shotgun scanning glycomutagenesis,
will enable comprehensive evaluation of glycosylation efficiency as a function
of conjugation site and antigen loading density, which will be correlated with
vaccine immunogenicity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.