* 2341183
* SHF: Core: Small: Real-time and Energy-Efficient Machine Learning for Robotics Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Ruth Bahar, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 393,668.00

Technological advancements have led to a proliferation of robots using machine
learning to assist humans in a wide range of tasks. However, despite the
strengths of approaches based on deep learning they have several shortcomings
that leave them vulnerable to exploitation from adversaries. In addition, the
computational, financial, and environmental cost incurred to train these
discriminative models can be quite immense. Alternatively, hybrid methods that
combine (less complex) deep learning with other probabilistic techniques can
provide more robust and adaptive learning. Unfortunately, these probabilistic
techniques tend to suffer from long run times and high computational complexity.
This project aims to develop new approaches for hardware acceleration of these
probabilistic techniques across a range of robotics applications. These
approaches are intended to pave the way for the design of autonomous robots that
can sense, perceive, and act in real time in a range of natural human
environments, and in a very energy-efficient manner. The proposed work has the
potential to enhance human quality-of-life by enabling robots to dramatically
expand the range of tasks they can complete. The project also includes
curriculum development for an interdisciplinary course in robotic design aimed
in part at getting a broader range of students interested in computing and
hardware design of robotic systems.

A long-term goal is to reach the point where mobile robots can compute all
information needed for perception on-board and in real time. This project
focuses on exploiting the complementary properties of deep learning and
probabilistic inference for making perceptual decisions, where the weaknesses of
one can be addressed by the strengths of the other. The researchers are
investigating various algorithmic and hardware-acceleration approaches that
provide effective robot perception in unstructured, natural environments in real
time and at efficient energy cost. In particular, the research is aimed at goal-
directed robot manipulation within a confined embedded system under limited
hardware and power budgets. The focus is on probabilistic algorithms such as
Bayesian inference that may be incorporated with neural network methods. The
project proposes three main tasks: a) accelerating graph-based Bayesian
inference in hardware, b) constructing a general-purpose library of optimized
hardware modules for accelerating robot-oriented algorithms, and c) using the
hardware library to develop new algorithms for robot perception.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.