* 2341843
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Computationally Efficient Algorithms for Detecting Anomalous Atmospheric Emissions
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Julianne Chung, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 92,203.00

Large-scale anomalous emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollution pose
threats to human health in the vicinity of the emissions, compromise state
emissions targets, and threaten energy security. Two recent, high-profile
natural gas blowouts underscore the need for early detection and intervention.
Several new and forthcoming satellites have the specific purpose of detecting
and monitoring greenhouse gas emissions, and recent studies have demonstrated
the potential of detecting such events using satellite data. However, there are
enormous computational challenges in quantifying these emission anomalies or
super-emitters due to the massive amounts of satellite data to be processed and
the fine-scale resolution at which reconstructions are needed for threat
detection. This project aims to tackle these challenges by developing improved
computational methods for use in detection of atmospheric emissions. The project
supports one graduate per year at each of the three universities.

The project aims to address fundamental issues in the development of
computationally efficient solvers for inverse problems, and to push the
traditional boundaries of threat detection via satellites by enabling
researchers to detect and monitor anomalous atmospheric emissions quickly,
accurately, and with quantifiable uncertainty. The main thrusts of this project
are (i) efficient incorporation of prior information and parameter selection,
(ii) improved spatio-temporal inverse modeling with multiple stochastic
components and cost-cutting inexact and sampling approaches to handle expensive
adjoint models, and (iii) evaluations, testing, and integration of the developed
methods via case studies with synthetic satellite data. The aim of this project
is to help identify potential immediate threats (e.g., oil and gas blowouts)
using satellites, which have significant broader impacts not only in disaster
response and recovery but also in minimizing the long-term environmental risks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.