* 2341214
* I-Corps:  Biological solutions for recovery of rare earth elements
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Norma Martinez-Gomez, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a bacterial bioprocess to generate rare earth elements (REEs).
Rare earth elements are critical metals used in technologies such as consumer
electronics and electric vehicles, and demand for these metals continues to
increase annually by 8-10%. More than 50 million tons of electronic waste
(E-waste) are generated globally each year. Recycling REEs from E-waste would
impact billions of people worldwide by reducing the waste footprint, groundwater
and soil contamination, and electronics costs. The proposed technology has the
potential to reduce the carbon footprint of rare earth oxide production by
25â€“70% compared to current hydrometallurgical processes, preventing
environmental damage estimated at $14.8 billion. In addition, developing
technologies for domestic REE reuse and recycling may provide a path towards
independence from foreign importation and offers a unique opportunity to
generate an REE remediation and recycling pipeline, removing heavy metal
contaminants from low-grade waste streams (medical waste, wastewater, fly ash)
and resupplying the REEs to electronics manufacturers.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a microbial platform for
one-step bioleaching, separation, and bioaccumulation of rare earth elements
(REEs) from waste sources. It is combined with a purification process to provide
low-cost, sustainable, manufacturing-grade rare earth oxides (REOs). The
proposed process uses microbes that produce rare earth binding ligands that are
highly specific for REEs, removing the need for harsh acids, high temperatures
and pressures, and solvent extraction steps involved in canonical
hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical production schemes. This bacterial
process is built on the discovery that specific bacteria are able to selectively
solubilize, transport, and bioaccumulate REEs from complex sources. Using
genetic and metabolic engineering, a bacterial platform has been developed that
exhibits enhanced bioleaching and bioaccumulation of REEs with high specificity.
The proposed technology currently has the capacity to recover REEs at the g/L
scale from electronic waste. If successful, this could be used to produce REOs
using waste feedstocks, reducing the environmental burden of production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.