* 2341344
* EAGER: Metabolomics Analysis of Archival Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Bill Baker, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2024
* USD 287,297.00

Non-technical project description Museums of natural history, such as the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) in Washington, D.C., are
repositories for, among other things, biological specimens. Specimens stored at
the NMNH were obtained over many decades and across the globe, resulting in what
is currently a treasure trove of biological and chemical information. Chemical
compounds (metabolites) found in the tissues of, for example, marine
invertebrates, can record the organism’s response to a changing environment.
This project seeks to establish a strategy for analyzing these compounds in
Antarctic marine invertebrates held in the NMNH. These organisms are especially
valuable for studies of their metabolites as such information will contribute to
our understanding of the history of the polar environment and how organisms are
able to adapt to extreme habitats. Further, studies of these rare and difficult
to obtain metabolites have broad impacts in biotechnology and human health.

Technical description of the project This project seeks to develop a workflow
for the analysis of metabolites in archival marine invertebrate specimens held
in the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (NMNH). Recent advances in
mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, both
instrumental as well as analysis platforms, enable the detection and annotation
of chemical structures in these otherwise difficult to obtain metabolites. In
particular, NMR strategy (Pure Shift NMR) will be implemented to increase
sensitivity toward these sample-limited analytes. Further, the workflow will be
applied in an analysis of storage methods used by the NMNH with the aim of
understanding how best to preserve specimens for future metabolomics analyses.
With an optimized workflow established, additional applications to inform our
understanding of adaptation and (cryptic) speciation in the extreme habitats
found in Antarctica are possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.