* 2341264
* I-Corps:  Accelerated, materials sparing powder compaction characterization for improved pharmaceutical tablet formulation design
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Changquan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a powder compaction model that describes mathematically the
complex densification process that occurs during compression. Currently, in
pharmaceutical tablet formulation development, traditional strategies can be
slow and expensive, and product quality is not always guaranteed upon scale-up.
The proposed technology is designed to address these problems by providing a
powder compressibility model and method for characterizing powder mechanical
properties. This may be used to extract more information, lower characterization
time from hours to minutes, reduce equipment costs, and reduce the amount of
powder required for characterization by an order of magnitude. This information
may inform key decision makers responsible for derisking the process and
ensuring commercial product success. In addition, this technology may be applied
to other industries that use powder compaction including metal part and cosmetic
manufacturing, detergent tablet production, and construction in soil sciences
and geotechnical engineering.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an additive powder
compressibility model that unifies several existing materials science models to
characterize powder compressibility. The proposed model has been evaluated using
materials with highly diverse mechanical properties. The comprehensive
characterization deconvolutes the complex powder compaction process using in-die
measurements, resulting in a fast, accurate, and materials-sparing
characterization of important material properties that may inform formulation
decisions. Deconvolution of these mechanical properties, such as plasticity and
elasticity, allows for a more intrinsic understanding of the material and
strengthens the understanding of the relationship between structure and
property, which is essential for designing quality into a product. The proposed
powder compression characterization method and analysis may be used to capture
more accurate and detailed information using only tens of milligrams of material
and seconds to collect.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.