* 2341279
* EBRC 2026: Engineering Biology for the Next-Generation Bioeconomy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2023,11/30/2026
* India Hook-Barnard, BIOINDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURING AND DESIGN ECOSYSTEM
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2026
* USD 1,350,000.00

The Engineering Biology Research Consortium (EBRC) brings together an inclusive
community of people from academia, government, and industry to advance the field
of engineering biology to address national and global needs. Engineering biology
combines the knowledge, processes, and tools of biology with the principles of
engineering to build organisms and systems, enable technological innovation and
scientific discovery, and develop new products, services, and economic growth.
EBRC facilitates collaborations between researchers and leaders with diverse
expertise to tackle our nation’s most critical challenges, including crises in
climate, food and water, energy, and health. Through EBRC’s efforts, experts
work together to identify the concrete steps needed to achieve technical
progress and breakthroughs, while actively incorporating policy, education,
ethics, equity, and security considerations.

Through this project, researchers and innovators in engineering biology create
forward-looking technical roadmaps that describe the research advances necessary
to achieve progress toward solving significant societal challenges. EBRC’s
policy and international engagement efforts provide information and insight to
inform and advise policymakers to help them anticipate issues and make decisions
based on a clear understanding of the engineering biology research enterprise.
EBRC works to identify and address ethical, regulatory, and policy issues in
ways that benefit the advancement of research while serving society responsibly.
EBRC’s focus on education fosters opportunities for learning about and engaging
with engineering biology to support students and develop the next generation of
engineering biology leaders. The security focus builds a research culture that
incorporates consideration of security throughout every stage of the research
lifecycle to reduce risk while promoting benefits. Integrated into all of its
efforts, EBRC endeavors to build a more diverse, equitable, and inclusive
research community that will accelerate innovation and grow a strong,
sustainable bioeconomy that benefits all.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.