* 2341158
* CAS: Dual-Site Relay Catalysis in Oxygen Reduction Reactions on Reducible Metal Oxide Heterojunction Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Zhenmeng Peng, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 111,612.00

Fuel cells and metal-air batteries are potential next-generation technologies
for clean, renewable, efficient electrical energy generation and storage,
respectively. A big hindrance to these developing technologies is the high cost
of the electrode catalysts needed to reduce oxygen. Current state-of-the-art
catalysts use rare and expensive metals. As a result, these technologies are not
economically viable for large-scale applications. Much cheaper and more readily
available materials are known to catalyze oxygen reduction, but their reactivity
is not high enough for practical application. In this project, Dr. Zhenmeng Peng
of the University of Akron is developing a new strategy to significantly improve
the activity of these inexpensive catalysts. If successful, this will allow
replacement of rare, precious metals with low-cost materials in fuel cells and
metal-air batteries, eventually rendering them economically viable. Dr. Peng is
actively engaged in education and outreach activities directed at creating
scientific interest on the part of high school students and encouraging their
career development in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
fields. Dr. Peng is also preparing undergraduate and graduate students for
future STEM careers.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Zhenmeng Peng of the University of Akron seeks to develop a new, dual-site
relay catalysis strategy to significantly improve the activity of reducible
metal oxide (RMO)-based materials in oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). RMOs with
insufficient ORR activity are explained by scaling relationship restrictions.
Dr. Peng is studying the cooperation between dual RMO active catalysis sites
that break this restriction and thus, overcome the activity challenge. RMO
heterojunction structures that possess a proper combination of two different
active sites in adjacency are being synthesized and used to conduct mechanistic
investigations. How the ORR pathway and the activity property are influenced on
RMO heterojunction structure are critical to verifying the dual-site relay
catalysis concept. These pathways and properties are being examined using
experimental kinetic studies in conjunction with computational simulations.
Professor Peng seeks to identification the governing structure parameters and
establish structure-activity property relationships. He is actively engaged in
education and outreach activities, with a focus on creating early scientific
interest in high school students and recruiting underrepresented students in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.