* 2341120
* Planning: FIRE-PLAN: Community Building Toward an Immersive Forest Network to Catalyze Wildland Fire Solutions and Training
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Melissa Floca, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 199,694.00

One way to proactively address the wildfire crisis is by increasing the
resilience of our landscapes through vegetation treatments such as prescribed
fires. The outcomes of a prescribed fire depend largely on fuel structure. Yet,
many fire models currently are limited to two-dimensional sources of data, and
also provide two-dimensional outputs that do not capture important fire
dynamics. A key shift is underway in fire models and management: a shift from
two-dimensional (2D) to three-dimensional (3D) fire modeling tools. This
planning effort lays the foundation for sensing pathways and workflows to
improve the characterization of fuels at large spatial extents and fine spatial
scales to enhance the representation of fire in modeling and forecasting.
Immersive visualizations of fuel and fire modeling will be shared at the World
Design Capital 2024 Pavilion in San Diego, California.

A series of meetings among a diverse set of stakeholders paves the way for real-
time, immersive visualization of scientific data and the AI-readiness of these
datasets toward new modes of training, decision making, and public communication
related to wildland fire management, including prescribed fires. Overall, the
project aims to: (1) identify current gaps in fuel structure representation in
models, (2) prototype a workflow from field data collection to fuel and fire
models to visualizations of modeling outputs, (3) build real-world use cases
with diverse communities, and (4) plan for a national-scale Immersive Forest and
Wildland Fire Management Network.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.