* 2341278
* Bridging the spatial and cognitive dimensions of farmer climate adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Kurt Waldman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 07/31/2026
* USD 284,207.00

This project examines the decision-making process of farmers as they evaluate
the possibilities of switching to new types of seeds that are adaptable to
heterogeneous environments and climates. These hybrid staple crop varieties are
the product of substantial effort, and technological advances in many regions
have focused on developing crop varieties with earlier maturity periods. A
combination of large-scale government subsidization of hybrid seeds and seed
market liberalization have accompanied these technological advances, which
results in a large and diverse array of seed choices. Many private farmers
therefore make critical livelihood decisions, including both which seed
varieties to plant and when to sow them, in a context characterized by
uncertainty arising from both climate variability and changing seed technology
available to them. The researchers on this project examine the extent to which
farmers rely on past experiences and cognitive heuristics to make choices that
promote food security. The project also contributes to the training and
education of multiple students while advancing recommendations for private
farmers and organizations that support agriculturists in diverse settings.

This project develops a methodology to bridge the spatial and cognitive
dimensions around the livelihood decisions of private farmers. Using a multi-
scale modeling approach that combines physically based high-resolution land
surface modeling with satellite data and machine learning, the researchers
identify hotspots of soil moisture variability and precipitation extremes. The
researchers also use satellite data of observed maize growth periods in these
hotspots to create maps of sowing dates, growing season length, and yield
outcomes for climate adaptive maize varieties. Combining these data products
with surveys of smallholder farmers allows us to employ causal inference models
to examine why farmers choose different seed varieties and sowing dates. The
study devotes attention in particular to the ways that common heuristics and
cognitive biases related to extreme weather events influence the decision-making
of farmers. Contributing broadly to scholarship on human-environment
interactions, this research provides new insight into the spatial and temporal
uncertainty that smallholder farmers face and the cognitive processes that
underlie critical food security decisions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.