* 2341922
* CAREER: A Multichannel Convolutional Neural Network Framework for Prediction of Damage Nucleation Sites in Microstructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Brandon Runnels, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2027
* USD 429,789.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
aim to answer the longstanding question: What causes materials to fail?
Structural materials are the building blocks of modern lifestyle, supporting
applications ranging from infrastructure to national security, yet the
mechanisms underlying their failure are not well understood. The first stage of
catastrophic failure is often the nucleation of small voids, through a complex
and multifaceted process that has so far evaded simplified models. This project
will leverage advanced machine learning methods, which can identify subtle
trends in large datasets, with damage mechanics models to unravel the nuances of
pore nucleation. The result will be a computer model that is able to rapidly
screen materials to determine damage susceptibility. The educational part of
this project is twofold. First, the project will make advances in machine
learning-based mechanics of materials accessible to budding and amateur
engineers and scientists through an internet-based application, called “Solid
Genius.” Solid Genius will be freely available, allowing direct manipulation and
exploration of the material model and its predictive capability through a user-
friendly educational interface. Second, the project will develop a new graduate
course to provide training for rising researchers in machine learning-based
damage mechanics.

Experimental evidence indicates that grain boundaries are preferential sites for
pore nucleation, but no meaningful correlations between grain boundary
properties and failure likelihood have yet been conclusively established. A
multi-channel convolutional neural network (MCCNN) machine learning framework is
planned that will be able to identify potential pore nucleation sites in
pristine microstructure. The framework will simultaneously account for both
nonlocal properties (microstructure, grain texture, etc.) and local properties
(pointwise curvature, inclination, etc.), synthesizing them against a training
dataset to produce a reliable estimator of failure likelihood. Training data
will consist of reconstructed experimental micrographs and EBSD data, divided
into “failure” and “no-failure” partitions. The raw experimental data will then
be enriched with secondary calculations and supplemental mechanics simulations
to supply non-visible channels such as grain boundary energy and mechanical
stress. The trained MCCNN framework will then be used in concert with a damage
mechanics model to further probe the early-time behavior of pore initiation and
growth. Development will include an emphasis on determining physical
interpretability of each aspect of the MCCNN model, such as formalizing the
connection between individual convolutional layers and feature segmentation in
microstructure, to facilitate a more rigorous application of the framework to
the problem of damage assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.