* 2341825
* CAREER: Mechanical Behavior of Graphene-Carbon Fiber Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Mehran Tehrani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 209,372.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will develop the
fundamental science for the design and characterization a new family of damage-
tolerant composite materials that are strong, stiff, and ductile. Carbon fiber
reinforced polymer-matrix composites are currently considered state-of-the-art
for defense, energy, and transportation applications. These polymer-matrix
composites, however, suffer several limitations, including brittle fracture and
poor damage tolerance, both of which result in catastrophic failures in
composite structures. The novel composites, based on graphene within a carbon
fiber matrix, address major shortcomings of traditional polymer-matrix
alternatives such as the lack of ductility and the propensity to damage and
therefore has the potential to help save billions of dollars in failure and
inspection costs across multiple industries on an annual basis. The polymer-free
nature of the graphene-carbon fiber (matrix) composite will enable resistance to
high impact energy, electromagnetic interference (EMI), high temperatures, and
harsh environments. These multifunctional aspects will significantly reduce cost
and design complexity and can potentially result in the manufacturing of safer
and more durable structures for defense, energy, and transportation
applications. This project will also result in effective platforms to attract
and train students in this emerging field and has the increasing enrollment in
Mechanical Engineering at the University of New Mexico, specifically women. The
grant also supports activities directed at increasing the interest in STEM
education in the local community among ethnic minorities including Native
American college students and Hispanic K-12 students.

This project will investigate and elucidate the underlying mechanisms that can
be used to control and tailor the ductility and damage progression in
carbonaceous nanocomposites, specifically in graphene-carbon fiber composites.
Graphene-based materials have been extensively studied recently, mainly by
incorporating trial and error approaches, to optimize their mechanical
properties rather than effectively studying to understand the underlying
mechanisms. These studies have shown promising results but cannot be used to
tailor mechanical properties due to the vast design parameter space available to
graphene-based materials. This project utilizes a combined numerical modeling
and state-of-the-art multi-scale characterization approach to understand and
tailor mechanical properties in the graphene-carbon fiber (matrix) composites.
The research objectives include the understanding of the stress-transfer
mechanisms at the graphene-carbon fiber interface and elucidation of the
underlying failure mechanisms in these composites. These resolution of these
underlying mechanisms will answer some of the long-standing scientific questions
and challenges regarding the strength-ductility trade-off in nanocomposites.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.