* 2342005
* EAGER: The Impact of Innovation Ecosystem Acceleration Training on Ecosystem Mapping, Stakeholder Engagement, and Regional Innovation Engine Choice
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Scott Stern, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Brown
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Recent years have seen the establishment of a significant number of new Federal
programs aimed at harnessing the potential of regional innovation “ecosystems,”
including the NSF TIP Regional Innovation Engines (RIE) program. Relative to
traditional research grants, place-based interventions are not directed toward a
specific research project but rather aim to reshape interactions among
researchers and other stakeholders within a given geographic location. The aim
of an ecosystem Engine intervention is “wire” or “re-wire” an innovation
ecosystem in order to enhance innovative productivity and impact. The choice,
design elements, and ultimate performance of an innovation ecosystem is
hypothesized to be a function of (a) the specific initial conditions of a given
ecosystem, (b) the degree of engagement and commitment by specific stakeholders
within that ecosystem and (c) potential interactions between initial conditions
and stakeholder engagement. The research to be done in this project will take
advantage of an innovation ecosystem training program in order to undertake an
empirical analysis of these hypotheses. Despite significant academic and policy
interest in the role of such federal interventions, there is to date no
systematic empirical study of the process by which regional innovation
stakeholders undertake innovation ecosystem analyses, engage innovation
ecosystem stakeholders, or choose innovation ecosystem interventions. As such,
the project has the potential to contribute to our theoretical understanding and
policy analyses regarding the design of place-based innovation policy
interventions.

The research will take advantage of an opportunity to conduct training on
innovation ecosystems as part of the NSF Regional Innovation Engines (“NSF
Engines”) program for the program's Development Awardees. This training effort
will provide the investigators the ability to (a) gather systematic and
structured data about the innovation ecosystem assessments of the “as-is”
ecosystem state undertaken by NSF RIE awardees, (b) document the participation
(and level of engagement and commitment by different potential ecosystem
stakeholders (e.g., universities, start-ups, local government, research
laboratories, corporates, etc.), and (c) observe the proposed intervention that
these Development Awardees ultimately submit as their future NSF Engines grant
application. The ability to capture real-time data of the analysis and degree of
engagement by more than 40 regional Type 1 awardees will allow for a direct
evaluation of key hypotheses noted above, and provide insight into the role of
ecosystem and stakeholder characteristics in shaping regional strategic Engine
choice and performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.