* 2342073
* Collaborative Research: Structural Frameworks for Output Control of Continuum Ensemble Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xudong Chen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,615.00

Ensemble control is about using a common control input to simultaneously steer a
large population (in the limit, a continuum) of dynamical systems. These
dynamical systems can themselves be networked multi-agent systems. Because the
framework is by nature resilient and scalable, ensemble control finds many
applications across various disciplines in science and engineering, ranging from
quantum spin systems to neuroscience, emergent behavior, and multi-robot
control. Many existing works in this area have focused on the problem of
controlling an ensemble system as a whole. However, one is often interested in
only controlling a certain output function, such as the mean. At the current
stage, little is known for output control of an ensemble system. This project
aims to fill the gap. The goal of the project is to establish new tool and
results to usher in a framework for output control of continuum ensemble
systems. The research program will integrate ideas from multiple areas in
mathematics, such as control theory, graph theory, Lie theory, functional
analysis, and dynamical systems. The research findings of this project will thus
push forward the development of all these research areas. The focus on continuum
ensembles of networked systems makes the output control framework adaptable to
address problems in various application domains as mentioned above.

This project will revolve around several central objects, namely, the output
function associated with an ensemble system, the sparsity pattern shared by the
individual systems, the geometry of the parameterization space, and the type of
system dynamics. Specifically, the PIs will formulate two complementary research
thrusts targeting two important classes of output functions and investigate
their relations with the other objects: (1) In the first thrust, the PIs will
introduce and address a new controllability notion for ensemble systems, termed
sub-profile controllability. Roughly speaking, a sub-profile of an ensemble
system can be understood as the collection of certain substates of the
individual systems. Amongst others, the PIs will aim to establish necessary and
sufficient conditions for a sub-profile to be controllable and to develop
algorithms for testing. (2) In the second thrust, the PIs will study output
functions that integrate individual systems of an ensemble system. Typical
examples of such output functions include the average and, more generally,
higher moments. The research findings of this thrust will provide insights for
the problem of understanding the statistical properties of dynamic profiles over
continuum parametrization space.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.