* 2342569
* CAREER: Probing Antiferromagnetic Spintronics with Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in Diamond
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Chunhui Du, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 169,516.00

Non-Technical Abstract: Antiferromagnets are advanced materials that are
scientifically intriguing and technologically important. They have promising
properties to bring new functionalities for developing next-generation
information technologies, such as high-densities, ultrafast data processing
speeds. Despite their potential benefits, these materials are difficult to
investigate using conventional techniques. In this CAREER project, the principal
investigator introduces nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond to achieve nanoscale
quantum sensing and imaging of antiferromagnetic insulators. This technique
provides a new perspective to reveal emergent antiferromagnetic spin transport
and dynamic behaviors. This research project is integrated with education and
outreach plan that promotes the participation of underrepresented minority
students into science and technology careers as well as public access to some of
the most exciting developments at the forefront of materials science research.

Technical Abstract: Antiferromagnetic materials with exchange-enhanced magnon
band gaps and vanishing net magnetization exhibit a wide range of exotic,
unintuitive, and technically interesting phenomena. Examples include
topologically protected magnetic textures, long-range spin transport, ultrafast
magnetic switching, magnon Bose-Einstein condensation, and many others.
Successful application of antiferromagnetic materials to functional spintronic
devices requires a comprehensive understanding of these emergent material
properties, which remains challenging in the current state-of-the-art. Here, the
principal investigator employs nitrogen vacancy centers, optically active atomic
spin defects in diamond, to perform quantum sensing and imaging of the local
spin behaviors of antiferromagnetic insulators at the nanometer length scale.
Exploiting the unprecedented field sensitivity and spatial resolution of
nitrogen vacancy centers, the research team aims to reveal the fundamental
mechanisms governing the intrinsic spin diffusion and Néel order switching in
antiferromagnets. Taking advantage of the dipole-dipole interaction between
antiferromagnetic magnons and nitrogen vacancy centers, the “stretch” goal of
this project is to develop antiferromagnet-based hybrid systems for next-
generation quantum information technologies. The proposed research is expected
to make important contributions to the burgeoning field of “antiferromagnetic
spintronics”. By developing cutting-edge quantum sensing and imaging techniques
and demonstrating their operation in an ambient environment, the project
provides a versatile measurement platform which can extend naturally to many
other interesting magnetic systems and benefits the community in the long run by
influencing future quantum sensing technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.