* 2342355
* CRII: SHF: RUI: Leroid: Bug Oracle and Environment Configuration Automation for Android Bug Report Reproduction
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Yu Zhao, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Developers of mobile apps rely heavily on bug reports in issue-tracking systems
to reproduce failures. However, the process of failure reproduction is often
manually done by developers, making the resolution of bugs inefficient and
costly, especially since bug reports are often written in natural language. For
example, bug reports may miss necessary steps-to-reproduce information or
include unclear discussions. However, existing approaches are far from solving
all problems in bug report reproduction. The first open problem is the bug
oracle generation problem. Current approaches can only support reproducing crash
bug reports while other types of bugs still need automatic-generated oracles to
determine whether the bug has been reproduced or not. Another open problem is
that reproducing environment configurations (e.g., Android SDK version) still
requires human effort to manually collect information from bug reports and
configure them. This project will develop a novel approach that can support
reproducing more bug types of Android bug reports by automatically generating
oracles and configuring environments. This research allows software developers
to more quickly reproduce bug reports and to fix bugs, which will increase
software quality. This, in turn, will benefit our modern society, which greatly
relies on software. Additionally, this project contributes toward a diverse
workforce, through integration with course curricula, training of students from
underrepresented minority groups, and organizing summer workshops aimed at
increasing K-12 girlsâ€™ interest in STEM-related careers.

To substantially improve automated bug report reproduction by supporting oracle
generation and environment configuration, novel techniques and tools will be
developed that address three important challenges: (1) extract
observation/expectation and environment information sentences in a bug report,
(2) generate oracle assertion codes that can determine whether the targeted bug
has been triggered, (3) configure reproducing environment. In this project,
techniques and tools based on a combination of techniques include static/dynamic
program analyses, deep learning, natural language processing, and web crawling.
The approach will be embedded in a user interface and evaluated extensively on
public bug reports and through industrial collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.