* 2342788
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Block System Response to Hydraulic Loads in Rock Scour
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Michael Gardner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 419,486.00

Scour by hydraulic plucking is a fundamental process in landscape evolution
where large, competent rock blocks are eroded from a fractured rock mass by
flowing water. This process also affects engineered structures interacting with
water, such as dams and bridges, and often leads to operational and safety
concerns since erosion of large volumes of material can compromise structure
foundations and serviceability. This research uses joint flume and numerical
modeling to establish a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanics of
hydraulic plucking, which will inform infrastructure design and remediation.
This mechanistic understanding of the governing modes of failure will make it
possible to identify the most efficient design or remediation strategy, and can
also be incorporated into landscape evolution models. The systematic means by
which the multi-scale and progressive nature of plucking is explored will
provide insights into key parameters that should be considered in real-time
hazard analysis and landscape evolution. Additionally, software developed as
part of this research will be released open-source to make it available to
researchers and engineers. The experimental data set will also be stored in a
public repository to be more broadly available and accessible.

Accurately predicting the likelihood of plucking requires an understanding of
how different properties of the fractured rock mass or engineered material
interplay with flow characteristics of the fluid flowing over, around, and
through it. It is not fully understood how variation in these properties
influence plucking, nor is it considered in present scour evaluation methods,
even though the potential stacking of effects could lower the threshold for
scour. This research will develop capabilities that assess the interaction
between different material and flow properties in order to develop a more
comprehensive understanding of the plucking process. This will be achieved
through a paired experimental and numerical approach that applies scaled flume
experiments and coupled Discrete Element and Lattice Boltzmann Method numerical
simulations. These capabilities will enable scour assessment methods that move
away from empiricism by limiting the number and extent of simplifying
assumptions that need to be made in physics-based models. The understanding of
the underlying mechanics gained from this research and identification of the
most critical features of the multi block-fluid system will inform further
research applied to stability and remediation of engineered structures, as well
as descriptions of rates of bedrock erosion in natural channels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.