* 2342505
* CAREER:  Dynamic Decision-Making Under Uncertainty via Distributionally Robust Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Grani Adiwena Hanasusanto, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 70,203.00

A wide spectrum of decision problems arising in process control, energy systems
operation, supply chain management, investment planning, project management,
engineering, economics, etc., involve uncertain parameters whose values are
unknown to the decision maker when the decisions are made. Ignoring this
uncertainty typically leads to inferior solutions that perform poorly in
practice due to the notorious flaw of averages, whereby plans based on the
assumption that average conditions pre-vail are usually wrong. These decision
problems are often also dynamic in nature they span across multiple time stages
and involve high dimensional non-anticipative recourse decisions which further
increase the problem complexity. Thus, effective and efficient solution schemes
for these decision problems are highly desirable. Traditional solution schemes,
however, suffer from the curse of dimensionality and are extremely challenging
to solve. Recent advances in distributionally robust optimization (DRO) have
been successful in mitigating the intractability of various single-stage
decision problems under uncertainty. In DRO, we seek a decision that performs
best in view of the most adverse distribution of uncertain parameters that is
consistent with the available statistical and structural information. Thus, DRO
not only improves computational tractability but also alleviates the overfitting
effects characteristic of the traditional solution schemes. By leveraging and
inventing new techniques in DRO, the proposed research work aims to
significantly advance the state-of-the-art methodologies for addressing the
challenges of dynamic decision problems and to initiate the effort for
industrial-size applications. The research outputs of this work will have a
significant and immediate practical impact on important applications in energy,
engineering, machine learning, operations management, finance, etc., and on
learning problems in robotics and automatic control. This CAREER work will also
advance the state of pedagogy by developing an integrated curriculum that
bridges the gap between the deep theory of decision-making under uncertainty and
the real-life practice. The proposed curriculum is aimed at future practitioners
and researchers, and is designed to equip these experts with the analytical
skills and tools to deal with real-life decision-making problems under
uncertainty.

The proposed research work is aimed at addressing a major gap in the theory and
practice of decision-making under uncertainty. It concentrates on four main
research thrusts: 1) Derive exact mixed-integer conic programming (MICP)
reformulations for convex dynamic problems as well as for dynamic problems with
discrete decisions 2) Deal with the case of endogenous uncertainty whose
representation depends explicitly on the chosen decisions 3) Systematically
integrate data into the description of uncertainty. Obtain provable out-of-
sample performance guarantees from the resulting data-driven DRO models 4)
Derive exact MICP reformulations for inverse optimization problems in the
dynamic setting. The proposed research effort endeavors to develop more powerful
solution schemes which leverage standard off-the-shelf MICP solvers for various
intractable decision-making problems under uncertainty. The work will establish
a new connection between generic dynamic DRO models and renowned classes of
mixed-integer conic programs. The resulting connection will give us a better
understanding of the inherent difficulty of the decision problems and enable us
to derive attractive performance guarantees for the new solution schemes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.