* 2342586
* SBIR Phase I: Delivering Confidence and Reliability in Thermal Batteries for Utilities Using an Aggressively Cycled Test Loop for Pumps, Pipes, Joints and Valves
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Michael Hvasta, THERMAL BATTERY CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Mara E. Schindelholz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on developing an energy storage
technology that stores electricity as heat and converts its back to electricity
whenever needed using thermophotovoltaics (TPV). If successful, the innovation
will help transition the United States (US) towards a fully renewable electrical
grid. The company is developing one of the only battery technologies able to
deliver a cost per unit energy (CPE) for energy storage that will enable the use
of renewables by the electrical grid. The innovation will also reduce the
production of carbon dioxide (CO2) during the production of electricity and may
do the same for transportation and industrial processes. The solution will also
support the US’s national defense by increasing the economic manufacturing
competitiveness of the US and improving energy security, as well as enabling
utility customers to benefit from significant cost savings.

The intellectual merit of this project is focused on the development of a
thermal battery system that takes electricity from any source and converts it to
extremely high-temperature sensible heat in inexpensive graphite blocks. The
innovative feature is its ability to decouple power and energy, enabling any
discharge duration between 1-100 hours. Currently, no other system can achieve
such great and variable discharge levels at such low cost. The company will
build two test rigs to test the pumps, pipes, joints, and valves, and then to
test the thermophotovoltaics modules under aggressive thermal cycling
conditions. The technical objectives are to: (1) set up the induction furnace
system to prescreen materials and components; (2) determine which grades of
graphite from large-scale suppliers can meet the specifications of future
commercial demonstrations; (3) pre-screen approaches to sealing; (4) quantify
the reaction strength of the bonding agent and determine how it can be used in
products; and, (5) verify that the system installed seals sufficiently well so
that future test loop work will not be delayed. The prototype’s hardware will be
scaled-up and the critical components will be stress-tested. The company has
already developed a fully-functioning, integrated system at a small scale, 1-10
kilowatt-hour-electric (kWh-e), that works as a proof-of-concept. The
reliability of the full-scale hardware in the test loop must be demonstrated
prior to building a 1 megawatt-hour-electric (MWh-e) scale demonstration. The
company is developing one of the only battery technologies able to deliver a
cost per unit energy (CPE) of <$25/kWh-e for energy storage which will enable
the full penetration of renewables onto the electrical grid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.