* 2343519
* Collaborative proposal: Workshop on ecological impacts of solar radiation management geoengineering; February, 2020; Port Jefferson, NY;  October, 2020; Minneapolis, MN
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Jessica Gurevitch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 02/29/2024
* USD 11,700.00

This workshop award will address the impacts of environmental geoengineering on
the living systems of earth. Geoengineering is a set of activities deliberately
designed to counter the impacts of environmental change. It has received
increasing attention in the face of failure to limit inputs of greenhouse gases
to the atmosphere. These ideas are highly controversial among both scientists
and the general public. Nevertheless, many schemes for geoengineering have been
proposed and some have been extensively studied using complex climate models.
The best-studied scheme for geoengineering is solar radiation management, which
would cool Earth's surface by increasing the albedo (reflectivity) of the Earth-
atmosphere system, reducing incoming solar radiation. This geoengineering
management option presents both known and unknown risks to the natural living
world. Yet almost nothing is known about the potential impacts of
implementation, continuation or termination on natural systems, their functions,
and their biodiversity. The goal of the workshop is to develop a research agenda
to understand and predict how the biodiversity and functioning of natural
systems would be affected by solar radiation management. The workshop will
develop information to inform policy and public discussion, provide knowledge to
incorporate into teaching and outreach, and engage a diverse audience in
discussions on the response of living systems to solar radiation geoengineering.

A major goal of this workshop award is to develop a framework that will enable
understanding and predictions of how the biodiversity and functioning of natural
systems would be affected by solar radiation geoengineering. Despite the growing
literature of caution and strategies for managing an uncertain process with
planetary-scale implications, there has been little to no research on the
implications of geoengineering for ecological systems. The workshop will address
how this geoengineering approach could change predicted effects of environmental
change on natural systems. A major product of the workshop will be a research
agenda that will lay out a series of high priority issues for research on
ecological impacts, consider the challenges and discuss how they might be met,
and initiate and publicize a research agenda for the wider relevant scientific
communities. Such issues include: downscaling, estimating diversity for plants,
birds, and amphibians in biodiversity hotspots or at critical sites for
suspected range limitations/expansions, and connecting those data with climate
projections for geoengineering scenarios. The workshop will support the
collaboration of a group of ecologists and climate scientists, ranging from
graduate students to senior academic and federal laboratory researchers, to
develop a research agenda on the ecological impacts of this geoengineering
approach. They will examine how natural systems would be impacted by the climate
modification, in contrast to future anthropogenic environmental change. The
proposed workshop would consist of two in-person meetings and regular electronic
meetings before, during and after the in-person meetings. This collaborative
team of highly interdisciplinary specialties will consist of atmospheric
scientists and scientists studying a wide range of ecological areas, including
researchers from additional disciplines to contribute to future research in this
area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.