* 2343021
* EAGER: Origami-Based, Shape-Adaptive, Skin-Like Wireless Sensors for Monitoring COVID-19 Patients in Field Hospitals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Xin Ning, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 05/31/2024
* USD 15,502.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has put the public health in great risks, among which the
shortage of medical spaces and facilities has significantly curtailed disease
control and resulted in higher fatality rate. Deploying field hospitals such as
makeshift stadiums and medical tents has been adopted worldwide to mitigate this
issue. However, the nature of simple field hospitals and the scarce medical
resources in a pandemic make them largely underequipped and understaffed.
Therefore, it is challenging to closely monitor the patients in temporary field
hospitals, posing threats to those who may experience rapid symptom progression
and health deterioration. This project will address this challenge by advancing
the fundamental knowledge of design and fabrication to realize skin-like,
wireless, battery-free sensors that can be quickly and easily implemented in the
environments of field hospitals. The envisioned sensors will be adaptable to a
wide range of body shapes and capable of closely monitoring temperature,
coughing, and breathing of COVID-19 patients without interference with their
daily living. They can also be used in regular hospitals where the medical
instruments are insufficient or at home for patients under self-isolation.
Overall, this project will explore an engineering pathway to respond to the
pressing societal challenges in COVID-19 pandemic. This project will include a
“We Are. We Care” educational outreach plan to cultivate students’ passion for
engineering innovation to address societal challenges. Undergraduate students
will be involved in this research. High school students will be engaged as well
through hands-on workshops where they will experience how and why engineering
research can impact society and save lives.

The objective of this project is to advance the knowledge of design and
fabrication of flexible electronics to realize skin-like devices capable of
continuously monitoring the vital health signals of COVID-19 patients in
temporary field hospitals, where conventional healthcare instruments are
insufficient or unavailable. The devices will employ near-field communication
technology to achieve wireless, battery-free sensing of breathing, coughing, and
body temperature. To achieve the objective, the PI will use a network of
collaborative, high-sensitive strain sensors to realize motion-blind breathing
and coughing detection. The PI will leverage deployable origami designs to
achieve ultra-high shape adaptability to fit with a wide range of body sizes
without customization. This origami-based approach will greatly advance flexible
electronics from the current paradigm of local skin integration to a
transformative, “one-size-fits-all” shape adaptability. Sophisticated finite
element analyses and mechanical testing will ensure the integrity of devices.
Operation of the envisioned devices in models of conventional field hospitals
and a new concept of fast-deployable origami hospital will be demonstrated to
show the efficacy of the devices. This project centers on innovations of
flexible electronics and draws inspirations from other disciplines such as
aerospace engineering to advance the field of flexible electronics. Overall,
this project will address the gaps between the state-of-the-art wireless,
battery-free epidermal electronics and the needs for advanced health monitoring
sensors in underequipped, understaffed medical spaces and facilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.